* 1336012
* EAGER:   U-PB DATING OF BISHOP TUFF ZIRCON BY SERIAL SECTIONING FOR GEOCHRONOMETER CALIBRATION AND MAGMATIC INSIGHTS
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/2013,02/28/2015
* Mary Reid, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 02/28/2015
* USD 12,081.00

Understanding the rates, durations, and interplay between geologic processes
relies on accurate dating of minerals. Under favorable circumstances, it is
possible to confirm the accuracy of these dates by applying different dating
techniques to the same, or related, minerals. An increasingly important
benchmark in mineral dating as well as a valuable source of insights into the
evolution of voluminous explosive eruptions is the &gt;600 km3 Bishop Tuff of
eastern California, USA. This project will test the hypothesis that U-Pb and
Ar/Ar dates for the minerals zircon and sanidine, respectively, are essentially
identical in the Bishop Tuff. It will determine whether there are U-Pb age
heterogeneities within Bishop Tuff zircon and, if present, to more rigorously
quantify them. If the age distribution with zircon is homogeneous, this study
will validate use of the Bishop Tuff as a key intercalibration point between the
U-Pb and Ar/Ar radiometric clocks. If older zircon domains are present, their
ages and their population distributions will validate previous evidence that
dates for zircon cores can be considerably older than the sanidine dates. Rapid
confirmation or rejection, as enabled by EAGER funding, of the hypothesis that
the U-Pb and Ar/Ar dates are identical will have an immediate impact on efforts
to improve the accuracy of Ar/Ar dating, a technique capable of providing
precise dates for events in the Cenozoic Era, and for geologic materials that
may be difficult to date by other methods. The outcome will inform models for
how magmas responsible for supervolcanoes accumulate beneath Earth?s
surface.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will explore novel approaches to
acquiring spatially sensitive and analytically more robust ion microprobe dates
for Bishop Tuff zircons. Analyses will be performed on zircon rims and on
oriented cross-sections exposed during optical interferometry-calibrated serial
sectioning, resulting in a high spatial sensitivity with respect to crystal
growth. Grains will be mounted sequentially so that rim and interior analyses
can be performed in tandem, reducing the reliance on a standard for confirming
age differences within grains, if present. Sputtering will entail a 100 nA ion
beam instead of the normally employed 10-12 nA beam, resulting in enhanced
radiogenic Pb yields and reduced analytical uncertainties. Once the age
distribution within the BT zircons has been quantified, mass balance analyses
will be performed in order to assess whether the zircons crystallized in a few
ka and, if older zircon domains are present, the extent to which they could skew
the ages obtained by single crystal TIMS analyses. The new technical approaches
to be explored in this study could advance the precision of situ U-Pb dating and
be adopted by other in situ geochronologists seeking to gain more insight into
age heterogeneities and their distributions within crystals for timescales of
magma chamber processes. The proposed study will also provide research training
in spatially sensitive U-Pb zircon dating for a female graduate
student.&lt;br/&gt;