* 1336579
* Collaborative Research: The Effect of Dynamic Surface-Associated Phase Change on Environmental Mobility in Unsaturated Environments
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2017
* Charalambos Papelis, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 12/31/2017
* USD 208,059.00

CBET-1336083/1336579 Tohren C. Kibbey/Charalambos Papelis The University of
Oklahoma/New Mexico State University

Natural and engineered processes can cause the water content of soils in the
unsaturated zone to vary significantly over time. Dynamic decreases in water
content caused by evaporation can cause local increases in the concentrations of
contaminants and other porewater constituents, which can drive enhanced
contaminant sorption and the formation of contaminant precipitates. Because
sorption/desorption and precipitation/dissolution processes tend to be strongly
rate-limited, dynamic water content changes can have a strong influence on the
long-term mobility of inorganic and organic contaminants, with these processes
either increasing or decreasing long-term mobility. To date, little quantitative
information is available that would allow realistic modeling of dynamic sorption
or phase change processes in unsaturated media, or prediction of their impact on
contaminant mobility. The objective of this work is to quantify the link between
dynamic changes in water content and composition and the corresponding phase
changes of contaminants that take place, with emphasis on quantifying the
ultimate connection between phase changes and subsurface mobility. This project
will initially focus on six separate chemical contaminants of environmental
concern, four organic compounds and two inorganic compounds, all selected to
exhibit a wide range of chemical behaviors (adsorption, speciation,
complexation, solid formation) likely to influence behavior under dynamic
unsaturated conditions. Work will be focused around three tightly-coupled tasks
and will include 1) dynamic unsaturated experiments; 2) batch analyses and
spectroscopic-microscopic measurements; and 3) coupled dynamic
geochemical/unsaturated transport modeling to interpret the results of the first
two tasks and to synthesize and expand the results of experimental work to
better understand and predict environmental implications of phase change on long
term contaminant mobility. The results of the proposed work will provide the
tools needed to enhance our understanding of contaminant phase changes during
natural and engineered changes in water content, and will provide quantitative
information needed for enhanced decision making processes for managing and
remediating contamination in the unsaturated zone.

The water content of soils can vary substantially over time either because of
natural processes, such as precipitation and evaporation, or because of human
activities. This water content variability can have a dramatic effect on the
mobility of hazardous inorganic substances, such as metals and radioactive
compounds, as well as organic substances, such as pharmaceuticals, pesticides,
and hydrocarbons. This project will enhance our ability to predict the movement
of organic and inorganic contaminants in the soil environment as a function of
soil water content. Our improved understanding of the link between soil water
content and contaminant mobility in the soil will enable the development of
improved soil remediation techniques.