* 1336358
* Assessing the photocatalytic effects of metal-oxide nanoparticles on marine organisms under environmentally-relevant light regimes
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* J. Evan Ward, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 07/31/2017
* USD 327,000.00

CBET - 1336358 &lt;br/&gt;Titanium dioxide (TiO2) nanoparticles (NPs) are one of
the most widely used manufactured nanomaterials in industrial and consumer
products, with predicted environmental loads as high as 2,000,000 to 6,000,000
tons in the next 10 years. Toxicologically, engineered TiO2 NPs have been well
studied with most work being performed on cell lines, bacteria, and rodents. The
reported effects include inflammation, oxidative stress, and DNA damage, but are
highly dependent on exposure method, and the concentration and physicochemical
characteristics of the NPs. Other research has examined the photocatalytic
properties of TiO2 NPs as a way of oxidizing contaminants, disinfecting drinking
water, or treating tumors. These studies have reported various phototoxic
effects, but typically use irradiances much higher than those found in aquatic
settings. A few studies have examined the phototoxicity of TiO2 on freshwater
organisms under natural light regimes, but work on near-shore marine communities
is largely lacking. We argue that the phototoxicity of TiO2 NPs on shallow-water
marine organisms is an overlooked area of research which is critical for a full
assessment of the environmental safety of nanotechnology. Based on our extensive
experience with a marine biology, metal chemistry and ocean optics, we have
developed several lines of research that examine the photocatalytic effects of
TiO2 under environmentally-relevant conditions. Our projects fit within the
budgetary constraints of the Environmental Health and Safety of Nanotechnology
program, and represent an exciting area of research in which students and PIs
will work. Specifically, we will investigate: 1) incorporation of nanoscale TiO2
into naturally occurring hetero-aggregations (i.e., marine snow); 2)
phototoxicity on important groups of microorganisms that live within the marine-
snow complex; 3) trophic transfer efficiency via marine snow to two species of
near-shore, benthic filter feeders; 4) subsequent photocatalytic effects on the
physiology and cellular processes of these two animals (one translucent, one
opaque).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit :&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work
represents the first comprehensive study to consider common oceanographic
processes (e.g., formation of marine snow) and environmentally-relevant light
regimes in assessing 1) photocatalytic impacts of TiO2 NPs on microbial
communities and benthic filter feeders that play key roles in marine ecosystems,
and 2) trophic transfer and bioavailability to benthic organisms. Determining
the potential deleterious effects of NPs on key groups of benthic organisms is
not only important for comparative purposes, but also to determine how such
materials might produce community level impacts. For example, toxic effects on
filter feeders would compromise their capacity for benthic-pelagic coupling and,
in turn, greatly impact the surrounding environment. Knowledge generated by our
research will be of interest to monitoring agencies concerned with seafood
safety, regulators who are developing risk-assessment protocols, scientists who
study the distribution of emerging pollutants, and engineers who are designing
"green" nanotechnology. As we are at the forefront of such research it is likely
that our results will immediately yield important data for marine systems, and
contribute to the debate regarding the potential safety of NPs in the
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts :&lt;br/&gt;As a natural
extension of our work we will train undergraduate and graduate students in
concepts and techniques that cross the disciplines of biology, chemistry, and
optics. Our research program will be used as a vehicle to engage educators and
students in discussions about near-shore ecosystem processes, and the benefits
and potential hazards of nanotechnology. Offering positive and entertaining
learning opportunities for scientific discovery at an early age is crucial to
capturing the enthusiasm for learning. Consequently, we will focus on developing
and implementing innovative teaching materials that advocate the importance of
marine environments to human health. The teaching materials will be designed in
collaboration with New England Science &amp; Sailing (NESS), a non-profit
marine-science educational organization. In collaboration with NESS we will: 1)
Develop lesson plans that demonstrate, in an engaging and understandable way,
basic principles that drive coastal ecosystems, and explore the links between
emerging pollutants and oceans and human health; 2) Train NESS senior staff to
use these lessons to foster ecological literacy and draw students into science
and engineering.