* 1336853
* Collaborative Research: Actively Controllable Microfluidics with Film-Confined Redox-Magnetohydrodynamics: experiment and simulation
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Ingrid Fritsch, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2017
* USD 184,463.00

Fritch/Isaac 1336853/1336722

Selective activation of redox-polymer-modified electrodes in a small volume in
magnetic fields will be investigated to control microfluidics spatially and
temporally. This new form of magnetohydrodynamics (MHD), as opposed to adding
redox species to the solution or not adding them at all, defeats problems that
hinder MHD from use in lab-on-a-chip (LOAC) devices. It allows higher currents
with lower voltages, and thus, higher MHD forces and faster velocities without
bubble formation or corrosion, faster response times, and compatibility with
detectors and samples. MHD offers greater versatility over other micropumps,
because flow can be programmed without redesigning channels of a device. An
interdisciplinary, preexisting collaboration of investigators in Chemistry &
Biochemistry at the Univ. of Arkansas and in Mechanical & Aerospace Engineering
at Missouri Univ. of Science & Technology will perform the research.

Intellectual Merit : Reduction/oxidation of chemical species confined to polymer
films on electrodes creates an ionic current in solution. When at right angles
to the magnetic field, the resulting MHD force causes fluid to flow there in the
third dimension. Individually-addressable electrodes will be fabricated in
desired patterns, polymer films will be polymerized and characterized by
electrochemistry, electrodes will be activated with current and voltage in
magnetic fields, and flow will be monitored by microbead movement in solution.
The objectives are to (1) establish large coulombic capacity, fast response, and
equivalent circuit models for redox-polymer films on electrodes, (2) control and
maximize flow velocities, tune profiles, switch direction, and drive adjacent
counter-flows using concentric disk-ring configurations of redox-polymer-
modified electrodes perpendicular to a magnetic field, (3) sustain fluid flow by
recharging redox-polymer films, and (4) use simulations to obtain spatial maps
of ionic current density, MHD force density, and fluid velocities as a function
of time, compare with experiment, and evaluate parameters that exceed
experimental limits to better design redox-MHD microfluidic devices.

Broader Impacts : The goal is to control microfluidics in a programmable way
with far-reaching consequences toward products of interest to the public, such
as hand-held, self-contained chemical analysis units for medical, environmental,
and household uses. The interdisciplinary nature of the project enhances
training of students involved in the research. Completed software modules will
become available for testing and further evaluation to the scientific community
free of charge. An outreach collaboration between science, math, and language
arts teachers at The New School and mentors at the U of A and Missouri S&T will
use MHD as a starting point to stimulate viral learning for middle school
students on topics of forces and energy. Students will perform self-directed
projects in collaboration with teachers and mentors, communicate results with
videos using their own vocabulary and perspective, which they have scripted,
edited, produced, and post them on the internet for public viewing and
commentary. This approach is expected to bridge the gap between university
research and middle school education, while simultaneously enhancing STEM
education and educator development and increasing public scientific literacy and
public engagement with science and technology.