* 1336147
* Collaborative Proposal: Fundamental Research on Physics of Instability of Organic Solar Cells
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2016
* Eric Schiff, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 07/31/2016
* USD 163,380.00

PI: Dalal, Vikram / Schiff, Eric&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1336134 /
1336147&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Iowa State University / Syracuse
University&lt;br/&gt;Title: Collaborative Proposal: Fundamental Research on
Physics of Instability of Organic Solar Cells&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will to systematically study, identify, and potentially overcome the various
physical phenomena in both materials and in devices that lead to degradation of
organic solar cells when subjected to light. Organic photovoltaic (OPV) devices
are an increasingly important photovoltaic (PV) energy conversion technology.
Recent advances in efficiency to ~12% range in both single and tandem junction
OPV solar cells are very encouraging for eventual commercial deployment.
However, the devices are known to degrade rapidly when exposed to light, losing
20-30% of the initial efficiency within ~100 hours of illumination, even when
encapsulated or kept in inert atmospheres. A major market for this technology is
building-integrated products, since in principle, the OPV devices can be
laminated onto existing window frames. For such commercial deployment, it is
essential that the degradation be reduced significantly, to &lt;10% range over
the lifetime of the product, which is typically ~20 years for building products.
Similarly, another major market segment, providing power for rural populations
in developing countries, also requires relatively long life, even though they do
not require the same power conversion efficiency as grid-connected central power
in the U.S. This project will systematically investigate the changes in
fundamental physical parameters such as optical absorption, hole mobility, deep
state densities in both the absorber materials and at the hetero-junction
interface when OPV materials and devices are subjected to illumination.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs will study the evolution of defects using both
electrical measurements such as capacitance-frequency at different temperatures,
and structural measurements such as spin resonance. PIs will study the kinetics
of defect evolution over time under varying intensities of light so as to
establish kinetic laws that govern defect evolution. Then, the PIs will
systematically explore the thermal annealing of these defects over time, thereby
finding out activation energies for annealing. The PIs will correlate these
kinetics and annealing energies to the structure, morphology and composition of
the organic materials, and the specific technology used for fabricating the
devices. A number of different materials such as P3HT and PCDTBT will be studied
and the relationship between the various kinetic parameters to the nature of the
bonding in the materials will be established. We will use these results to
design and fabricate better polymers which are likely to be more stable while
maintaining power conversion efficiency. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact consists of the industrial impact of the work, and in educating both
graduate and undergraduate students in the field of OPV devices and materials in
particular, and solar energy conversion devices in general. Significant
attention will be paid to transfer the research results into education by
including new lab sections in existing courses. Both women and under-represented
minority group students are expected to play a significant role in the research.
The results of the research will be broadly disseminated to scientists and
engineers through publications, and by offering webinars through IEEE.
Dissemination to the general public will be done by giving talks both in the
U.S. and overseas.