* 1336443
* Nanotip-Induced Boundary Layers to Enhance Flow Boiling in Microchannels
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Chen Li, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Jose Lage
* 08/31/2017
* USD 305,830.00

CBET-1336443&lt;br/&gt;Li&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through the latent heat
evaporation, flow boiling in microchannels has great potential in achieving high
temperature uniformity at a high working heat flux with reduced pumping power,
which is critical in cooling high power electronics and photonics and in
improving reliability and energy efficiency of micro-heat exchangers and
reactors. However, flow boiling in microchannels is stochastic and hampered by
several severe constraints such as bubble confinements, viscosity and surface
tension force-dominated flows. It is well known that heat and mass transfer are
ultimately governed by boundary layers (BLs) during flow boiling in
microchannels. It was observed, by disturbing BLs such as creating oscillations,
introducing capillary flows along walls, and promoting thin film evaporation,
flow boiling in microchannels can be enhanced. However, research to enhance flow
boiling by intentionally constructing and optimizing BLs is still lacking. In
this study, by directly reconstructing or designing the BLs, the flow boiling in
microchannels can be controlled and designed as desired to some extent. This can
be achieved by forming innovative hydrophilic nanotip arrays along microchannel
walls. After multiple and transitional two-phase regimes are unified by nanotip-
induced BLs, in this project, it will be feasible to develop general, physics-
based, and robust two-phase models. Equally importantly, the concept developed
in this project will be positively utilized to push the limit of flow boiling in
microchannels. The specific tasks of this project will be pursued to achieve
project goals: construct and optimize BLs by developing hydrophilic nanotip
arrays with advanced profiles; achieve an unprecedented flow boiling
performance; characterize new flow boiling phenomena with induced BLs in
microchannels; and develop understandings of the induced BLs and their critical
roles in determining two-phase transport phenomena in nano- and micro-
domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will form the basis for a new
research discipline in fluid mechanics with induced BLs, enable new research
directions in two-phase transport, and provide fundamental insights pertinent to
two-phase transport at the nano- and micro-domains. Drastically enhanced flow
boiling in microchannels by controlling BLs can update the two-phase cooling
technology and scientific discovery in thermal/fluids. Compatibility with
microelectronics will lead to embedded cooling solutions for high power
electronics and photonics, which is still a challenging task. This project will
also aim to educate next generation scientists and engineers in micro/nano-
technologies and providing opportunities to undergraduates, in particular
underrepresented minorities, to gain first-hand research experience in
micro/nanotechnologies and expand their intellectual horizon by bridging the
state-of-the-art micro/nanotechnologies and basic science.