* 1336966
* Large Drag Reductions with Superhydrophobic Surfaces Sustainable in Turbulent Boundary Layer Flows
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2016
* John Kim, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 09/30/2016
* USD 279,993.00

Kim, Chang-Jin&lt;br/&gt;1336966&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Utilizing recently
developed superhydrophobic (SHPo) surfaces that can sustain the nonwetting state
even in high-speed flows, the UCLA team proposes to elucidate how they
experience such a reduced drag (by &gt; 50%) in turbulent flows. The drag
reduction will be characterized both experimentally and numerically over a wide
range of Reynolds numbers in turbulent boundary layer flows, which represent
water vehicles in motion. The ultimate utility of the developed SHPo surfaces
will be confirmed by the field tests in marine
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit :&lt;br/&gt;Despite
numerous studies on SHPo surfaces over the past decade, challenges remain in
obtaining SHPo surfaces deployable for real applications. Although drag
reduction is the most attractive feature anticipated from the SHPo surfaces, no
surface has ever demonstrated a drag reduction under a field condition, such as
in outdoor water. While the drag reduction requires the SHPo surface to be in a
dewetted state as a necessary condition,the dewetted state is very fragile
underwater. No matter what one does, the trapped gas would eventually be
diffused out to the surrounding water, eventually making the surface wetted.
Recently the PI's lab has dramatically increased the robustness of underwater
SHPo surfaces by developing a semi-active SHPo surface that sustained the
dewetted state for month,) even in tens of meters of deth. In addition, they
obtained over 50% drag reduction on some passive SHPo surfaces in turbulent
boundary layer flows. These surfaces were also found nonwetting even in high-
speed flows. Empowered by these recent breakthroughs, the UCLA team proposes to
find the underlying physics of the large drag reduction on SHPo surfaces in
turbulent flows, and establish the drag reduction over a wide range of Reynolds
numbers (5x10E5 - 2x10E7). Ultimately, they would demonstrate a drag reduction
under field conditions, using a small boat.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts
:&lt;br/&gt;Reduction of friction drag by flowing liquids has long been an
elusive goal in fluid engineering. If the drag reduction is sustainable
practical conditions, the energy savings alone will bring about significant
benefits to the economy and the environment. Rhe proposed research aims to
explain how drag is reduced on certain SHPo surfaces in flows that represent the
general traveling conditions of most water vehicles. The results will be widely
disseminated through lab websites, magazines, blogs, and regular media. The
research results will be integrated in curricula and programs at UCLA,
especially the Ph.D. Major Field of MEMS and nanotechnology. Furthermore, by
providing attractive tasks for non-specialists, the project will promote
education for undergraduate and high school students. For example, undergraduate
students will help develop the field-testing apparatus through many programs at
the UCLA engineering school. High school teachers and students can help field-
test the SHPo surfaces in their local coastal water, strengthening the outreach
programs of UCLA California NanoSystems Institute (CNSI).