* 1336650
* Towards a Sustainable Residential Hot Water Infrastructure: Optimizing Public Health, Water Savings, and Energy Goals
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Marc Edwards, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 08/31/2018
* USD 375,800.00

1336650 (Pruden). Residential hot water infrastructure is a critical nexus of
water, energy, and public health. In the U.S., its total energy demand exceeds
that of the water and wastewater utility sectors combined, while building
plumbing systems (especially hot water) are now the primary source of waterborne
disease outbreak. In particular, Legionella pneumophila, non-tuberculosis
mycobacteria, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and Acanthamoeba are especially
challenging because they establish and grow within the hot water distribution
system itself. Unfortunately, there is currently a void of practical research to
guide rational selection of optimal hot water systems. Thus, the overall goal of
the proposed research is to advance sustainability of our residential hot water
infrastructure by conducting the first integrated assessment of performance in
terms of public health, water savings, energy goals, and overall system
vulnerabilities. Three specific research Objectives (O1-O3) are: O1. Conduct a
controlled, head-to-head study of standard, recirculating, and on-demand water
heater configurations over a range of temperatures and water demands and compare
their performance in terms of energy consumption and microbial quality of the
water; O2. Examine the interplay of varying water chemistries, pipe materials,
and water heater configuration on scaling, corrosion, energy loss, and microbial
quality of the water; and O3. Develop a multi-criteria decision analysis tool to
identify the most sustainable configuration(s) for a specific context, with
consideration of consumer barriers to implementation. Although 3.3-5.5% of total
U.S. energy demand is used in residential water heating systems, and such
systems are now the primary source of waterborne disease outbreak, there exists
a critical gap in fundamental knowledge needed to select an optimal water
heater. Extensive head-to-head comparisons will be made of water and energy
demands incurred by three representative water heater configurations.
Application of next-generation DNA sequencing tools will provide a truly
pioneering understanding of water heater impacts on pathogens and the broader
microbial ecology. Preliminary results suggest that hydrogenotrophic bacteria
may utilize hydrogen produced by magnesium anodes (common in tank heaters to
reduce corrosion) and, in turn, fix and release detrimental levels of organic
carbon into the water. Other preliminary results indicate that copper may
possess beneficial properties for inhibiting Legionella. While this research
focuses on electric energy sources as an important first step, the fundamental
understanding gained, such as effects of temperature stratification, scaling,
and roles of plumbing components, can be readily extrapolated to other energy
sources. The optimal water heater is likely to vary based on a variety of local
constraints. Although on-demand is expected to have the lowest initial water and
energy demands, and the least potential for pathogen amplification, it is not
likely to be a feasible option in waters of high scaling potential. Effects of
all operating conditions on disinfectant residual levels, a critical protective
barrier against pathogens, will also be a vital factor for overall performance
evaluation. Evidence is mounting that existing ?green? advice may be creating
misguided policy with long-term negative repercussions on water-energy
consumption and public health. This research seeks fundamental knowledge and a
holistic perspective to support rational decision-making by consumers, public
health officials, and regulators on selection of optimal hot water systems.
Scientifically-defensible recommendations considering multiple dimensions of
performance are necessary to achieve truly sustainable water systems. The
proposed effort incorporates a significant social science component and
sustainability ranking approach in support of the development of a multi-
criteria decision making tool. Results will be available on public websites,
presented at green building and water engineering conferences, and published in
the peer-reviewed literature. The project will also support three graduate
students, who will participate in the Water INTERface Interdisciplinary Graduate
Education Program and will be trained across fields of green engineering, water
chemistry, and environmental microbiology. Undergraduate researchers will also
participate through the Interdisciplinary Water Science and Engineering NSF REU
site.