* 1336410
* Catastrophic transition to turbulence in rotation-dominated flows
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Juan Lopez, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2017
* USD 268,565.00

Lopez, Juan &lt;br/&gt;1336410 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In floows with dominant
background rotation, Coriolis accelerations provide restoring forces that can
act to suppress radial motion, or lead to oscillatory behavior. Such flows are
found in a wide range of applications in mechanical engineering (swirl burners,
rotating machines), aerospace(vortex-generated lift, fuel tanks of spin-
stabilized spacecraft), minerals processing (mixing, suspension and separation),
to geophysics (molten planet cores, tropical cyclones).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;The focus is on
understanding the catastrophic transition from laminar to turbulent states in
contained rotating &amp;#64258;ows. While there is experimental evidence for
this phenomenon, no consensus exists as to the underlying physical mechanism.
The two dominant interpretations are that the transition arises either from
resonance of inviscid modes or directly as an instability of the basic state.
&lt;br/&gt;The PI proposes to resolve this argument by using theoretical,
numerical and experimental studies. Simulations and analysis at the PI's
laboratory will be complemented with experiments conducted by international
collaborators. Precessing rotating flows (where the driving mechanism is
temporal variation of the rotation vector) and flows that generate large
inertial wave responses through interaction of oscillatory Stokes layers with
background rotation (rotation vector is &amp;#64257;xed) will be examined. The
research approach will be based in direct numerical simulation and stability
analysis of viscous &amp;#64258;ows, so that all the dynamics can be studied and
directly matched to experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;The scientific problem to be investigated is a fundamental
issue that has intrigued researchers for nearly 50 years, and has many
potentially important applications, as already mentioned
above.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project includes interdisciplinary training of
graduate students by mentors who have decades of interdisciplinary research
experience between them. Being a part of a larger international collaboration,
there will be ample opportunities for exchange visits, providing a valuable
training and mentoring experience for all involved. Our involvement with
research experiences for undergraduates will be continued, where aspects of the
&amp;#64258;ow problems will be isolated into projects suitable for
undergraduates. For the broader community, all solvers developed in the project
will be freely and readily available.