* 1336004
* Collaborative Research: Deciphering Induced-Charge Electrokinetics: Multiscale Simulations and Nanoscale Flow Characterization
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Guiren Wang, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2018
* USD 137,374.00

Qiao/Wang 1336224/1336004

Induced-charge electrokinetics (IC-EK) is a class of transport phenomena
originating from the migration of induced space charges in electrolytes driven
by electrical fields. Because of its distinct advantages over the classical EK
in fluid/particle manipulation, IC-EK is expected to bring significant
breakthroughs to microfluidic technologies. A fundamental understanding of IC-EK
is, however, still lacking: although some experimental trends can be explained,
theories often overpredict experimental measurement by 10-100 folds, and some
observations cannot be explained even qualitatively. This suggests that some
important physics are missing from the existing theories. Identifying and
elucidating such physics is important for advancing the basic understanding of
IC-EK and for exploring IC-EK's potential in microfluidic technologies to the
fullest extent.

Intellectual Merit : The objective of this collaborative effort is to
investigate IC-EK using alternating current electroosmotic flow (AC-EOF), a
representative member of IC-EK, as a model problem. The central hypothesis is
that the discrepancy between experiments and existing theories is caused by a
lack of accurate account of the Stern layer, rheology of interfacial fluids,
non-equilibrium electrical double layers (EDLs), and their coupling with fluid
flow in existing theories. Driven by this hypothesis, two specific objectives
are planned: 1) to develop a multiscale simulation tool that accurately accounts
for the Stern layer and the rheology of interfacial fluids, and explicitly
resolves the ion/fluid dynamics in non-equilibrium EDLs and bulk electrolytes;
2) to elucidate the experimental anomalies of AC-EOF by integrating multiscale
modeling with nanoscale flow characterization and to explore new design of AC-
EOF-based device using the insights gained in this work. The planned flow
measurement will resolve flow within the nanoscopic non-equilibrium EDLs and the
dynamics of vortices near electrodes. Together, these studies will enable the
underlying physics of the experimental anomalies of AC-EOF to be delineated with
unprecedented accuracy. The research is potentially transformative. First, the
insights gained here will lay foundation for the rational design of AC-EOF
devices to overcome their limitations. Second, by elucidating the impact of the
rheology of interfacial fluids on EOF and the role of non-equilibrium EDLs in
AC-EOF, this study will significantly advance EK theory. In particular,
quantitatively confirming the importance of non-equilibrium EDLs in AC-EOF can
potentially lead to a paradigm shift in how the entire class of IC-EK transport
is understood and controlled.

Broader Impacts : A series of activities are planned to encourage and prepare
undergraduate students to pursue careers in computational science and
engineering. Students participating in this interdisciplinary project will be
exposed to diverse fields such as computational electrohydrodynamics and
interfacial sciences. Various resources, e.g., the minority
recruitment/retention programs at the PIs' institutions, will be utilized to
recruit students from under-represented groups to participate in this project.
These activities will benefit from the PIs' experience with these programs.
Research results will be developed into modules for the micro/nanofluidics
courses taught by the PIs. Research results will also be developed into videos
and posters for use in K-12 outreach activities and for submission to the
gallery of fluid motion/images hosted by Efluids.com.