* 1336636
* SusChEM: Biomolecular and cellular engineering for hydrocarbon biofuel production
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,02/28/2017
* Xiaoxia Lin, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 02/28/2017
* USD 457,973.00

PI: Marsh, E. Neil&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1336636&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
University of Michigan Ann Arbor&lt;br/&gt;Title: SusChEM: Biomolecular and
cellular engineering for hydrocarbon biofuel production&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposal will develop a new biological route for efficient production of
advanced ?drop-in? hydrocarbon fuels from renewable resources, by integrating
enzyme, metabolic pathway and cellular engineering. Today ethanol and biodiesel
are the only biofuels produced and utilized at a large scale. However, each has
severe drawbacks due to incompatibility with current infrastructures and/or very
limited supply of suitable feedstocks. Therefore, there is both a pressing need
and increasing scope for developing a new generation of
biofuels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Target of this project is to produce short- and
medium-chain alkanes and alkenes (C8-C20) derived from fatty acids, which can be
used as direct substitute of petroleum based fuels. To enable the production of
these advanced biofuels using recombinant E. coli strains, the PI will
investigate and optimize hydrocarbon-producing enzymes, fatty acid biosynthetic
pathways, and whole-cell machinery, via (1) Mechanistic studies and engineering
of key enzymes in two hydrocarbon-producing pathways, (2) Metabolic pathway
engineering for increasing fatty acids as hydrocarbon precursors, and (3)
Pathway integration and cellular engineering for hydrocarbon production from
cellulosic biomass.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The successful completion of this
project will lead to several potentially transformative outcomes. First, this
project will develop an innovative strategy across multiple scales for creating
efficient whole-cell biocatalysts. Second, the PIs will generate E. coli strains
capable of producing high-grade hydrocarbon biofuels from renewable resources.
Third, the PIs will advance fundamental understanding of mechanisms of
hydrocarbon-producing enzymes, regulation of fatty acids synthesis, and whole-
cell metabolism. The genome engineering and ultrahigh-throughput screening
approach represents a major innovation in microbial engineering and its
variation/extension can be employed for improving a wide variety of complex
phenotypes. More generally, the scientific knowledge generated through these
activities will prove valuable for other bio-engineering
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific findings resulted from this
project will make significant contributions to the ultimate development of cost-
effective and sustainable production of hydrocarbon biofuels, which helps solve
one of the most pressing challenges currently faced by our society. The
education and outreach activities will focus on fostering academic and
professional development of involved graduate student and postdoc, supporting
undergraduate research, and promoting underrepresented groups. Expanding
previous and ongoing activities, the PIs also plan to engage middle/high school
students in summer research within a team setting with undergraduates.