* 1336179
* Enzymatic Wastewater Treatment:  Removal and Fate of Pharmaceuticals and Personal Care Products
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Desmond Lawler, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 08/31/2017
* USD 329,999.00

CBET 1336179&lt;br/&gt;Kerry A. Kinney&lt;br/&gt;University of Texas at
Austin&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The discharge of pharmaceuticals and personal care
products (PPCPs) into natural waters threatens not only aquatic ecosystems, but
also humans who routinely ingest trace levels of these compounds with their
drinking water. Discharges from municipal wastewater treatment plants are the
major point source for PPCPs into natural waters. Thus, to protect both aquatic
ecosystems and human health, PPCPs must be removed from municipal wastewater
prior to discharge into rivers and streams. The proposed treatment process
addresses this critical need by employing a novel enzymatic treatment system
near the front end of a wastewater treatment plant to maximize removal of PPCPs
within the treatment plant. The overall objective of the proposed research is to
assess the efficacy of using an enzymatic treatment to remove a mixture of
representative PPCPs from wastewater. The research will include identifying the
mechanisms that such treatment utilizes, and determining the fate of both the
original compounds and any oxidation byproducts through a conventional
wastewater treatment train. Despite the promise of this enzymatic treatment, the
fundamental parameters that determine whether the enzyme can oxidize a given
PPCP directly or indirectly need to be defined. Also, the byproducts formed in
the process need to be identified and their fate in subsequent wastewater
treatment needs to be determined. This project addresses these questions and
evaluates the overall effectiveness of enzyme-catalyzed treatment of PPCPs in
municipal wastewater, not only by measurement of the chosen PPCPs and their by-
products, but also by assays for antimicrobial activity and
estrogenicity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PPCPs are ubiquitous in our
environment and are now being detected regularly in wastewater, surface water,
and drinking water. Removing these compounds at wastewater treatment plants will
reduce their presence in surface water and in drinking water, and thereby
address both the ecological and public health issues associated with their
presence. Successful development and implementation of enzymatic treatment of
municipal wastewater could significantly reduce the release of PPCPs into the
environment, and mitigate the potential toxicological effects of PPCP exposure
to natural organisms and humans. The enzymatic treatment process that we will
study is unique because, unlike other PPCP treatment processes that are being
considered, it can be deployed early in the set of treatment processes and
therefore take advantage of existing treatment to complete the degradation of
the compounds. In addition to the graduate student working on the project,
undergraduate students from underrepresented groups in engineering will
participate in this study as part of the University of Texas Graduates Linked to
Undergraduate Engineers (GLUE) mentoring program.