* 1336160
* Rapid and dynamic cell assessments in dielectrophoresis-based microfluidic devices
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Blanca Lapizco-Encinas, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Continuing Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2017
* USD 272,946.00

1336160&lt;br/&gt;Lapizco-Encinas&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Food and water safety,
environmental monitoring and clinical screening are examples of fields where
microfluidics can make a significant contribution, since in these areas it is
critical to obtain rapid results. Working with microfluidic devices offers
important advantages: small sample requirements, higher resolution and
sensitivity, and shorter processing times (~minutes).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit &lt;br/&gt;Dielectrophoresis (DEP), an
electrokinetic (EK) transport mechanism, is one of the most popular techniques
used in microdevices for analyzing cells. Insulator-based DEP (iDEP) offers a
dielectrophoretic mode that employs 3-dimensional insulating structures located
between two external electrodes. These systems have been extensively studied
employing DC potentials and high frequency AC potentials. There is, however, a
significant gap in knowledge for particle behavior in iDEP systems with low
frequency (&lt; 1 kHz) AC electric potentials. The present proposal is focused
on the use of low frequency AC potentials in iDEP systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to immobilize and concentrate particles in iDEP
systems, DEP has to overcome electroosmotic flow (EOF). EOF is necessary as
means to pump the liquid and cells through a microchannel, but it is costly for
DEP to overcome EOF, since very high potentials are required, which compromises
cell viability and produces heat. This proposal aims to dynamically control EOF
by modifying the characteristics of an applied AC potential. This is more
advantageous than eliminating EOF, since it allows controlling EOF "on the fly,"
leading to lower voltage requirements. There is great flexibility and novelty on
the use of AC electric potentials with iDEP systems, since a new set of
parameters can be used to fine tune particle and cell manipulation. By using
these parameters (signal shape, frequency, amplitude, offset), EOF can be
dynamically controlled to produce more effective cell manipulation at lower
required potentials. This work will also employ mathematical modeling that will
aid on the understanding of the fundamentals behind iDEP. Integrated systems
with the application of sequences of AC and DC potentials and multipart devices
comprising sections for streaming DEP and trapping DEP will also be evaluated,
with the objective of achieving sorting, concentration and separation of a
sample containing various cell types on a single
device.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts &lt;br/&gt;Scientific impact: The
potential of iDEP has not been fully explored; there is a need for systems able
to perform several processes on a single device, and low frequency AC potentials
can answer this need.&lt;br/&gt;This project will advance the state of the art
in the applications of iDEP, addressing the gap in the low frequency regime
(&lt;1kHz). It will also advance on the knowledge of mathematical modeling of
iDEP systems and fundamentals on post geometry. Schemes for cell sorting,
separation and concentration will be designed, by integrating several steps of a
process on a single device. The possible applications of a microscale method
that can process a sample containing several types of cells in a matter of
minutes are numerous. This research can make an impact in many other fields,
where a rapid response of samples containing cells is
critical.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Societal impact: This project will provide a
premier research opportunity for undergraduate and graduate students. It will
also assist in providing research opportunities for female students through the
Women in Engineering program, and for minorities and underrepresented groups,
including those students in the RIT Ronald E. McNair Post-Baccalaureate
Achievement Program, a program dedicated to low income, first generation
minority students to ensure they enter graduate education.