* 1336455
* Probing and Controlling Photothermal Heat Generation in Plasmonic Nanostructures
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2017
* Richard Haglund, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Jose Lage
* 07/31/2017
* USD 318,018.00

CBET-1336455&lt;br/&gt;PI: Valentine&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability to model,
control, and harness heat generation at the nanoscale is of fundamental and
practical importance in areas ranging from chemical catalysis to medical
therapy. This research project will investigate, both theoretically and
experimentally, photothermal heat generation in metallic nanoscale optical
antennae and nanostructures. Utilizing Babinet?s principle as a design
framework, the researchers will investigate how conventional antennae exhibiting
localized electric fields can be translated into novel thermal antennae
exhibiting highly localized heat generation. These antennae will also be
integrated with perfect absorber geometries in an effort to realize unity
absorption and maximum local heat source density. Another key aspect of this
project will be the development of a novel thermal microscopy technique which
allows robust spatially resolved measurements of temperature and heat source
density in nanoscale materials. This new microscopy method, deemed thermographic
phosphor lifetime imaging microscopy, will be used to validate antenna designs
and investigate the thermal response of complex nanostructures. The technique
will be implemented in both a far-field and near-field configuration, allowing
the characterization of global as well as nanoscale thermal transport phenomena
in the antennae. Using these microscopy techniques, we will investigate
nanoscale transport phenomena such as reduction in thermal / electrical
conductivity and reduced melting temperature in the antennae to establish the
maximum illumination power and failure mechanisms of the
structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will provide new insights into
controlling and harnessing optically induced heat generation at the micro and
nanoscale. This could lead to breakthroughs for a variety of devices and
applications including photodetectors, chemical catalysis, thermally induced
recording, and cancer ablation therapy. The development of an improved nanoscale
thermal microscopy technique will also provide researchers in other fields a new
tool to study thermal transport in micro and nanoscale materials with
applications in areas such as thermoelectric energy conversion devices and
microelectronic cooling. This research will also be integrated with science
demonstrations to provide awareness, exposure, and excitement of science to K-12
students.