* 1336638
* Pushing & Pulling, Bending & Buckling; Viscosity and Elasticity in Flagellar Swimming
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Kenneth Breuer, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2018
* USD 389,980.00

Breuer, Kenny 1336638

The goal of this research is to observe and track individual bacteria in order
to elucidate the physical mechanisms of agellar motility. The central tool of
the study is a Digital Tracking Microscope (DTM), which allows tracking of a
single cell for arbitrarily long times. The first stage of the project is the
refinement of the DTM, which already exists in prototype form. Once completed
the DTM will be deployed to measure the velocity and orientation of single
swimming cells over the course of several minutes. These measurements will yield
detailed statistics for the swimming behavior of single bacterial cells such as
C. crescentus, E. coli, and S. marascens. By correlating the swimming velocity
and cell orientation with geometrical properties of the cell, such as cell
shape, agellum length, and number of agella, and by using theory and computation
to determine the fluid and elastic stresses acting on the cell, the PIs will
elucidate how physical constraints determine swimming behavior. Stokes flow
analysis will be coupled with elasticity theory in a combined manner, and with
this synthesis, the PIs will explain why cells in 'pusher' mode, with the
agellum behind the swimming cell, move faster than cells in 'puller' mode, with
the agellum ahead of the swimming cell. The effects of the rheology of the
suspending fluid on the swimming behavior will also be explored. Motivated by
the fact that most infectious bacteria encounter mucus, a non-Newtonian fluid,
when they enter the body, the PIs will track swimming bacteria in non-Newtonian
fluids.

Intellectual Merit : The intellectual merit of this work is that the DTM allows
a host of new measurements and observations. By observing single bacterial cells
over time, it becomes possible to study the effects of individual variation
across a population. Tracking of individual cells has already lead to new
discoveries in C. crescentus, such as the difference in swimming speed between
pushers and pullers. The high resolution of the DTM motivates the development of
more sophisticated quantitative theories that integrate fluid mechanics with
material properties and elasticity, and can be compared with our precise
measurements. While recent years have seen active focus on idealized theoretical
approaches and table-top models for swimming, the proposed work promises a new
level of detail from live cell studies that have not previously been possible.

Broader Impacts : The PIs will participate in outreach and recruitment
activities. The co-PIs will continue to participate in the Research Experiences
for Teachers program, which invites K-12 teachers from local schools to the
Brown campus to participate in laboratory research and course development
projects during the summer, and in the Brown University Summer High School
program, giving lectures and demonstrations on the physics of locomotion. The
PIs will also contribute lectures and discussions to the Providence After School
Alliance (PASA) - a local organization that provides expanded learning
opportunities to high-school students through science-oriented programs. Lastly,
the collaboration will also develop web-based educational media to illustrate
the concepts of bacterial motility, agellar motion, microscopy, and PIV.