* 1336725
* Predicting Climate Change impacts on Shallow Landslide Risk at regional scales
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Erkan Istanbulluoglu, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 08/31/2018
* USD 299,036.00

1336911 (Istanbulluoglu). Landslides disrupt aquatic habitats and damage
infrastructure (e.g., roads, utilities, dams). Landslide hazards in the west are
expected to grow with climate change, but to date, geologic landslide research
has been typically conducted independently from hydroclimate research. There is
need for unifying these two lines of research to provide regional scale
landslide prediction for resource management and climate adaptation strategies.
Washington Cascade Mountains experience landslides across a wide a range of
climates, vegetation, and topography, and thus, work done here is relevant to
mountain areas across the globe. Working with state and federal agency partners,
this project team will develop a regional-scale distributed numerical model in
conjunction with 50+ years of landslide observations across the Washington
Cascades to answer the following research questions: 1) What are the relative
roles of location (geology, topography, slope) vs. climate (precipitation,
temperature, snowmelt, and recharge rates) on landslide frequencies? 2) How well
does a new, transformative model combining the methods of geotechnology,
geology, and hydroclimate prediction reproduce past spatial-temporal patterns
and frequencies of landslides? Specifically, a) Are probabilistic or
deterministic methods more reliable? and b) In which cases are finer, more site-
specific data needed (e.g., snow pack on mountainsides providing extra load and
a key trigger for landslides, or freeze-thaw cycles changing soil stability) for
accurate model performance. 3) How will climate change likely impact landslide
locations and frequencies? Specifically, a) What are the largest expected
hazards (e.g., road wash-out, sediment flux, culvert failure)? and b) Under
these predictions, what decision support tools are needed for sustainable
management of landscapes and streams over complex terrain? While the effects of
climate change on water resources and stream temperatures have been extensively
studied using numerical models in recent decades, only limited studies focused
on landslide sediment delivery. These studies either use empirical rainfall
thresholds and geologic susceptibility maps at regional scales to identify
landslides, or focus on detailed hydrology over several meters. The first method
excludes essential physics, while the second cannot be used over large areas.
This project will integrate these two lines of thought and potentially transform
how regional landslide research is done. The proposed model will pioneer an
innovative numerical model design by combining subsurface flow recharge and
surface runoff from an 5,500-m resolution land surface model (VIC) with a 10-m
resolution probabilistic slope stability model (SINMAP). The work is targetedto
directly impact resource management and will be incorporated into K-12,
undergraduate, and graduate education. The research plan has been developed in
close collaboration with state and federal agencies, who will immediately put
results to use in land management. A workshop will be conducted in year 3 of the
project to give model training to resource managers and share our final modeling
framework with them. In conjunction with education professionals, an education
module will be developed for high school students. This module will be presented
at select schools in Seattle through the University of Washington's "University
in the Classroom project," wherein students receive university credit for high-
level work. The findings of the project will contribute to undergraduate and
graduate level teaching at the University of Washington.