* 1336105
* Combustion of Highly Strained Hydrocarbons: Non-Intrusive Isomer Specific Detection of Complex Combustion Intermediates
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Fedor Rudakov, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 08/31/2018
* USD 300,000.00

1336105&lt;br/&gt;Weber&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Combustion reactions are of great
importance for basic combustion science as well as for the development of
efficient and clean engines. Highly strained hydrocarbons are of particular
interest since they are candidates for high-energy density fuels. Established
techniques for flame composition analysis, such as VUV photoionization mass
spectrometry, IR or Raman spectroscopy are difficult because either the
molecules can isomerizes on their way to a detector, or the high temperature of
the flame makes spectra too complex to analyze. This project develops a novel
technique, Rydberg Fingerprint Spectroscopy, to identify the molecular compounds
in the flame. Following calibration and comparison with data from a molecular
beam photoionization implementation, the technique will use a radar method for
in-flame analysis. The technique enables non-intrusive and in-situ detection of
complex molecular species and reveals highly resolved spectra that are molecular
structure sensitive while being insensitive toward temperature. Consequently,
the method is promising for sampling flame components at the high temperature of
a flame. We explore the combustion of quadricyclane and norbornadiene, highly
strained hydrocarbons with the formula C7H8. The proposed new method for flame
diagnostics can also be used for future combustion science studies and for
commercial implementations. The project will involve one graduate student and
form the basis of the student?s dissertation. The PI will work with Leadership
Alliance, a national consortium headquartered at Brown University enhancing
undergraduate students? interest in pursuing graduate education and success in
their careers.