* 1336839
* SAVI:  Climate Change, Human Adaptation and Risks to Sustainable Freshwater Ecosystems in the Western Hemisphere and Beyond
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Thomas Harmon, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 08/31/2018
* USD 384,573.00

1336839&lt;br/&gt;Harmon&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Science Across Virtual
Institutes (SAVI) project will integrate multiple sustainability research
efforts in the western hemisphere by examining climate-driven risks to
freshwater ecosystems and the services they provide. The connection between
climate variation and threats to ecosystem services is poorly understood and
difficult to assess because it depends on regional climate responses to global
climate change. The value of ecosystems services varies locally and regionally
with varying human needs and cultural settings. Hence, assessing (and
mitigating) these threats to tightly coupled natural-human system requires a
multidisciplinary approach addressing scientific, socioeconomic and cultural
aspects. In this project, researchers from the U.S. will team with complementary
investigators from Canada, Argentina, Colombia, Chile, Uruguay, and future
participating nations globally. The goal of this SAVI is to enable all these
researchers to expand their geographical and socioeconomic coverage to better
assess climate- and human-forced risks to freshwater ecosystems and services,
and to develop adaptation strategies. The project will achieve this goal by (1)
Developing and implementing a standardized environmental cyberinfrastructure
(technology for data acquisition, management, and collaborative analysis) to
employ freshwater ecosystems globally as sentinels of climate variability and
risk to services (particularly in previously unobserved settings in Central and
South America); (2) Investigating watershed and ecosystem interactions with
multiple stressors to assess risks to ecosystem services across geophysical,
socioeconomic, and cultural gradients; (3) Enhancing international collaboration
between the U.S., Canada and Latin American nations in developing transferrable
strategies for stakeholder engagement to determine management and mitigation
strategies which are both technically and economically feasible, as well as
culturally acceptable; and (4) Integrating our graduate student training and
subsequent doctoral research to train the next generation of internationally
engaged, inter-disciplinary aquatic ecosystems researchers who will attack
scientific challenges of importance to society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Humans
benefit from resources and processes supplied by freshwater ecosystems,
including streams, rivers, lakes and wetlands. This work will study how these
benefits, which are referred to as ecosystem services, are expected to change
with changing climate. Ecosystem services can be grouped into four broad
categories: provisioning (drinking water or hydropower for example), regulating
(such as modulating climate, controlling disease), supporting (such as
distributing sediments and nutrients), and cultural (such as recreational
benefits). The project will unite engineers, earth scientists, biologists and
social scientists in an effort aimed at understanding how quickly and how
severely climate changes will affect aquatic ecosystems in different places. At
the same time, the investigators will identify suitable strategies for people to
reduce the impact of these changes by adapting practices locally or regionally.
People living in different places value ecosystems services differently. For
example, people living in a large city may value drinking water or the quality
of a fishery differently than people living on a lake. Part of this project will
focus on identifying successful adaptation strategies within different cultures
and socioeconomic settings and communicating these strategies to relevant
stakeholders. Lastly, the project will continuously involve undergraduate and
graduate students in its research and stakeholder outreach activities in order
to better prepare them to address the challenges ahead for our global well-
being.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is designated as a Science Across Virtual
Institutes (SAVI) award and is being co-funded by NSF?s Office of International
and Integrative Activities.