* 1336073
* Collaborative Research: Hybrid Block Copolymer Electrodes for Electrochemical Energy Storage
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Rafael Verduzco, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2016
* USD 197,225.00

PI: Lutkenhaus, Jodie / Verduzco, Rafael Proposal Number: 1336716 / 1336073
Institution: Texas Engineering Experiment Station/ William Marsh Rice University
Title: Collaborative Research: Hybrid Block Copolymer Electrodes for
Electrochemical Energy Storage

Storage of energy through electrochemical means (batteries, capacitors) is
critical to providing power for advanced transportation and portable
electronics. Next-generation energy storage materials must simultaneously
satisfy a number of criteria: excellent charge and ion transport, high capacity,
and reversible charge transfer. For this reason, electron- and ion-conducting
polymers are often explored as additives in cathodes such as V2O5, LiCoO2,
LiFePO4, etc. to form hybrid electrodes. Unfortunately, it remains extremely
difficult to obtain a hybrid electrode that successfully balances electron and
ion transport with charge transfer because of large-scale phase separation and
poor structure control among the electrode?s various components.

This project will investigate a model system of hybrid electrodes for energy
storage based on nanostructured blends of poly(3-alkylthiophene)-block-
poly(ethylene oxide) (P3AT-b-PEO) multifunctional block copolymers and V2O5.
P3AT-b-PEO is capable of simultaneous electron and ion transport, and V2O5 is a
commonly explored high-capacity cathode material for Li-ion batteries. V2O5 will
be synthesized within selected polymer blocks using ?structure directed?
synthesis. The PIs hypothesize that through bottom- up assembly methods, the
resulting hybrid materials will exhibit favorable properties characteristic of
both organic and inorganic components.

This project will determine the relationship between block copolymer composition
and morphology as it is affected by V2O5, side chain functionalization, and
electrochemical performance. The relationship between block copolymer morphology
and charge transfer, electron transport, and ion transport has never before been
systematically investigated as a whole, so the proposed research will establish
a broad knowledge base to guide the development of multifunctional block
copolymers for energy storage. First, the PIs will establish relationships
between the morphology of hybrid electrodes containing block copolymer bearing a
single type of side chain and V2O5 and electrochemical performance (Objectives 1
and 2). This knowledge will then be applied to a wider family of block
copolymers of varying side chain chemistry so as to balance electrochemical
properties with processability.

The proposed work will have broader impacts within the scientific community as
well as the general public through educational activities and outreach. Within
the scientific community, this work will establish a knowledge base for
multifunctional block copolymers in electrodes, where several processes
(reaction and diffusion) must be balanced.

The PIs will pursue educational activities including hosting high school
teacher(s) through Enrichment Experiences in Engineering, providing summer
research opportunities for talented, underrepresented groups from the Houston
Community College system, hosting Nova-sponsored, materials science-themed
Science Cafés at Houston-area high schools, and organizing Texas Soft Matter
Meetings at TAMU and Rice University.