* 1336616
* SusChEM GOALI: Transformative Approach to Sustain Potable Water Infrastructure: Fundamental Mechanisms of In-Situ Autogenous Repair
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Marc Edwards, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 09/30/2017
* USD 536,358.00

CBET 1336616&lt;br/&gt;Marc Edwards&lt;br/&gt;Virginia
Tech&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As the nation's aging potable water pipeline systems
fall deeper into disrepair, and costs of traditional pipe replacement
increasingly dwarf societal abilities to pay for upgrades, innovative approaches
to sustain pipeline assets are urgently needed. We have discovered that our
existing pipe materials (i.e., iron, cement, and copper) have a remarkable
ability for autogenous leak self-repair that has heretofore been unexploited,
providing possible approaches to pipeline restoration at costs orders of
magnitude lower than conventional alternatives. Our ultimate objective is to
rationally engineer the chemistry of drinking water to seal existing leak-holes
formed in existing materials via clogging with waterborne and/or water-formed
particles. A laboratory phase of research establishes fundamental mechanisms of
(1) leak clogging by model particulates commonly found in water distribution
systems, (2) "smart" precipitation of crystalline CaCO3(s) in leak-holes, and
(3) metallic corrosion as a pathway for repairing leaks. Parallel large-scale
application of the approach to extend the lifetime of New York City's iconic
Delaware Aqueduct will provide valuable data and insights to both leak clogging
and "smart precipitation."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is the first to
demonstrate that existing leaks in aged pipelines do not inevitably grow to
failure, but can actually provide a pathway to self-repair via water chemistry.
Such low cost, environmentally friendly solutions to one of the most urgent
infrastructure problems facing the developed world, has the potential to save
tens of billions of dollars per year in reduced damages, water loss, and capital
expenditures. Repair of leaks enhances water conservation/sustainability and
protects public health by reducing the likelihood of contaminant influx into
pipelines. After more than a century of research aimed at minimizing problems
with corrosion, scaling and particle formation in potable water systems at every
opportunity, the possibility that these processes can be beneficially exploited
to repair existing pipelines would represent a true paradigm shift. The basic
science and concepts also have direct linkages to economically sustaining other
decaying infrastructure assets including sewage pipelines and concrete
structures.