* 1336542
* Nanoprospecting: An Approach Towards Environmental Monitoring of Engineered Nanomaterials
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Kiril Hristovski, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 08/31/2017
* USD 306,000.00

CBET - 1336542 &lt;br/&gt;Engineered nanomaterials (NMs) are a new class of
pollutants, and debate is growing regarding their potential hazard in the
environment. This proposal aims to contribute towards gaining improved
information on the exposure component of hazard assessment. Even for the high
production volume (HPV) NMs used today in society (TiO2 and SiO2) there is a
paucity of field monitoring data on their concentration or frequency of
occurrence in aquatic systems. Environmental monitoring of NMs on the cusp of
widespread use (e.g., Ag0, CeO2, CNT, C60, etc.) or futuristic high value-added
NMs will remain unattainable unless frameworks and analytical methods exist to
understand where and how to find NMs. We propose developing and applying a
framework for monitoring NMs in the environment. Nanoprospecting is the first
stage of this investigative framework, involving monitoring for the presence of
HPV and emerging NMs at critical inputs to and points along the urban water
system. Bulk food ingredients are a major potential source of NMs into the urban
water system. To compliment the use of existing analytical approaches available
today to detect NMs at environmentally relevant concentrations, we propose
improvements to post-processing of data signals from specific instrumentation
and discovering the suitability of several NM extraction techniques that
leverage a unique property of NMs by exploiting the unique phenomena of NMs that
a minimum free energy exists for NMs at the solvent-water or water-solid
interface. By monitoring for a few NMs in the environment today, information and
data can be collected and used in validating life cycle models. Research is
organized around the following four research components: (1) Nanoprospecting
across an urban water gradient; (2) Nanoprospecting in the food supply system;
(3) Using interfaces for nanomaterial extraction from water; (4) Framework for
long-term monitoring of aquatic systems for
nanomaterials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit
:&lt;br/&gt;Nanoprospecting builds upon experiences of the environmental
community dealing with other emerging contaminants and technologic shifts, and
is complimentary to life cycle perspectives. Specifically, this project will
provide the scientific community with estimates of realistic human (through
food) and ecosystem (through urban water gradients) exposure levels and
characteristics of "real" nanomaterials, as opposed to NMs purchased or
synthesized solely for research-grade testing. New extraction methodologies and
signal processing of analytical response data will be developed. The research is
motivated by the following scientific questions: What is the frequency in
detection of nanomaterials across the urban water gradient? What are the
occurrences and characteristics of nanoscale TiO2 and SiO2 in bulk food
ingredients and finished food products? How can the unique property that
nanoscale objects adsorb at liquid or solid interfaces be harnessed to extract
nanomaterials from water and facilitate their characterization? Could a
monitoring framework and network of monitoring stations be established to
provide baseline and longer-term data on nanomaterials in water?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts :&lt;br/&gt;By focusing on field-scale
monitoring we hope to lead the environmental nanotechnology field toward
establishing protocols suitable for monitoring NMs at environmentally relevant
concentrations. The researchers have a proven commitment to mentoring gender and
ethnically iverse undergraduate and graduate students. The graduate student
funded by this project will participate in Science Outside the Lab, a two-week
immersive seminar in Washington, DC that explore how science becomes policy. The
project connects with the NSF Central-Arizona hoenix Long Term Ecological
Research (CAP-LTER) program, taking a similar longitudinal approach looking at
NMs along the urban water gradient, and field data collected by this project
will become part of the CAP-LTER data archives. The research team has a record
of onducting research of interest and visible to the public, and will continue
to strive to share our results with the public, including working with the
Center for Nanotechnology in Society at ASU.