* 1336896
* Development of  a Designer Fluid for Phase Change Heat Transfer in Different Materials
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2015
* Ivan Catton, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Jose Lage
* 08/31/2015
* USD 245,000.00

CBET 1336896 PI: Catton

The project goals are twofold; 1) yield an understanding of the chemistry of an
inorganic aqueous solution that is sufficient to develop a ?designer fluid? for
a particular heat transfer application and 2) establish the ability of such a
designer fluid to enhance heat transfer in the phase change device (heat pipes,
recuperators, and/or thermosiphons) within which it is to be used. The
understanding of the chemistry, the first part of the project, will be
quantified to establish the impact of the type and amount of the chemical
constituents. A library of various applications and suggested chemical
constituents will be developed. What is needed to passivate various materials,
to relate the mixture constituents and their molality to passivation,
hydrophilicity, surface deposition and microstructure will be established. The
second part of the project is to quantify the capacity of a designer fluid to
enhance heat transfer in the device in which it is to be used. A correlation
between the deposition of material and construction of the micro-porous coatings
to the chemistry, pH and temperature of the mix will be developed. The heat
transfer will be related to the amount and type of constituents and their
capacity to construct micro-porous coatings on a surface and to the
hydrophilicity and capillarity of the surface microstucture. The impact of such
a designer fluid on the effectiveness of various types of wicking will complete
the project.

Water is one of natures best heat transfer fluids when phase change is involved
because it has the highest heat of evaporation. Unfortunately water is also a
good oxidizer and can lead to corrosion and, if a metal, hydrogen production
that can seriously degrade the heat transfer performance. Presently, water can
only be used with metals like copper. In this work, a novel, inorganic aqueous
solution is developed for use with aluminum and other material heat pipes and
thermosiphons that will improve the heat transfer performance by as much as a
factor of two. The chemical reactions responsible for passivating the device
material interior and preventing generation of non condensible gases (NCG) will
be explained. Being able to use a phase change heat transfer fluid that has the
equivalent or better heat transfer performance than water in a range of
different materials will have a significant impact on many aspects of the power
generation, process and electronics industries and our ability to harvest waste
heat.