* 1336794
* Metal fingerprinting and chemothermal isolation methods to quantify natural and engineered carbon nanoparticles
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Desiree Plata, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 08/31/2016
* USD 305,001.00

CBET - 1336794&lt;br/&gt;Overview:&lt;br/&gt;The PIs seek to develop methodology
to quantify, fingerprint, and distinguish natural and
engineered&lt;br/&gt;carbonaceous nanoparticles using thermal separation
techniques and metal content signatures.&lt;br/&gt;Building on well-established
thermal methods to quantify black carbon (BC) soot, the PIs&lt;br/&gt;propose a
technique that distinguishes non-nanoparticulate natural organic matter, single-
walled&lt;br/&gt;carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs), and BC (the most ubiquitous, natural
carbonaceous nanoparticle)&lt;br/&gt;based on their distinct thermal
stabilities. Preliminary results suggest that natural organic&lt;br/&gt;matter,
SWCNTs, and BC have unique oxidation ranges and could be distinguished and
quantified&lt;br/&gt;following sequential oxidations coupled with elemental
analysis. Here, we aim to demonstrate&lt;br/&gt;that these thermal stabilities
are preserved in complex mixtures of air, water, sediments,&lt;br/&gt;and soil,
and as a result, can be used to quantitatively delineate the nanoparticles
(e.g.,&lt;br/&gt;natural vs. engineering) in environmental matrices.
Furthermore, bulk metal contents determined&lt;br/&gt;via complete acid
digestion and mass spectrometry should provide a route toward source
apportionment.&lt;br/&gt;Advantages of this approach include the low cost,
accessibility, high-throughput capabilities,&lt;br/&gt;and minimal sample
processing (e.g., extraction) required for this method, which reduces
the&lt;br/&gt;potential for analyte loss and transformation during
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit :&lt;br/&gt;The National
Research Council 2012 EHS Nanotechnology Research Strategy report listed
analytical&lt;br/&gt;techniques as the first research priority. Current
approaches for measuring carbonaceous&lt;br/&gt;nanoparticles (CNPs) in the work
place (and atmosphere) primarily rely on light-scattering&lt;br/&gt;particle
sizers, which provide a bulk measure of nano-sized particles. However, as
synthetic&lt;br/&gt;approaches to form engineered carbonaceous nanoparticles
(i.e, carbon nanotubes and graphene)&lt;br/&gt;are known to co-produce natural
nanoparticles (i.e., soot), current results are reporting&lt;br/&gt;natural plus
engineered nanoparticle exposure. Thus, it is not possible to
quantitatively&lt;br/&gt;determine occupational exposure to engineered
nanoparticles. In addition, there are no methods&lt;br/&gt;to assess release of
engineered nanoparticles to the atmosphere, which is a likely
vector&lt;br/&gt;for CNP transport to the environment. This has severe
consequences for ongoing nanoparticle&lt;br/&gt;research: (1) fate models lack
validated source data, (2) occupational exposure can be
neither&lt;br/&gt;assessed nor enforced, and (3) environmental release can not
be mitigated where necessary.&lt;br/&gt;Upon project completion, quantitatively
differentiation of natural and engineered carbonaceous&lt;br/&gt;nanoparticles
(NPs) will be possible for the first time, allowing accurate assessment of
exposure&lt;br/&gt;to engineered NPs, which have unique properties,
morphologies, and toxicities compared to&lt;br/&gt;natural NPs. These goals are
within the team?s reach and rely on affordable, accessible
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts :&lt;br/&gt;The PIs and their
research groups are actively involved in the outreach efforts hosted
by&lt;br/&gt;the Center for the Environmental Implications of Nano-technology
(CEINT) at Duke University,&lt;br/&gt;as well as other science enrichment
activities there, including Females Excelling More in&lt;br/&gt;Math Engineering
and Science (FEMMES) (100% females from underrepresented groups)
volunteer&lt;br/&gt;science workshops. As part of the proposed work, the PIs
will establish a nano-analytical&lt;br/&gt;K-12 education module (Is CSI for
real? Rapid Nano-forensics?), and this will be taught as&lt;br/&gt;part of
NanoDays, FEMMES, and later distributed to the CEINT network of K-12 educators.
Additionally,&lt;br/&gt;the program will be modified for a more advanced
audience (e.g., public library and senior&lt;br/&gt;center), delivered live, and
videotaped for web distribution.