* 1336401
* Flow of colloids and emulsions:  Microscopic details of rearrangements and stresses
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Eric Weeks, Emory University
* Continuing Grant
* William Olbricht
* 08/31/2016
* USD 210,199.00

1336401 PI: Weeks

In this project, the PI and his lab group will study the flow of soft materials,
in particular emulsions (oil droplets in water). The goal is to connect the
microscopic details of the flowing emulsions to their macroscopic properties.
The project has two thrusts: first, to study the shear of dense three-
dimensional emulsions; and second, to investigate the flow properties of dense
two-dimensional emulsions. The 3D samples will be viewed using confocal
microscopy. For these 3D samples, the importance of polydispersity will be
examined using samples with droplet sizes that vary by as much as an order of
magnitude. Flow of these highly polydisperse samples is qualitatively distinct
from less polydisperse cases, and the data from this project will be a
foundation to understand jammed materials that are highly polydisperse. For the
2D samples, the oil droplets will be confined between two parallel glass plates,
so that the droplets are deformed into round quasi-two-dimensional disks. From
the outlines of the droplets and knowledge of their surface tension, forces
between droplet pairs will be measured and related to the rearrangements as the
droplets flow. These measurements enable testing of theories of flowing
amorphous materials. Microfluidic techniques will be used to create the oil
droplets, allowing careful control over droplet sizes, viscosities, and surface
tension.

Soft jammed materials are common, and include colloidal pastes (such as
toothpaste), gels (such as gelatin), foams (such as shaving cream), and
emulsions (such as mayonnaise). In contrast to regular liquids like water, the
flow properties of these materials are less well understood. For example, the
flow of an emulsion composed of oil droplets in water must involve
rearrangements of individual droplets; additionally, the droplets can be
stretched and even break up, making the flow even more complicated. The projects
funded by this award will use microscopes to take movies of flowing emulsions,
to see how the oil droplets move and how these motions are related to the forces
required to flow them. This will lead to better understanding of how to create
emulsions with specific flow properties, and how to better process emulsions in
industry. Additionally, Professor Weeks will conduct at least one field trip
each year to his laboratory for groups of primary school students. These
students will investigate the properties of "squishy" materials such as the oil-
and-water emulsions used in this project. While such materials are common and
safe, they are also counterintuitive and get students curious. For example,
consider shaving cream, which can sit in a pile on a table, in contrast to a
puddle of soapy water which must lie flat. Such materials challenge the ideas
students have that materials only come as solids, liquids, or gases.