* 1336186
* SusChEM: Converting Urban Wastes into Longer Chain Chemicals
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Largus Angenent, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 08/31/2016
* USD 391,302.00

CBET 1336186&lt;br/&gt;Largus Angenent&lt;br/&gt;Cornell
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bioprocesses with open cultures of microbial
consortia (reactor microbiomes, similar to gut microbiomes) are advantageous for
waste processing because they remain functionally stable during invasions of
outside microbes, circumventing costs for influent sterilization. Under
anaerobic conditions (without oxygen), these microbiomes have been mainly used
in anaerobic digesters to convert organic wastes into methane as an energy
carrier. However, methane is a relatively low-cost commodity. This research
project will examine whether urban wastes, such as food and wood wastes, can be
converted into a longer-carbon-chain biochemical with multiple uses as a more
valuable commodity. The production of longer-chain biochemicals was observed
with an enriched reactor microbiome that was able to produce mainly one soluble
product (n-caproic acid) from a complex organic substrate. The investigator was
able to shape the microbiome by controlling the temperature and pH while
continuously extracting the chemical product from the bioprocess during the
operating period. This study will focus on functional and microbial population
stability during application of the technology to urban wastes, which include:
(1) an increase in extraction rates of the biochemical; and (2) perturbations of
the waste quality that are common for real waste treatment systems. Besides
long-term bioreactor studies that include perturbation experiments, the PI will
use a combination of several high-throughput molecular biology techniques. These
techniques provide a unique picture of the dynamics of specific microbial
populations as well as their metabolic activities in the
microbiomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will advance the scientific
knowledge about biochemical and biofuel production using microbiomes. The
research also should shed light on how microbial populations behave in a
microbiome over the long operating periods of bioprocesses that treat real urban
wastes during high rate extraction of final biochemical fermentation product.
The results will also investigate whether biochemical and biofuel production can
be performed in a stable way with reactor microbiomes rather than just with pure
cultures. The bioprocessing application and its challenges will be discussed in
a new hands-on workshop for local high school students at the university campus.