* 1336082
* Collaborative Research:   Genetic and Metabolic Signatures of Marine Microorganisms in Oxygen Depleted and Varying Geochemical Seascapes (MetaOmics in the Cariaco Basin)
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Craig Taylor, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 07/31/2017
* USD 683,052.00

Oxygen depleted water columns (ODWCs) appear to be expanding in response to
global climate change. This alters trophic structure, compresses habitat and
modifies geochemical cycles of major elements. Oxygen depletion can vary in
intensity and duration from seasonal hypoxia to permanent anoxia. The focus of
this study is a classic example of the anoxic end-member, the Cariaco Basin. The
overall goal is to examine how microbial functional potential (metagenomic),
activity (metatranscriptomic), taxonomic diversity (based on SSU rRNA) and the
ecological/geochemical consequences (in terms of measured rates of key
processes) relate along vertical oxygen/geochemical gradients and between
seasons in the Cariaco Basin. This will reveal relationships between expression
of particular sets of genes, environmental differences in nutrients, energy
substrates and oxidant availabilities.&lt;br/&gt;The objectives are to: (1)
Integrate hydrographic, geochemical and microbial ecological data with
metagenomic and metatranscriptomic profiles to understand regulatory and
metabolic networks defining microbial community responses to environmental
forcing during high and low productivity periods. This will help to understand
the importance of processes, such as anaerobic oxidation of methane, utilization
of redox-sensitive metals, the cryptic sulfur cycle in this ODWC, and the
impacts of oxygen depletion on nitrogen transformations. (2) Determine the
importance of associations between microbial eukaryotes (mEuks) and prokaryotes
in this ODWC. (3) Identify "indicator" genes of known or unknown function that
may be relevant to major elemental and trace gas cycling as targets for further
biochemical characterization and molecular probe development, and quantify a key
subset of these genes and transcripts across redox gradients using qPCR. (4)
Provide a basis for developing monitoring tools using expressed genes indicative
of important elemental transformations and fluxes for diagnosing the health
status of natural and human engineered ecosystems. (5) Compare results with
recent and ongoing studies of other ODWCs to discern shared and unique
attributes of these systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Previous
studies of ODWCs have underscored the need for more data on microbial community
structure and functionality in ODWCs, particularly biochemical rate measurements
and other data on community responses to changing conditions. Better predictive
models of responses of marine microbial communities and biogeochemical processes
to global climate change are essential for informing future policy and
management decisions. Data from an anoxic end-member ODWC like Cariaco Basin are
critically needed to compare with data from other recent and ongoing studies of
seasonally-depleted coastal systems and permanently-depleted deep basin and
western boundary oxygen minimum zones (OMZs) to construct more skillful models.
This study will advance the understanding of impacts of expanding ODWCs around
the world, moving beyond assessments based only on taxonomic diversity, to yield
new insights into the ecology and physiology of major microbial groups in these
environments and interactions among Bacteria, Archaea and microbial
eukaryotes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The PIs and their
collaborators will train one Research Associate, one postdoctoral investigator,
a graduate student, and numerous undergraduates from SBU. All personnel will be
trained in various aspects of microbial ecology and oceanography, with an
emphasis on both traditional (e.g., microscopy) and "cutting edge" (e.g.
metagenomics/transcriptomics) techniques. The PIs will also involve the Zephyr
Education Foundation's marine science literacy and education program, located in
Woods Hole, MA. The PIs will work with this organization to educate inner city
K-12 students using local boat field trips organized by Zephyr, and lectures,
and classroom laboratory exercises designed by the PIs. Additionally, this
project will have broad implications for understanding how ODWCs affect marine
ecosystems, and may influence future management strategies and models describing
the cycling of C and N between the ocean and atmosphere.