* 1336643
* Collaborative Research: High Temperature and Pressure Char Kinetics - Diagnostic development, Gasifier experiments, and Modeling
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Gregory Rieker, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Song-Charng Kong
* 08/31/2016
* USD 155,000.00

1336364/1336643 Rieker/Porter

Current water treatment methodologies are not designed to handle emerging
contamination threats derived from agricultural run-off, volatile organic
compounds, and pharmaceutical residues?advanced methods are therefore needed.
Plasma production in liquid water produces a host of advanced oxidation agents
that have the capacity to rapidly decompose organic contaminants. The proposed
effort investigates a novel method of producing plasma in bubbles immersed in
water by driving them at resonance in the presence of an electric field. This
effort studies the ignition physics of resonantly driven bubbles, the time
evolution of plasma formation in such bubbles, and the chemistry of the active
interfacial layer separating the plasma bubble and the liquid water. The
understanding gained from these studies will be used to design and build a
plasma reactor for the purpose of water purification. As part of the educational
outreach thrust of this effort, lab tours and demonstrations will be given to
visiting grade school students from programs such as the Detroit Area Pre-
College Engineering Program and those sponsored by Women in Science and
Engineering, using in-house fabricated plasma demonstration experiments. In
addition to sponsoring a student from the Summer Research Opportunity Program
(SROP), a program aimed at encouraging underrepresented students to attend
graduate school, we will also integrate plasma demonstrations into the existing
educational outreach effort led by the National Society of Black Engineers,
which involves actually visiting at risk schools in the area for the purpose of
inspiring students with hands on experiments, mini-lessons, and mentorship.