* 1336913
* Acquisition of a High-Pulse-Energy, Narrow-Linewidth, UV Laser Source: Improved Quantitative Gas-Phase Mixing Measurements in Turbulent Spray Flows
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2015
* Jeffrey Sutton, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Song-Charng Kong
* 09/30/2015
* USD 98,721.00

1336913 Sutton This project involves the acquisition of components to assemble
an ultra-high-pulse-energy (300 mJ/pulse at 254 nm), tunable, narrow-linewidth
(~ 30 MHz) UV laser system. This instrument will be the primary component used
within a UV filtered Rayleigh scattering (FRS) measurement system to investigate
vaporization and gas-phase mixing processes within turbulent spray flows.
Subsequent experiments using the new UV laser and FRS system will target gas-
phase thermometry in sooting hydrocarbon flames which will yield new information
concerning soot transport and reaction chemistry.

Perhaps the best known examples of turbulent sprays exist in energy conversion
systems in which a liquid fuel issues into an oxidizing environment, evaporates,
and mixes with the oxidizer before reacting. Gas-phase mixing has not been
studied extensively in multi-phase spray environments primarily due the co-
existence of the liquid phase that makes the independent measurement of the
vapor-phase concentration very difficult. The PI will use the new high-energy UV
laser (254 nm) in conjunction with an atomic mercury filter to perform UV FRS
measurements for quantitative gas-phase measurements with minimal interference
from the liquid-phase droplets. Broader impacts of the project are addressed by
the fact that the majority of engineering systems operate with working mediums
that consist of multiple phases. In particular, spray flows are of significant
interest in many applications including automotive engines, liquid-propellant
rocket engines, industrial furnaces, and gas-turbines. With a better
understanding of the vaporization and gas-phase mixing processes, improvements
in fuel injector and combustor design will be possible, resulting in an improved
control over ignition and a potential for increased efficiency, increased
stability, and decreased pollutant emissions. In terms of research-related
education, the proposed laser system will be used by post-doctoral researchers
and undergraduate/graduate students to enhance their training in state-of-the
art measurement techniques. Our technological future depends on developing both
new methodologies and a new workforce capable of tackling such complicated
problems.