* 1336940
* MRI: Acquisition of a MALDI-TOF/TOF Mass Spectrometer for Molecular Structure Determination and Imaging
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Michael Bowser, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 08/31/2016
* USD 285,544.00

With this award from the Chemistry Major Research Instrumentation Program that
is co-funded by the Chemistry Research Instrumentation and Facilities (CRIF)
Program, Professor Michael Bowser from University of Minnesota-Twin Cities and
colleague Joseph Dalluge will acquire a matrix-assisted laser desorption
ionization tandem time-of-flight mass spectrometer (MALDI-TOF/TOF-MS) with
molecular imaging capability. The proposal is aimed at enhancing research and
education at all levels, especially in areas such as (a) characterization of
synthetic multiblock copolymers essential to the development of next-generation
polymeric materials; (b) moving beyond classical histology and
immunohistochemistry to characterize engineered tissues and assess the efficacy
of a new generation of engineered drug delivery agents; (c) identification of
biofoulants adsorbed to engineered chemical sensors designed for clinical and
environmental monitoring; d) determination of spatial heterogeneity of
subcellular-specific autophagy markers; (e) structural characterization of
bioactive proteins and nucleic acids; and (f) assessing high-speed, high peak
capacity, 2D microfluidic separations to improve capabilities and efficiency in
systems biology research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mass Spectrometry (MS) is one of
the key analytical methods used to identify and characterize small quantities of
chemical species embedded in complex matrices. In a typical experiment, the
components flow into a mass spectrometer where they are ionized into the parent
ion and its fragment ions and their masses are measured. This highly sensitive
technique allows detection and determination of the structure of molecules in a
complex mixture. An instrument with tandem capability provides additional
structural identification power through further fragmentation of ions produced
in the spectrometer. The instrumentation provided by this award will provide
faculty and students in several departments the opportunity to pursue research
projects using modern instrumentation not heretofore available at the
institution. In addition, acquisition of the proposed instrument will enable
collaboration with Anoka-Ramsey Community College (ARCC) to provide
undergraduate organic chemistry students at ARCC (&gt;50% of whom are students
of color, women, or students with disabilities) the opportunity to gain hands-on
experience with this technology, improving the pipeline that connects 2-year and
4-year colleges and universities.