* 1336020
* Collaborative Research: A multi-scale approach for optimizing tidal kinetic energy extraction  for sustainable power generation
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Luigi Martinelli, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2017
* USD 163,358.00

PI: Cowles, Geoffrey / Martinelli, Luigi&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1336007 /
1336020&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth /
Princeton University&lt;br/&gt;Title: Collaborative Research: A multi-scale
approach for optimizing tidal kinetic energy extraction for sustainable power
generation&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tidal in-stream energy conversion (TISEC)
facilities provide a highly predictable and dependable source of energy. Given
the economic and social incentives to migrate towards renewable energy sources
there has been tremendous interest in the technology. However, at present it is
not yet apparent what the most efficient design would be for real ocean
conditions. A second open issue pertains to environmental impact. Such devices
are able to extract a significant fraction of energy from the water column and
can produce local modifications to the bed stress resulting in a morphodynamic
adjustment in locations where the substrate is mobile. When sited in an inlet or
constriction, a turbine array can influence the exchanges of water between an
embayment and the adjacent ocean. An accurate quantification of environmental
impact is critical for site planning and
permitting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Presently, researchers are examining scientific
issues related to tidal kinetic energy extraction using a variety of
computational tools that range from commercial CFD codes for evaluating device
performance to ocean models for evaluating impact and site selection. Taken
independently, such approaches are forced to rely on simplifying assumptions
that decrease the accuracy and utility of the computations. The device scale CFD
models typically employ a uniform inflow velocity, ignoring realistic site-
specific ocean conditions that influence device performance such as vertical
shear, surface waves, free-stream turbulence, and eccentricity of the tidal
ellipse. Large-scale hydrodynamic models typically employ subgrid-scale
approaches to model energy extraction using simple parameterizations to
represent the influence of the device on the
flowfield.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will apply a multi-model approach
to link the scales of interest. Device scale simulations will be performed using
a RANS CFD code with an optimal shape design capability. The shape design
procedure uses a highly efficient approach based on control theory for
construction of the gradient. For the larger scales necessary for impact
assessment and site evaluation, an unstructured grid ocean model will be
employed. The models will be coupled using a two-way approach. The device scale
simulations will provide momentum loss and changes in turbulent kinetic energy
needed for accurate subgrid-scale parameterization of energy extrac- tion in the
ocean model. The ocean model will provide realistic flow conditions for the
device scale simulations. The coupled approach will be applied to both idealized
and realistic domains and will be capable of improving turbine performance in
realistic conditions while simultaneously considering the potential impacts to
the environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop and test a
process for optimizing and evaluating tidal kinetic energy extraction across the
entire range of critical scales. In particular, the multi-model approach will
enable (1) automatic device shape design for increased efficiency in realistic
flow conditions, (2) assessments of impact on circulation and sediment transport
using accurate parameterizations of turbine effects. An important outcome of
this research will be the development and demonstration of a suite of tools to
support the planning and permitting processes for tidal energy installations.