* 1336731
* Tailoring Transport in Transparent and Conducting Non-conjugated Polymers for Next-Generation Materials in Organic Photovoltaic Devices
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Bryan Boudouris, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2016
* USD 268,500.00

PI: Boudouris, Bryan&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1336731&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
Purdue University&lt;br/&gt;Title: Tailoring Transport in Transparent and
Conducting Non-conjugated Polymers for Next-Generation Materials in Organic
Photovoltaic Devices&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Organic photovoltaic (OPV) cells are
recording device efficiencies that are beginning to rival many inorganic
photovoltaic systems due to breakthroughs in the design of materials; as such,
they present themselves as potential sources of sustainable energy generation.
However, much of the groundbreaking research has focused on the design of pi-
conjugated, light-absorbing macromolecules for use in the semiconducting layers
of the OPV devices. Less success has been had in the realm of new polymeric
materials for charge extraction at the electrode-organic interfaces of OPV
devices despite the inherent need to remove the photogenerated charges from the
solar cell efficiently. Therefore, there exists a critical need to develop and
understand the fundamental charge transport in novel materials that are highly
transparent, stable in ambient conditions, and that have the ability to
transport charges in a rapid manner. Here, the PI introduces a promising new
class of conducting polymers where a stable radical group is pendant on each
repeat unit of a macromolecular chain whose polymer backbone is composed
entirely of aliphatic carbon-carbon bonds; these materials are known as radical
polymers. In addition to providing a method by which to conduct charge, radical
polymers have the advantages traditionally associated with common aliphatic
polymers (e.g., polystyrene) in that they: 1) can be generated from easily-
synthesized monomers, 2) have their polymerizations occur through controlled
mechanisms (e.g., controlled radical polymerizations) and on large scales, and
3) are processed readily either from solution or from the melt. Therefore, it is
anticipated that the project will be able to generate transparent, conducting
polymer thin films that have distinct synthetic, processing, and stability
advantages over traditional OPV charge-collecting layers [e.g.,
poly(3,4-ethylene dioxythiophene)-poly(styrene sulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS)] while
still retaining high charge transfer rates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The interplay
between the molecular architectures of radical polymers and their solid state
optoelectronic properties is important both in terms of fundamental structure-
property relationships and for their performance in OPV devices. Deciphering
these interactions will require a combination of polymer synthesis, structural
characterization, and electronic testing. Implementation of these skills will
result in: 1) the synthesis of new hole-conducting and electron-conducting non-
conjugated polymers, 2) a description of charge transport in radical polymers
such that improvement in the conductivity values of these functional
macromolecules can occur, and 3) the utilization of these materials in OPV
devices such that an environmentally-stable, low-cost alternative to existing
charge collecting layers can be found. As such, completion of the research
objectives will provide the fundamental scientific understanding to lay the
foundation for a new area of polymer development and interfacial modifications
in organic electronics with a deep impact in the organic photovoltaics and
sustainable energy fields. This could lead to high-performance OPV devices that
will help address current uncertainty in the global energy landscape.
Furthermore, the basic discoveries regarding charge transport relationships in a
new class of solid state polymeric conductors will have the potential to spread
to other realms of organic electronics currently dominated by the conjugated
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to providing a concrete physical
understanding of radical polymer conductors, this project will aid in the
teaching and career development of graduate, undergraduate, and high school
students through laboratory and outreach activities. For example, it will
increase the participation of traditionally underrepresented groups in science
and engineering through support of the Boudouris-founded Purdue Project SEED
high school research experience. Bridging the disciplines of chemistry, polymer
science, chemical engineering, and electrical engineering will afford the
graduate, undergraduate, and high school students associated with this project a
unique opportunity to engage in interdisciplinary, energy-related research that
will have them well-prepared for future endeavors in academic and industrial
circles. This synergistic relationship between research and educational
activities will be of prime import in producing high impact scientific results,
generating transformative technologies, and inspiring the next generation of
sustainable energy scientists and engineers.