* 1336057
* In-situ morphology characterization of self-assembled high-energy density mesoporous electrodes using x-ray and neutron scattering
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Bryan Vogt, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 09/30/2017
* USD 365,010.00

Nanoporous materials are attractive for electrochemical energy storage
applications. For insertion battery electrodes, these pores provide improved
morphological stability during charge-discharge cycles through accommodation of
large volumetric changes. However, relationships between morphological structure
and performance are still, in general, lacking; in particular, complex multi-
component and multi-scale materials should enable significant improvements in
performance. For example, carbon coating of metal oxides or silicon provides
improved performance in comparison to graphite or pure metal oxide. This project
seeks to provide a fundamental framework for the design and characterization of
hybrid materials for Li insertion battery electrodes using well-defined model
materials in conjunction with an in-situ multiscale (atomic and meso)
characterization and testing program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Self-assembled
ordered materials provide model electrodes to enable fundamental insight into
how morphology evolution and distortion during cycling impacts long term battery
capacity. In this work, we propose to use cooperative self assembly of phenolic
resin (carbon precursor) and (1) sol-gel Li-doped vanadium pentoxide or (2)
silicon nanoparticles to fabricate ordered mesoporous nanocomposites as model
materials by which structure-property relationships can be elucidated. This
self-assembly route enables near monodisperse pore sizes, wall thickness and
transport paths for fundamentally examining the impact of pore size and
nanoparticle (Li-V2O5 or Si) content on the performance of these nanocomposite
materials as insertion battery electrodes. The nanocomposite matrix allows for
significant incorporation of Li (through insertion in Li-V2O5 or Si) and high
electrode conductivity (through continuous carbon pathways). The PI proposes to
systematically vary the nanoparticle:carbon ratio and the nanoparticle size/sol
aging to develop an improved understanding of morphology-property relationships,
enhanced by their well-defined mesoscale structure. A suite of characterization
tools (including TEM, porosimetry, and scattering) will enable correlation of
structure to standard electrochemical performance tests. Of particular interest
are structural changes involving swelling, de-swelling, and distortion under
charge-discharge conditions that will be elucidated by in-situ grazing incidence
small angle x-ray scattering and rotational small angle neutron scattering to
address fundamental material challenges associated with electrode stability.
Novel in-situ small angle scattering studies during electrochemical testing are
proposed to elucidate solid-electrolyte interphase formation and potential
routes to mitigate performance loss through nanostructuring and improved control
of charge-discharge cycles. Combined these studies will provide improved basic
understanding of structure-property relations for porous Li ion battery anodes
and potentially provide new engineering solutions for high performance
batteries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advances in battery technology from improved
fundamental understanding developed could lead to improved battery efficiency,
battery usage in higher power applications and increased battery lifetime. Due
to the growing utilization of Li insertion batteries in consumer and industrial
applications, the potential impact from even modest advances in efficiency and
lifetime is quite large. There are both economic and environmental benefits to
consider as increased battery lifetime will decrease the replacement rate for
batteries in applications, especially considering the growing market for
batteries from consumer electronics to transportation. Dissemination of concepts
associated with this research will be disseminated to a broader, public audience
through partnership with UA-St. Vincent?s High School (STVM) and the Akron
Global Polymer Academy (AGPA) that provides materials to K-12 teachers
nationwide; additional local outreach effort will include trips to classrooms
for grades 6-10, through AGPA connections.