* 1336873
* Thin-Film Formation of Insoluble Discharging Products at the Reaction Interface of Li-Air Batteries
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2018
* Yun Wang, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 09/30/2018
* USD 335,666.00

PI: Wang, Yun&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1336873&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
University of California-Irvine&lt;br/&gt;Title: Thin-Film Formation of
Insoluble Discharging Products at the Reaction Interface of Li-Air
Batteries&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lithium-air (Li-air) batteries show great
potential for high capacity of energy storage. Their unique feature is that the
cathode active material, oxygen, is not stored in the batteries, but obtained
from the ambient environment. In addition, Lithium metal is used rather than the
Li intercalated graphite (LiC6) as that in Li-ion batteries. The theoretical
specific energy of Li-air batteries reaches 11,680 Wh/kg, comparable to that of
gasoline (13,000 Wh/kg). Despite the great promise, they face scientific and
technical challenges: one is their discharge capability limited by insoluble
products formation in cathode electrodes. It has been observed that
precipitation of insoluble discharging products forms a nano-scale film on the
reaction surface, hampering electrochemical activity and eventually leading to
significant voltage/capability loss. The underlying physics are, however, poorly
understood at present. This project examines the thin-film formation at the
reaction surface and its effects on Li-air battery performance, with the
ultimate goal to eliminate its adverse effects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project hypothesizes that the thin-film formation of insoluble discharging
products exhibits heterogeneous structures depending on operating conditions,
and thus delineating the heterogeneity is crucial to understand the underlying
physics of discharging voltage and capacity losses. The first objective is to
explore the film growth modes at typical surface morphologies, and understand
the thin-film structure, i.e. the spatial variation of film properties; the
second objective is to explore the effects of film formation on battery?s
voltage loss following an approach newly developed in PEM fuel cells for
subfreezing operation: product water in fuel cells freezes with ice forming at
the reaction surface and hampering electrochemical activities, which is similar
to the film formation of insoluble discharging products in Li-air batteries. In
the first, three surface morphologies will be analyzed: planar, cylindrical, and
spherical shapes. The PI will also directly measure the thin-film?s spatially
varying properties, including chemical composition, porosity, and electric
resistance. In the latter, the PI will analyze the capacity and discharging
voltage loss due to film formation, following that of ice formation in PEM fuel
cells. Diagnostics methods such as cyclic voltammeter (CV) and impedance will be
applied to measure reaction surface loss, and the reaction and oxygen transport
resistances. The project is anticipated to develop fundamental knowledge
regarding thin-film formation, its physical properties, chemical composition,
and effects on electrochemical reaction activities, significant to Li-air
battery development. The outcomes also benefit other research areas, such as the
biological reactors, other battery systems, PEM fuel cells, high-temperature
fuel cells (tar formation in the anode), nano film growth, and electron
tunneling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Li-air battery technology has the potential to
overcome the major technical hurdle for electrical vehicles, i.e. the
insufficient storage capability. Outreach efforts include: 1) Multidisciplinary
learning experiences for graduate and undergraduate students; 2) a renewable
energy outreach program which emphasizes hands-on engineering experience for
high school students and teachers, participating alongside undergraduate
students.