* 1336464
* GOALI: Thermal transport in AlGaN alloys: effect of point and structural defects
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2019
* John Muth, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Ying Sun
* 07/31/2019
* USD 249,987.00

CBET-1336464&lt;br/&gt;PI: Paskova, Tania M. (NCSU)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this GOALI research effort is to perform a systematic study of
thermal conductivity of AlGaN alloys in the entire composition range with
variable defect density achieved by using hydride vapor phase epitaxy on
different substrates and to explore the role of point and structural defects on
the thermal transport in these materials. In partnership with Kyma Technologies,
our interdisciplinary team of academic PIs seeks to gain understanding of the
thermal transport sensitivity to defect present and to develop a proper
analytical model applicable to alloy layers with variable ratio of
substrate/layer thermal conductivities. Currently, there is a considerable
interest in developing compact and highly efficient devices based on III-Nitride
materials for variety of electronic and optoelectronic applications. However,
the presence of large number of defects reduces the device efficiency, light
output and lifetimes while contributing to overheating. Despite their enormous
practical importance, the thermal management of AlGaN-based devices is not well
developed and the studies of thermal conductivity and their dependences on
defects, typically present, are very limited. In order to enhanced our knowledge
about that and to accelerate the device development this research project is
focused on: (i) growth optimization, aiming to control the defect density by
varying growth conditions, substrates, buffers, and layer thickness; (ii)
determining the accurate values of thermal conductivity of AlGaN alloys and its
dependence on the Al mass fraction, elucidating the effect of alloy scattering;
(iii) establishing the thermal conductivity dependencies on both dislocation and
point defect densities; (iv) theoretical modeling of thermal conductivity in
nitride alloys, aiming to validate or refine the existing models. Variety of
techniques is employed for the microstructure characterization, and the 3-omega
method is used for the thermal conductivity measurements of the AlGaN materials.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The knowledge gained can guide technological developments
of highly desired nitride layers and substrates based on AlGaN ternary alloys to
enable better thermal management of the device structures, and thus improving
their performance and lifetime, being critically important for multiple high-
power, high-frequency electronic and high-efficient optoelectronic applications.
The PIs of this project are strongly committed to the integration of research
and education. The project provides training of graduate students by exposing
them to comprehensive, application-driven academic research through curriculum
development, guest lectures, seminars and summer internships at Kyma. The
project intends to involve and support women and underrepresented minorities, as
well as high school students conducting summer science research. Kyma in turn
will continue to receive exposure at NCSU through integration of the research
topics and results.