* 1336702
* Collaborative Research: Characterizing Biodegradable and Recalcitrant Distillates used during Hydraulic Fracturing: Rates, Risks, and Microbial Metabolic Processes
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2014,08/31/2015
* Desiree Plata, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 08/31/2015
* USD 159,868.00

CBET 1336326/1336702&lt;br/&gt;Paula Mouser/ Desiree Plata&lt;br/&gt;Ohio State
University/Duke University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advancements in horizontal
drilling and hydraulic fracturing techniques have recently made it possible to
extract large volumes of energy resources from coal bed and methane shale
formations. Currently, shale energy development is occurring at a rate that is
outpacing both regulatory policies and research on the potential environmental
and health effects of these techniques. Public concerns include the potential
contamination of drinking water resources through the mishandling of fracturing
and flowback fluids (e.g. borehole leaks, surface spills), as well as the fate
of injected fluids that remain unrecovered in the deep subsurface. The objective
of the research project is to determine biodegradation rates for select aromatic
and aliphatic compounds that are used during the hydraulic fracturing process in
order to better define the degradable or recalcitrant constituents that may pose
risk to ecological or human health under natural aquifer conditions. The select
chemical classes represent frequently used, potentially toxic compounds that are
often undisclosed by chemical manufacturers in hydraulic fracture fluid
additives. To realize this objective, the investigators will characterize low
and high molecular weight aromatic and aliphatic distillates present in a
representative fracturing fluid and identify a subset of risk constituents using
high resolution analytical techniques, including gas chromatography (GC) with
flame ionization detection, GC mass spectrometry, and multi-dimensional GC.
Laboratory experiments employing indigenous microbial populations and select
bacterial isolates will be performed to investigate how chemical constituents
are biologically degraded across a range of physical and chemical conditions
representative of shallow freshwater aquifers, deeper saline bedrock, and shale
formation pressures and temperatures. Microbial dynamics will be monitored using
high-throughput biotechnology tools, including pyroseqeuncing of the 16S rRNA
gene, which allows comparison across a broad range of biological species.
Research findings will be used to develop a risk matrix that outlines the
presence or absence of potentially toxic organic constituents along a pressure,
temperature, and salinity spectrum. Associations between degradable constituents
and microorganisms will provide a starting point for understanding the specific
microbial metabolic mechanisms responsible for distillate compound
biotransformation in fracturing fluids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
significantly improve our understanding of how fracturing fluid distillates are
biodegraded by indigenous microorganisms and will identify the key
physicochemical factors that may limit or enhance the degradation of higher risk
compounds in the environment. Outcomes from this research include better
quantification of biodegradation rates and better parameterization of flow and
transport models of these systems. It will also provide further insight into the
persistence of compounds in order to improve chemical formations in
environmentally friendly drilling operations. Research findings will be
communicated to students and the broader public through EnergyExplained!
lectures, highlighting such issues as scarcity, security, feasibility, and
environmental impacts from natural gas and renewable technologies at a variety
of local venues (libraries, museum, and/or grade schools). Investigators will
also disseminate knowledge on key shale energy issues to non-profits, regulatory
agencies, academics, and other stakeholders in the Appalachian region through
regular workshops and workgroup meetings led by Ohio State University?s
Subsurface Energy Resource Center and Extension Office.