* 1336709
* Systems-Level Predictions of Electron Flows in TCE-Dechlorinating, Dehalococcoides Containing Microbial Communities Using Modeling and Emerging Molecular Biology Tools
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2016
* Lisa Alvarez-Cohen, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 12/31/2016
* USD 340,000.00

CBET 1336709&lt;br/&gt;Lisa Alvarez-Cohen&lt;br/&gt;University of California
Berkeley&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Groundwater contamination by chlorinated solvents
is an important problem at thousands of sites within the United States and
worldwide. In situ bioremediation of chlorinated ethene-contaminated groundwater
involves the biostimulation of indigenous Dehalococcoides bacteria and/or
bioaugmentation using Dehalococcoides-containing cultures to completely reduce
perchloroethene and trichloroethene to non-toxic ethene. Because these bacteria
exhibit specific restrictive metabolic requirements for substrates and cofactors
that can be supplied by supportive microorganisms through diverse networks of
metabolic interdependencies, this project seeks to deliver systems-level
predictions of interspecies electron and metabolite exchange networks that shape
the structural and functional robustness of Dehalococcoides-containing microbial
communities. Using a combination of engineered control of cultures in
continuous-flow bioreactor systems, TCE dechlorination biokinetic modeling and
high-throughput, community-level genomic analysis, this research will develop
mechanistic, systems-level models under groundwater plume-relevant conditions
(i.e., continuous flow with low concentrations of chlorinated ethenes) to
optimize and proactively control dechlorination processes under a range of
environmental scenarios, leading to a better understanding and predictive
control of bioremediation processes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Groundwater
contamination by chlorinated solvents (for example, degreasing fluids and dry-
cleaning agents) is an important problem at thousands of sites within the United
States and worldwide. Fortunately, a type of naturally-occurring bacteria are
capable of biodegrading these contaminants when they are stimulated to grow to
high enough population densities, in a process called "in situ bioremediation."
These bacteria live in complex microbial communities that provide many of the
factors needed by the bacteria to survive and biodegrade the solvents. This
project takes a systems-level approach to understanding the interactions within
these microbial communities to develop an integrated picture of how complex
degrading communities operate and respond to different environmental stressors.
This understanding will be captured in predictive models that will be useful for
environmental scientists and bioremediation practitioners to evaluate and
optimize cleanup strategies for chlorinated solvents, and to provide guidance
for strategies to manipulate microbial communities in the field. This project
will also support science outreach activities for multiple education levels to
stimulate interest in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics through
(co-)curricular learning, tutoring and training services.