* 1336478
* REUSE OF STRUCTURAL STEEL:  TOWARDS MAXIMIZING THE GREENNESS OF BUILDINGS
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Erik Thostenson, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 08/31/2018
* USD 299,330.00

1336478 (McConnell). The primary objective of this research is to prove that
widespread reuse of structural steel in buildings would be structurally-sound
engineering practice with significant environmental benefits. The reuse of
structural steel is currently exceedingly rare and, furthermore, reusing primary
structural steel members as primary structural members is even less common. Once
it can be shown that reuse of structural steel is generally acceptable or the
specific conditions in which reuse of structural steel is appropriate are
identified, this will lay the foundation for a new paradigm for reuse of
structural steel and transform current construction practices resulting in
significant environmental benefits. Original data that are to be generated
through this research is detailed information on construction-induced stresses
through field testing using established and novel monitoring and inspection
techniques combined with computational structural analysis. The work will also
result in improved understanding of the holistic stress state within a building
system, which can be used to optimize future designs, building layouts, and
conventional and deconstruction-focused connection methods. Such practice would
dramatically reduce the need for recycling steel members, and the associated
minimum estimates of 10 GJ of energy and 0.92 tons of CO2 emissions per ton of
steel. The outcome of this research and its complementary activities is targeted
to cultivate a cultural shift in the way in which buildings are designed,
constructed, deconstructed, and repurposed in order to have a more thoughtful
regard for energy and natural resource consumption. Through four tasks, data to
support or disprove the primary hypothesis that structural steel members can
safely be reused will be generated by creating a stress envelope of potential
stress states for common applications. In support of the second hypothesis of
this research (conditions most likely to impair future structural usefulness are
construction-induced stresses and connection stresses), considerations of
construction sequencing and/or analysis in the vicinity of connections will be
common to all research tasks. Task 1 will be a laboratory pilot case for later
field instrumentation to be installed in Task 2 to obtain novel information on
the construction-induced stresses in typical buildings. In Task 3, the residual
stresses in and structural performance of decommissioned steel members will be
quantified. Through the combination of Tasks 2 and 3, the actual stresses in a
suite of steel building members will be known at all stages of a steel member?s
life cycle (construction and service-life from Task 2; end of service-life from
Task 3). The information from these select members and structures will be used
to predict the peak life-history stresses via computational structural analysis
in Task 4. Through the monitoring efforts in Tasks 1 and 2 it will also be
determined if novel monitoring and inspection methods have the ability for
evaluating suitability for reuse on a specific individualized basis for any
member that is a future reuse candidate. The broader impact of the proposed
research and its integrated activities is to initiate a cultural shift towards a
more thoughtful and environmentally-friendly regard for the manner in which
materials are used and reused in our profession and society. Through this
research it is anticipated that the frequency at which steel is reused will
increase, to achieve reductions in energy consumption and greenhouse gas
emissions in the construction industry. Through a comprehensive plan for
disseminating the research topic and results, the concept of reusing materials
will be promoted within the scientific, college, pre-college, and local
communities. Outreach activities to expose a diverse population of pre-K
students to the concepts of sustainability and the field of civil engineering in
a manner that is integrated with existing research-based best-practices in pre-K
literacy education is also proposed.