* 1336620
* SusChEM:  Novel biomimetic materials for water purification: perchlorate treatment
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2018
* Julie Zilles, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 07/31/2018
* USD 385,612.00

CBET-1336620 Julie Zilles & Charles Werth University of Illinois Urbana
Champaign

New technologies are needed to remove emerging contaminants such as
pharmaceuticals, personal care products, and endocrine-disrupting compounds from
water. While these contaminants have a wide range of sources, chemical
structures, and effects, they share the properties of being toxic even at low
concentrations and of being biologically recognized. This project will harness
the high specificity, affinity, and activity of biological enzymes to develop
novel materials, referred to as biocatalysts, to degrade the drinking water
contaminant perchlorate. The enzymes will be tested in two forms: free in
solution and encapsulated in hollow lipid spheres or vesicles. Encapsulation in
vesicles is expected to increase stability but also to introduce diffusion
limitations. The first objective is therefore to measure fundamental properties
of these materials: diffusion limitations, reaction rates, and longevity. These
data will identify what properties are most likely to limit the utility of the
material, providing a focus for subsequent research and data for an initial
assessment of the economic feasibility and environmental impacts. Other project
objectives will target the limiting properties for improvement using a two-step
process of mining biology and applying directed evolution. The first step,
mining biology, will consist of screening existing enzyme variants from
different microorganisms to identify those with the most suitable combination of
properties. In the second step, directed evolution will be used to further
improve the best existing enzymes. This approach involves iterative cycles of
making random mutations and selecting for those mutant enzymes that show
improvements in the desired property. In parallel with these objectives, the
project will compare the sustainability of biocatalytic materials for
perchlorate reduction to existing and emerging perchlorate treatment options.
This sustainability analyses will incorporate economic and environmental impacts
in life cycle analysis using both the initial properties and the improved
properties obtained in later objectives. The results of the ongoing
sustainability analyses will guide the development of these materials and will
provide a more general assessment of the potential of biocatalytic materials for
water treatment.

This project will contribute to safe drinking water through the development of
perchlorate treatment technologies that are effective and efficient. By
incorporating evaluation of the potential economic and environmental impacts at
an early stage, this research will emphasize development of sustainable water
treatment processes. More generally, the insight into factors limiting activity
of biocatalytic materials gained here will demonstrate the potential and
limitations of this approach, which could provide a highly specific and
sensitive means of dealing with emerging contaminants and facilitating water
reuse. This work will also contribute to the interdisciplinary education of
undergraduate and graduate students in microbiology and engineering, and promote
diversity in science and engineering through middle school and high school
outreach including under-represented minority students.