* 1336567
* Sustainable Co-generation of Hydrogen and Biochar from Biomass via a Novel Alkaline Thermal Treatment
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Jingguang Chen, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2017
* USD 300,001.00

PI: Park, Ah-Hyung&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1336567&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
Columbia University&lt;br/&gt;Title: Sustainable Co-generation of Hydrogen and
Biochar from Biomass via a Novel Alkaline Thermal
Treatment&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates biomass conversion to
COx-free hydrogen (H2) with co-generation of biochar via a novel alkaline
thermal treatment. CO and CO2, commonly produced during pyrolysis, will react
with the alkali metal hydroxide to form stable metal carbonates leading to
gaseous product that is free of carbon. Thus, the produced hydrogen can directly
be used in fuel cells for electricity generation without subsequent gas
cleanup/upgrade steps. In this study, both non-catalyzed and catalyzed reactions
of biomass and hydroxide will be investigated to optimize and evaluate the
overall sustainability of the proposed biomass conversion scheme. If successful,
this transformative approach to biomass conversion will provide an important
stepping stone for the development of a sustainable energy pathway based on
carbon-neutral bioenergy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fundamental reaction kinetic
and mechanistic studies will reveal important reaction pathways for forming a
carbon-free hydrogen stream from various biomass feedstocks. The findings from
this complex solid-solid reaction scheme involving in-situ carbon capture will
not only provide the proof-of-concept of this novel biomass conversion
technology but also the fundamental basis for other biomass conversion
technologies. Ultimately, if successful, this technology will advance the field
of sustainable energy generation by allowing the traditional energy consumers to
be able to engage in the decision making process in energy production or even
become energy producers themselves. The main technological benefits of the
proposed biomass-to-H2 scheme include the co-generation of H2 and biochar,
significant reduction in carbon emissions with the potential to be carbon-
negative, no need for additional gas cleanup steps, and a simplified reactor
design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team?s educational and outreach activities
include: to promote the international research and educational collaborations in
the proposed research area; to motivate K-12 students, particularly female and
minority students, to pursue a career in science and engineering; to provide
academic research experience for both graduate and undergraduate students; and
to enable the development of a new curriculum reflecting an increasing interest
in green energy and environmental issues.