* 1336581
* GOALI: Aerosol processing of metal powders from multiphase precursors
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Sheryl Ehrman, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Susan Muller
* 07/31/2017
* USD 324,999.00

1336581&lt;br/&gt;PI: Ehrman&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Spray pyrolysis processes can
be used to make unique materials not accessible via traditional precipitation or
vapor deposition processes. Additional advantages include scalability and
solvent free final product powders. Aerosol production of oxidation resistant
materials such as silver and palladium has been demonstrated, but extension to
lower cost base metals on an industrial scale has been challenging. The
objective of this project is to develop a mixed-phase spray pyrolysis route for
producing multicomponent base metal powders with increased protection against
oxidation, for printable electronics applications including hybrid integrated
circuitry and metallization of solar cells. Spray pyrolysis will be used to
achieve kinetic control of microstructure, enabling formation of particles that
cannot be made by other means. The test bed will be particles that contain both
copper and copper/tin alloy, but the processing approach will be broadly
applicable to other material systems. A team consisting of student, faculty and
industrial researchers from DuPont and the University of Maryland will conduct
experimental and simulation based studies to overcome technical hurdles
associated with mixed phase powder processing. This team draws upon University
of Maryland expertise in chemical engineering, materials characterization and
aerosol technology and DuPont expertise in materials chemistry, powder
processing, and statistical design of experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results
of this work will enable incorporation of low cost base metals into conductive
pastes, leading to overall reductions in cost for solar cells, electronics and
medical devices. Use of aerosol based production routes for metal powders will
realize additional environmental and cost benefits over conventional
precipitation-based processes. Elements of the value added by this project
include: (1) fusion of industrial and academic perspectives (2) interactions
between industry and university researchers and students that will allow
participation at all stages from laboratory innovation to applications testing
and (3) interjection of real world elements into activities and research
experiences for pre-college and undergraduate students.