* 1336983
* Characterization of Turbulent Flow in Porous Media: Integrating Experiments, DNS, and Theory
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2013,12/31/2016
* James Liburdy, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Susan Muller
* 12/31/2016
* USD 398,651.00

1336983&lt;br/&gt;Wood&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary objective of the
proposed research is to examine fast (high Reynolds number) flows in porous
media. A unified approach is proposed, which integrates three research elements
(1) upscaling theory (the method of volume-averaging ) with closure, (2) direct
numerical simulation (DNS) of flow in porous media, and (3) PIV experimental
studies of flows in porous media. The study will cover a broad range of Reynolds
numbers [Re ~O(100-4000)]. The overall goal of this work is to provide a
cohesive theory (with extensive experimental validation) to describe rather high
velocity flows in a packed bed in a way that is consistent with the widely-used
empirical expression known as the Darcy-Ergun-Forchheimer
equation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The wide range of applications of
high Re flows in porous media includes gas adsorption, filtration, catalyst
reactions, combustion, heat transport and other processes in fixed bed reactors,
nuclear reactors and subsurface groundwater remediation. Due to the complex and
irregular flow geometry within the pore space, the confining aspects of the
flow, and the variable length scales, it is difficult to properly define the
mean flow structure and associated turbulence of high Re flows in porous
materials. These same complexities make experimental observations and numerical
simulations extremely difficult. To date there exist few detailed PIV or DNS
data for turbulent flows in randomly packed porous media, and none that cross
validate among DNS and experiment. The proposed research brings together unique
and complementary expertise and capabilities in experimental, computational, and
theoretical approaches. Combined experiments and simulation data will be used to
enhance our understanding of the flow physics in porous materials. The upscaling
approach, which will focus on providing a consistent theory, has the potential
to transform modeling approaches for heat or scalar transport in densely packed
porous media. The experiments will involve pore-scale velocity field data for
both simple cubic packing and randomly packed porous beads using three-component
time-resolved particle image velocimetry. The DNS work will focus on high-
fidelity, fully resolved direct numerical simulations of steady/unsteady
inertial, transitional and turbulent flows. The detailed data from both sources
will elucidate the complex flow structures and turbulence characteristics needed
to form a theoretical basis for the development of a predictive tool for
macroscopic flow and transport properties in porous media. Specifically, the
data will facilitate direct evaluation of non-linear, closure terms due to
unresolved, sub-grid scales of motion in the
model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research plan will become the basis
for training students and helping them appreciate the need for the integrated
analysis necessary for complex problems. The PIs have a track record of
involving underrepresented groups in their laboratories, both graduate and
undergraduates (such as Textronic Scholars [available to first-year women] and
University Honors Students. This project will reach out to developing engineers
to provide a learning opportunity through the OSU-SMILE mentoring program for
middle school students (which targets underrepresented groups). International
exposure through collaborations with Insitut de Mecanique des Fluides de
Toulouse will also be available to students. In addition the graduate students
will be supported through the proposed grant and departmental funds to present
their work at international and national conferences. The investigators will
plan two special sessions at international conferences (such as AGU) during the
final year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Fluid
Dynamics and Particulate and Multiphase Processes Programs in Chemical,
Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport Systems Division.