* 1336935
* Building the Foundation for Smart Wind Farms through First-Order Controls Opportunities based on Real-Time Observations of Complex Flows
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,02/28/2018
* John Schroeder, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 02/28/2018
* USD 384,066.00

PI: Hirth, Brian&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1336935&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Texas
Tech University&lt;br/&gt;Title: Building the Foundation for Smart Wind Farms
through First-Order Controls Opportunities based on Real-Time Observations of
Complex Flows&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Reducing the cost of wind energy requires
optimization of new and existing wind farms, which is inherently dependent on
understanding the complex flows within and surrounding them, and using this
knowledge to develop more advanced control systems. Complex flows within wind
farms result from turbine wakes, heterogeneous local terrain and roughness, and
the natural variability in atmospheric boundary layer flow. Existing numerical
simulations used to plan wind farm installations fail to accurately represent
these complex flows, and current wind turbines are optimized for autonomous
operation with minimal recognition of their surroundings or interaction with
neighboring turbines. Observations of the complex flows within and surrounding
wind farms are exceedingly limited owing to significant instrumentation costs
and inherent spatial coverage shortcomings of current technologies. This project
will provide innovative data collection technologies, strategies, and analysis
techniques to document the complex flow fields across several operational wind
farms. Through industrial partnerships, this information will be integrated with
operational turbine data and controls to construct transformative methods for
developing the first generation of "smart" wind farms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project leverages recently-developed Doppler radar technologies and innovative
methodologies to provide an unprecedented assessment of the complex flows within
and surrounding wind farms. Generated wind field products will be coupled with
operational turbine and available meteorological data to provide flow field
validation, comparison of radar derived and actual power output, and
investigation of individual turbine and array performance. Supplemental access
to first-order control opportunities (e.g. yawing a turbine slightly out of the
wind to deflect the resulting wake away from a downstream turbine) within a
research-scale wind farm and several full-scale operational wind farms will
enhance the development of intelligent control systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
use of specialized Doppler research radars to characterize wind farm flow fields
represents a paradigm shift for measurement campaigns within the wind energy
community. The high spatial and temporal resolutions and larger observational
footprints allow for the identification of shortcomings within the current
numerical simulations and modeling efforts. Integration of the operational
turbine data provides an opportunity to investigate performance optimization
spanning individual turbines to large turbine arrays. First-order controls
opportunities provide a foundation to develop ?smart? wind farms through the
creation of proactive, networked control systems capable of maximizing the total
power output from an entire turbine array. Such intelligence, even in a basic
form, does not currently exist. Implementation of these data collection and
analyses methodologies in wind farm planning, design, deployment, and operation
offer the potential to revolutionize wind energy world-
wide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Beyond the integration into available undergraduate
and graduate coursework, the technological advancements embodied within this
interdisciplinary research project will also be reduced into several course
modules targeting K-12 student groups. These modules, along with access to the
radar technology, will be delivered to local student groups by the graduate
students and faculty associated with the project, including underrepresented
groups, to introduce the next-generation of scientists and engineers to the
basics of wind energy, remote sensing, atmospheric science, controls, and
aerodynamics. The unique and close collaboration with industry partners
throughout this project will foster methodologies, products, and procedures that
will have an immediate impact on existing wind farm operation and new wind farm
design and layout. This project carries the potential to transform current wind
energy practices to ultimately increase wind farm power output leading to a
reduction in the cost of energy.