* 1336622
* Understanding and Modulation of Interfacial Properties within Plant Cell Wall Pores to Facilitate Enzymatic Deconstruction and Conversion to Biofuels
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2016
* Ilsoon Lee, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 12/31/2016
* USD 315,915.00

PI: Hodge, David Proposal Number: 1336622 Institution: Michigan State University
Title: Understanding and Modulation of Interfacial Properties within Plant Cell
Wall Pores to Facilitate Enzymatic Deconstruction and Conversion to Biofuels

This project will investigate the multifaceted role that the non-covalent forces
exerted by plant cell wall polymers within nanoscale cell wall pores have on a
number of important phenomena influencing plant cell wall deconstruction for
biofuel production, how these forces are impacted by plant cell wall properties
and how these properties evolve during pretreatment and hydrolysis that lead to
outcomes of improved polysaccharide conversion. Specifically this involves the
role of surface properties in influencing: (1) water infiltration into the cell
wall and cell wall swelling, (2) cellulolytic enzyme accessibility to binding
sites within the cell wall, and (3) enzyme binding to chemically and physically
modified surfaces within the cell wall. For this, the PIs will investigate a new
paradigm for understanding plant cell wall recalcitrance, specifically that the
limitations of cell wall porosity and inaccessible surface area to enzymes, can
be best investigated in the context of understanding the plant cell wall matrix
as a water-swellable hydrogel and understanding the porosity in the context of
hydrogel swelling due to the opposing forces of water swelling versus the
resistance of the plant cell wall matrix to swelling imparted by lignification.
Additionally, the PIs propose that using a wider range of plant cell wall
sources than have been explored in the past (graminaceous monocots and a woody
dicot) and exploring a wider range of pretreatment/delignification conditions
that result in a diverse range of cell wall properties (lignin contents,
carboxylate contents) they will be able to significantly improve the
understanding of how cell wall matrix properties impact water swelling and
porosity and be able to link these differences to improved enzymatic conversion.

By comparing the diverse cell walls with the diverse properties, this project
will address several important outstanding problems in cellulose hydrolysis: (1)
untangle the complex relationship between cell wall rigidity, lignin content,
cell wall swelling, and porosity in its impact on cell wall enzymatic
digestibility, (2) understand the limiting factors controlling the penetration
of charged and uncharged sets of polymer probes, enzymes, and non-catalytic
glycan-binding protein modules into cell wall pores, and (3) develop an improved
understanding of the fundamental differences in properties influencing
recalcitrance in grasses versus woody dicots.

The project work will help enable the development of bioenergy technologies for
displacing imported petroleum, and providing rural income and employment. The
education of undergraduate engineering students by engaging them with hands-on
experiences and examples of these bioenergy technologies is a logical
development in the evolution of engineering education. The PIs will further
develop an international bioenergy education program with the goal of enhancing
student knowledge acquisition and increasing self-directed and life-long
learning through the diverse experiences and perspectives that students gain in
this international environment.