* 1336719
* Extraction of radioactive and toxic element contaminants from organic-rich shale in contact with hydraulic fracturing fluids
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Kim Hayes, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 08/31/2017
* USD 353,590.00

CBET 1336719&lt;br/&gt;Ellis, Brian R.&lt;br/&gt;University of Michigan Ann
Arbor&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent advances in directional drilling and well
stimulation techniques have made extraction of natural gas and oil from shale
formations economically viable via high-volume hydraulic fracturing. A side
effect of hydraulic fracturing is the exposure of previously hydraulically
isolated minerals that may contain naturally occurring radioactive material and
toxic metal elements. These constituents may be released into the fracturing
fluids that flow back to the surface, which must be properly handled to avoid
contamination of fresh water resources. The primary objective of this study is
to characterize the interactions between the hydraulic fracturing fluid and
organic-rich shales in order to determine the potential for hydraulic fracturing
fluid chemicals to mobilize undesirable trace toxic metal and radionuclide
flowback fluid constituents. While flowback fluids are expected to be
contaminated to some degree, e.g., it is known that these fluids may be highly
saline and contain elevated levels of trace toxic metals and radioactive
elements, the potential for these contaminants to be leached as a function of
the shale composition, down-hole conditions, and chemical additives present in
hydraulic fracturing fluid formulations has not yet been determined. To address
this knowledge gap, a series of batch and flow-through experiments will be
performed to assess the impact of these parameters on contaminant leaching.
Experiments will be conducted on natural shale rock samples from two Michigan
shale gas reservoirs, under typical in situ temperature and pressure conditions
encountered in the field. Unique and state-of-the art high temperature and
pressure apparatuses will be constructed for this research and used to
development standardized methods for evaluating the chemical processes and
mechanisms controlling the release of inorganic toxic and radioactive elements
from organic-rich shales in contact with hydraulic fracturing fluids in the
subsurface.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current efforts to assess flowback water
quality rely on the analysis of the water once it has returned to the surface.
To properly address or dismiss concerns regarding water quality impacts
associated with hydraulic fracturing, a better understanding of the chemical
evolution of hydraulic fracturing fluids in the subsurface is required. The
results of this study will help guide industry best practices for sustainably
developing domestic shale gas resources and for reducing potential water quality
impacts associated with hydraulic fracturing well completions. Furthermore,
understanding the chemical evolution of the injected fluids will aid in forming
sound regulatory policy addressing flowback water management practices,
including treatment, reuse and disposal.