* 1336062
* Collaborative Research, RUI: Assessing Load Reduction and Biological Recovery After 500 MGD Treatment Upgrades in an Effluent-Dominated Aquatic Ecosystem
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2017
* Heiko Schoenfuss, St. Cloud State University
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 12/31/2017
* USD 139,109.00

1336062 / 1336165 / 1336604 Schoenfuss/Martinovic-Weigelt/Schultz

Urbanization has resulted in many aquatic ecosystems becoming impacted by
effluent discharges from wastewater treatment plants. In recent years, treated
wastewater effluent has been identified as a pathway for endocrine active
compounds, including hormones and pharmaceuticals, to enter aquatic ecosystem
with adverse effects for the health of exposed fish populations. Despite these
dramatic alterations to pre-industrial conditions, effluent dominated systems
sustain many fish species and are used by the human population for recreation.
Updates to the wastewater infrastructure supplying these urban aquatic
ecosystems cannot accomplish restoration to pristine condition, and instead need
to strive for the greatest cost-benefit of the infrastructure investment. This
project explores the idea that large-scale wastewater infrastructure
improvements will reduce overall endocrine active compound concentrations in an
effluent dominated urban aquatic ecosystem and, thus, will enhance the
sustainability of fish populations despite continued presence and inputs of
these compounds. A case study will examine the efficacy of upgrading two major
wastewater treatment plants in the Greater Chicago Metropolitan Area to
disinfection (Ultraviolet (UV); chlorination/dechlorination). This aquatic
ecosystem has been the focus of intense biological and chemical study for
several years and provides a unique opportunity to assess (i) how two approaches
to effluent disinfection will reduce endocrine active compound loads in the
final effluent; (ii) how estrogenicity, a measure of the total biological
activity in the system, is affected by the upgrades to two treatment plants
contributing roughly 50% of all effluent in the Greater Chicago Metropolitan
Area; (iii) how the two treatment technologies (UV vs.
chlorination/dechlorination) compare in their efficacy of removing endocrine
active compounds from the final treated effluent; and (iv) how adverse
biological effects in exposed fish will be mitigated.

This project will address an understudied area in the environmental sciences
that has a direct impact on the majority of our population, which resides in
urban areas with effluent dominated ecosystems. The ability to study the effects
of two disinfection technologies side-by-side in two size-matched urban
wastewater treatment plants will provide efficacy information to wastewater
treatment plant engineers and will help guide investment into future
infrastructure upgrades. Urban ecosystems will benefit from a better
understanding of how technology can help to reduce the environmental loads of
endocrine active compounds and provide for sustainable fish populations.