* 1336428
* Heat and Charge Transport and Coupling in Quantum-Confined Nanowires
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Renkun Chen, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Jose Lage
* 08/31/2016
* USD 300,002.00

CBET- 1336428&lt;br/&gt;PI: Chen&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In dielectric materials,
such as semiconductors, heat is conducted by phonons (lattice vibrations). When
the characteristic length scale of a solid is comparable to phonon wavelength,
which for most semiconductors is in the range of 1 to 10 nm, a new regime
referred to as the ?phonon confinement? regime arises. This regime has yet to be
accessed experimentally but will provide tremendous insight into the
fundamentals of energy transport and conversion. The goal of this project will
be to probe the phonon confinement regime for the first time with the following
objectives: 1) Develop a high-resolution resistive thermometry scheme capable of
resolving sub-picowatt/Kelvin (pW/K) thermal conductance, in order to probe
nanowires with diameter down to 5 nm, which will possess thermal conductance on
the order of 10 pW/K; 2) Study thermal transport in single-component and core-
shell nanowires in the phonon confinement regime, in order to elucidate the
effects of confinement and boundary scattering on thermal transport, as well as
explore the prospect of phononic engineering through heterostructures; 3)
Investigate carrier and thermoelectric transport in the quantum confinement
regime to understand low dimensional charge transport and electron-phonon
coupling. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Thermal energy transport and
conversion phenomena are ubiquitous in a variety of technologies, such as heat
generation and dissipation in computing and communication devices and
thermoelectric waste heat scavenging. As the trend of miniaturization continues,
the size of various functional structures is approaching the scale of phonon
wavelength. This project will enhance our understanding of fundamental thermal
energy transport and conversion processes in the quantum confinement regime.
Subsequently, this understanding will enable us to engineer thermal and
thermoelectric properties beyond the classical size effect regime, which could
impact important thermal technologies such as thermal insulation,
thermoelectrics, and thermal management. The research undertaken in this project
will also train students in the interdisciplinary fields of nano-science and
heat transfer. Furthermore, opportunities to engage and educate local
disadvantaged high school and undergraduate students will be supported through
this project in conjunction with outreach programs at the UCSD campus.