* 1336844
* Research into Emerging Nano-structured Electrodes for the splitting of Water (RENEW)
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Paul McIntyre, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2017
* USD 407,100.00

PI: McIntyre, Paul&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1336844&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
Stanford University&lt;br/&gt;Title: Research into Emerging Nano-structured
Electrodes for the splitting of Water (RENEW)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will focus on photoelectrochemical splitting of water into hydrogen and oxygen.
Oxidation of water at the anode surface is a kinetically difficult process,
typically requiring overpotentials of several hundred millivolts even on the
most efficient catalysts, noble metals such as Ir or Ru and their oxides. The PI
will study atomic layer deposition (ALD) for ultra-thin film deposition,
nanostructuring and surface alloying to minimize the use of these metals in
highly efficient water oxidation catalysts, and to explore more Earth-abundant
catalyst alternatives for both oxygen evolution reaction (OER) and hydrogen
evolution reaction (HER) in both single-junction and tandem photoelectrochemical
cells. Well-established in semiconductor device fabrication, ALD is now being
investigated for energy applications, enabling high-impact
discoveries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project would be an international
partnership supported jointly by NSF, Science Foundation Ireland, and Invest
Northern Ireland through the US-Ireland Research and Development Partnership
Program. If supported by NSF, the RENEW project would bring to bear the efforts
of four PI?s at three universities (Stanford, Tyndall National Institute/UCC,
Queens University Belfast) with complementary expertise. The approach integrates
activities at our universities to provide both significant intellectual benefits
and unique broader impacts of the research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will
focus on the nanoscale engineering of water oxidation catalysts deposited on
ultrathin, ALD-grown tunnel oxide supports. Consistent with the recent work on
pinhole-free tunnel oxides for efficient and stable photoelectrochemical water
oxidation on silicon, the PI will test if these layers achieve corrosion
protection of a variety of Earth-abundant semiconductor absorbers with
appropriate band edges for efficient solar-driven water splitting. With ALD as a
versatile tool for nanoscale materials design, the goals are to study ultra-thin
film and nanoscale island catalysts, and surface-alloying of noble metals in
tunnel oxide layers. The latter structures constitute an ultrathin, ALD-grown
analogue to the much thicker RuO2-TiO2 dimensionally stable anode coatings used
in the electrochemical industry. RENEW team efforts will include screening of
Earth-abundant, nanocrystalline OER catalysts by wet chemical synthesis methods
and development of ALD processes for their deposition. The PI will also explore
II-VI semiconductor absorbers for single-junction and tandem photosynthesis
cells with corrosion-resistant photoanodes and cathodes. Possible applications
of this research include grid-scale storage of solar energy and solar-driven
synthesis of more complex and energy-dense hydrocarbon fuels, for which water
oxidation is likely a required step.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of
this project would flow from both international personnel exchanges, including
extended student researcher-in-residence visits, across the RENEW team
universities, and the coupling of energy and materials research with
undergraduate science education at Stanford. In one of two joint efforts in
education and outreach, the PI plan to collaborate in the development of a
freshman-level electrochemistry course module, using electrolysis of water and
corrosion protection of metals as examples of practical applications of
electrochemistry. The module will be available for free download from the
internet and will include sufficient material for 2-3 lectures in a semester-
long introductory chemistry course. The PI also plan to involve undergraduate
researchers from other US universities in this project by leveraging existing
NSF summer REU programs at Stanford, with special attention given to identifying
and recruiting promising female and under-represented minority students as
summer researchers.