* 1336027
* Collaborative Research: RealVAMS-Getting Real-World Value from Value Added Models
* EDU,DGE
* 10/01/2013,03/31/2017
* Jennifer Broatch, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 03/31/2017
* USD 159,625.00

Value-Added Models (VAMs) in education are increasingly being used to attempt to
measure the impact of a teacher on student achievement in a way that takes into
account students? and peers? prior performance and demographics. Data that
typically inform a VAM rely largely on student achievement data from state
testing systems. The RealVAMs project tests a multi-dimensional mechanism to
include other measures of student success such as scores from different
assessment instruments (SAT, ACT) and categorical responses such as whether or
not a student graduated or persisted in a STEM field. The real world model using
multi-dimensional data is being tested using a longitudinal database from a
large school district. The project is creating an open source accessible program
to facilitate the expanded measurement of VAMS across a larger
scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has national significance as the use of
VAMs for teacher evaluation is expanding rapidly across the country in schools
and districts. A major objection to the use of VAMs in teacher evaluation has
been the over-reliance on the use of state testing data. Opponents of the use of
VAMs argue that this reliance contributes to a narrowing of curriculum and
instruction to only what can be tested on state tests. Not all subjects are
tested, so the use of VAMs does not support the evidence that can be used in the
evaluation of teachers in non-tested subjects or grade levels. This project
informs the educational practice community of schools and districts and provides
for more nuanced and richer information about the impact of teachers for policy
decision making.