* 1336952
* Propagation of localized compaction in brittle granular materials
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2013,11/30/2016
* Julio Valdes, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 11/30/2016
* USD 131,207.00

1336952 PI: Valdes

Granular packs (soils, sedimentary rocks, industrial powders, crowded bacteria,
pills, foodstuffs) typically exhibit localized deformations during loading:
severe relative displacements amongst grains occur within localization zones,
whereas minimal deformations are suffered by the rest of the material.
Localization varies with type of loading (e.g., shear vs. compaction), packing
characteristics (e.g., porosity), and grain characteristics (e.g., sizes, shape,
roughness, internal porosity). This project centers on localized compaction,
i.e., porosity loss in the localization zone, and focuses specifically on
elucidating a recently discovered phenomenon: the periodic propagation of
localized compaction in granular packs composed of porous grains. Laboratory
experiments that involve load-deformation and granular breakage measurements,
acoustic emission and wave velocity monitoring, and video capture for digital
image correlation analyses are implemented to understand why and how such
phenomenon takes place. This understanding is attained by characterization of
the propagation process (i.e., speed, spatial extent, periodicity) and
identification of the range of conditions required for its manifestation,
placing emphasis on the role that material properties (e.g., grain
crushability), loading conditions (e.g., imposed deformation rate), and boundary
conditions (e.g., near vs. far) play on the characteristics of the deformation
response.

This work will lead to an increased understanding of localization mechanics and
nonlocal effects in granular materials. In turn, this understanding shall serve
in furthering the development of characterization and prediction tools for
processes wherein localization takes place, including soil and rock engineering
(e.g., fault gauging, slope instability, in-site soil testing), and geo-
mechanics (e.g., hydrocarbon production and reservoir damage) processes, natural
and industrial granular flows, snow avalanches, and deformation of non-granular
porous solids, such as engineered cellular foams and composites. This project
supports undergraduate and graduate research students, furthers collaboration
between a Hispanic-serving institution (San Diego State University) and an
international research university (University of Sydney), and contributes to the
Nation?s commitment to entice middle- and high school students towards the study
of science and engineering, through the development of research-related didactic
tools coupled with teacher-training implemented within the nationwide program
Project-Lead-the-Way.