* 1336445
* SusChEM: Collaborative Research: A Multi-Scale Environmental and Kinetics Study on the Pyrolysis of Sustainable Biomass Feedstock
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* M. Tyler Ley, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2016
* USD 41,000.00

PI: Biernacki, Joseph / Ley, M. Tyler&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1337033
/1336445&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Tennessee Technological University/ Oklahoma
State University&lt;br/&gt;Title: Collaborative Research: A Multi-Scale
Environmental and Kinetics Study on the Pyrolysis of Sustainable Biomass
Feedstock&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A multi-scale, interdisciplinary study on the
kinetics and socio-economic broader impacts of biomass pyrolysis is proposed.
This research will bring together five disciplines; Chemical and Civil
Engineering, Chemistry, Sociology and Agriculture. Most experimental techniques
focus on meso-scale (mg) or larger quantities of raw material and mostly ignore
external and internal transport conditions of the sample. The PIs propose a
unique experimental technique and to introduce a Multiple Variable Control
Volume Reactor (MVCVR) concept. In combination with technology for producing
individual micro-spheres of biomass, the PIs propose to utilize the MVCVR to
independently control the particle-related (intra-particle) and homogenous-
related (extra-particle) transport phenomena and associated reactions, thereby
making it possible to independently observe the two processes. A series of
experiments are proposed wherein model compounds (e.g. levoglucosan and other
carbohydrates), separated components (i.e. cellulose, hemicellulose, and lignin)
and whole biomass are studied in an effort to understand the extent to which
pyrolysis occurs within condensed phase intermediates and the homogeneous gas
phase. The PIs also propose to introduce a new multi-scale modeling platform
based on kinetic cellular automaton (KCA) and to demonstrate the applicability
of this robust modeling strategy for simulating microstructure evolution in
pyrolyzing biomass. Molecular-scale computational strategies will be used in
parallel to supplement experiments and validate mechanistic hypotheses for up-
scaling to KCA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The data collected in this research will
contribute to the scientific and engineering advancements currently being sought
globally for the expanding biofuels industry and development of associated
technology for direct thermochemical conversion of biomass-to-liquid fuels (BTL)
and chemicals. Such will be elements of tomorrow?s integrated biorefineries
(biochemical and thermochemical conversion under one roof) currently at the
pilot and demonstration stages. For this reason the proposed work will focus on
pyrolysis of whole biomass from crops with significantly reduced agricultural
input requirements and residues, so as not to compete with agriculturally
demanding food crops, such as corn and oilseeds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs
will integrate elements of socio-economics and to provide a unique PhD
experience that will greatly broaden the impact of this effort. The PIs also
will include undergraduates as an integral part of the research team along the
critical path. A major goal of the project is to communicate with, and gather
information from, farming communities in central Tennessee. This element of the
proposed research focuses on documenting and understanding the perceptions of
the farming community regarding the possibility of allocating local farmland for
growing energy crops. Information such as: amount of local farming land, common
farming practices in terms of tillage, type of crops grown, amount of crop
residues, and whether farmers are willing to grow dedicated energy crops (e.g.,
switchgrass), use their poor-quality crops for energy conversion, or whether
they are willing to participate at all, will be gathered. The broader impacts of
such an activity, while regionally-specific, are fundamental for the overall
success of a sustainable biofuels industry. For the transition from a fossil
resource- to a bio resource-based economy to happen, a well-informed and
educated public is critical. Biopyrolysis-based fuels and chemicals research
provides many unique opportunities for vertically integrated educational
activities.