* 1336139
* Collaborative Research: Natural Organic Matter, Capping Agents, and Nanoparticle Transport in Granular Media Filtration
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Desmond Lawler, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 08/31/2017
* USD 210,550.00

CBET - 1336139 and 1336167&lt;br/&gt;As the field of nanotechnology continues to
expand, increased entry of engineered nanoparticles (NPs) into the environment
has resulted in growing environmental and health concerns. The behavior of
engineered NPs, many of which serve as an avenue for rapid and long-range
transport/transformation of contaminants in the environment, is an important
topic for the safety and treatment of drinking water. As natural organic matter
(NOM) is ubiquitous in natural waters and known to complex with NP surfaces, a
mechanistic understanding of NP-NOM interactions will provide insight to the
stability and mobility of NPs in granular media filtration. Our team of
investigators takes a three-pronged approach to study the mechanisms by which
NOM affects the aqueous transport of "pristine" and "transformed" silver NPs
(AgNPs) in granular media filtration. We employ filtration studies to identify
and quantify the deviation of NP removal efficiency from its prediction by
colloid filtration theory. Where chemical interactions cause deviation from
theory, we use a combination of experimental tools to elucidate both the
kinetics and the mechanisms of NP-NOM interactions. This research will
ultimately improve our ability to removal engineered NPs by granular media
filtration.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit :&lt;br/&gt;During the formation or
release into the aquatic environment, most NPs acquire a surface coating by
interacting with organic macromolecules. We expect that the properties of
coatings on NP surfaces will play important roles in NP removal in granular
media filtration. We hypothesize that: 1) "Pristine" AgNPs (capped with citrate
and polyvinyl pyrrolidone (PVP)) and "transformed" AgNPs (partly sulfidized
AgNPs) will exhibit reactivity with various NOM components, thereby producing
AgNP-NOM complexes with different surface charge and degree of steric hindrance,
2) the kinetics of adsorption of NP-NOM complexes onto silica surfaces is a
function of the surface charge produced by the different functional groups of
NOM and steric hindrance resulting from the physical arrangement of NOM, and 3)
NOM coating on AgNPs as well as collector grain surfaces causes significant
deviation in particle removal efficiency. Using a novel combination of molecular
spectroscopy, quartz crystal microgravimetry (QCM), and column filtration
experiments, we will determine the mechanisms and kinetics of NOM interaction
with the surfaces of NP and silica.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts :&lt;br/&gt;As a
means of integrating cutting-edge science into education, we present a 5-Phased
Outreach Plan to enhance this exchange: (1) professional education, all three
PIs will propose a full-session workshop or special session at "Texas Water",
the third largest annual water conference in the U.S. in the third year of the
three-year grant. (2) Graduate education, multiple lectures will be developed in
four courses. The work outlined here will be used to actively recruit and train
undergraduate and graduate students from underrepresented groups. We will employ
diversity in choosing the Ph.D. students, and additionally try to support 1-2
undergrads for senior thesis research. (3) College level: we will continue
interacting with two major mentoring programs designed to involve under-
represented minorities in engineering research programs. (4) Baylor University
has an established outreach program focusing on nanotechnology
(The&lt;br/&gt;Physics Circus) which is actively working in the Waco and LaVega
middle and high schools. (5) High school level: we will work with students from
San Juan Diego High School, a college-preparatory school located near the
University of Texas campus that serves economically-disadvantaged, mostly
Hispanic, students to increase their college preparedness in science and
mathematics. The increasing applications of both natural and engineered NPs
represent both a technological panacea and potential health threat. At present,
there is insufficient information regarding the environmental transport and fate
of NPs. Our work is transformative in providing crucial information for
predicting behavior and interactions of NPs with NOM and silica sand surface.
Current practice of granular media filtration targets micron-sized particles;
however, the potential influences of NOM and other water treatment parameters on
the fate of NPs in granular media filtration are largely unknown. The results of
this study will provide greater knowledge of the behavior of NPs that could
ultimately influence water treatment design and practice, and thereby improve
the protection of the public health.