* 1336760
* Collaborative Research: A retrospective assessment and future projection of thunderstorm impacts on the field performance of wind turbines
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2013,06/30/2017
* Lance Manuel, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 06/30/2017
* USD 224,840.00

PI: Manuel, Lance / Basu, Sukanta&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1336760 /
1336304&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Texas at Austin / North Carolina
State University&lt;br/&gt;Title: Collaborative Research: A retrospective
assessment and future projection of thunderstorm impacts on the field
performance of wind turbines&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In wind resource-rich regions
such as the U.S. Great Plains, wind energy development in recent years has
increased at a brisk rate in recent years. Climatologically, this region is also
where severe weather events such as thunderstorms are common; failures of wind
turbines in recent events suggest a need for retrospective analysis and re-
evaluation of design for associated transient inflow conditions. To meet the
nation?s goals of 20% wind energy by 2030 more wind turbines will likely be
sited in the Great Plains where failures in extreme weather events are expected;
suggested climate change influences on the changing frequency and severity of
such events exacerbates concerns about today?s turbine
designs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to develop advanced mesoscale
and large-eddy-simulation (LES) procedures for the generation of thunderstorm-
related inflow wind fields, informed and validated by diverse data streams, so
as to make possible safe design and assessment of future wind
turbines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is structured in four phases. In
Phase 1, PIs will consider about 20 case studies representing severe weather
events recorded in West Texas over the period, 2005-2012. A wide array of data
sets for these events is available for validation of the 4-D mesoscale-LES
inflow fields that will be developed. These flow fields will be employed in
aeroelastic simulation of loads on single utility-scale wind turbine units as
well as arrays. In Phase 2, PIs will assess the validity of ?engineering?
simulation models based on older field campaigns (e.g., NIMROD and JAWS) against
physics-based and data-driven mesoscale-LES models. The focus in Phase 3 of this
project is on the development of low-dimensional representations of the inflow
wind fields to be used to predict turbine loads accurately and efficiently. This
will take coordination between the two collaborating researcher teams with
complementary non-overlapping expertise. Consideration of turbine extreme and
fatigue limit states over the long term will guide the low- dimensional model
development. Finally, in Phase 4, PIs tackle the future projection component of
this study. Armed with the inflow modeling from the previous phases, PIs address
life-cycle performance of turbine units and arrays. Over a service life of 20
years, a turbine may be expected to experience several extreme weather events.
For candidate Great Plains sites, PIs will examine anticipated load profiles on
turbine components over the long term, taking into consideration changing
climate effects (such as in changes in the frequency and severity of
thunderstorms), informed by climate model data and with considerations for
uncertainty. PIs expect, thus, to provide a picture of expected performance (and
uncertainty on the same) of turbine units as they are considered in the context
of failure against ultimate and fatigue limit states.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
students involved in the research effort will develop skills in statistical
modeling, boundary layer meteorology, turbulence simulation, aeroelastic and
structural analysis, and reliability-based design procedures for wind turbines
against extreme and fatigue limit states. While these skills are not part of a
typical curriculum, there is a dire need for trained engineers who can assist
with analyses of the kind that will be developed in this project. Indeed, today,
for advanced analysis, consulting assistance is routinely sought from Western
Europe. The PIs will provide education and training/internship opportunities for
graduate and undergraduate students of engineering and atmospheric sciences to
serve this economically vibrant industry. Minority undergraduate students will
be engaged as research assistants through the Texas Research EXperience (TREX)
program. The National Renewable Energy Laboratory will provide summer internship
opportunities for students, and collaboration opportunities in research between
their engineers and the PIs and their students. K-12 student and teacher
involvement in planned STEM learning is planned with the Science House program
at North Carolina State University.