* 1336166
* Connecting nanoscale structure and dynamics to rheology and flow of glassy nanocolloidal suspensions
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Robert Leheny, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Susan Muller
* 09/30/2017
* USD 349,771.00

1336166 PI: Leheny

X-ray photon correlation spectroscopy, in conjunction with other scattering
techniques and rheometry, is used to understand microstructural dynamics
underlying rheology and flow of three different concentrated nanocolloidal
systems: binary mixtures of silica nanocolloids with short-range attractive
forces; a depletion-induced colloidal gels; and a nanoemulsion. Data obtained
for these systems will provide tests for the generality of the theories for gel-
fluid and glass-fluid transitions in colloidal systems and insights into their
nonlinear rheology.

When sub-micron to nanoscale particles are suspended in a liquid, the resulting
composite material, or colloid, can adopt properties of a fluid, a solid, or
something in between. In many cases, seemingly subtle changes in the
characteristics of the material can dramatically alter its mechanical rigidity
and flow behavior. This sensitivity creates both a scientific challenge and an
opportunity for designing suspensions with properties tailored for specific
applications. Indeed, such control is crucial to a vast range of technologies
from 3D printing to food processing and drug delivery. This grant supports a
novel avenue of investigation into colloidal suspensions that promises to expand
the strategies available for controlling their rigidity and flow, particularly
by elucidating the unique properties of suspensions of two sizes of particles
with a tendency to stick together that can be tuned. A key feature of the
experimental program will be the application of a new x-ray technique that
enables unprecedented resolution of the slow microscopic motions in soft
materials at lengths as small as a molecule. The development of these x-ray
methods for investigating materials under deformation and flow will have impact
far beyond the planned experiments by providing a new tool with application that
spans several traditional disciplines including physics, chemical engineering,
and the biosciences.