* 1336232
* Collaborative Research: Analysis and design of textured super-hydrophobic surfaces capable of preventing ice formation on wind turbine blades
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2019
* Mehdi Raessi, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2019
* USD 214,583.00

PI: Raessi, Mehdi / Lackner, Matthew&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1336232 /
1336502&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth /
University of Massachusetts Amherst&lt;br/&gt;Title: Collaborative Research:
Analysis and design of textured super-hydrophobic surfaces capable of preventing
ice formation on wind turbine blades&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wind energy is a
clean, renewable, and domestic energy source that is abundant in the U.S., in
particular in cold climates where ice formation is common. The potential to
generate renewable wind energy in cold climates is immense, both in the U.S. and
internationally. The current wind energy capacity in cold climates is only 500
MW, however, which is primarily due to the challenges posed by icing at these
sites, which has numerous detrimental effects. Mitigation efforts to date have
had moderate success at reducing ice accumulation, but reduce efficiency. The
research objectives of this project are to better understand the physics of ice
formation on wind turbine blades using advanced computational models, to
investigate the aerodynamics of wind turbine airfoils and blades that utilize
textured surfaces using computational fluid dynamics and a novel turbulence
model, and finally to design and then valuate textured super-ice-phobic surfaces
for wind turbine blades in order to prevent ice formation. The project aims at
addressing the major issue of ice accretion on wind turbine blades by combining
the expertise of PIs in wind turbine aerodynamics, turbulence modeling, and
multiphase flows and solidification. The research on textured super-hydrophobic
surfaces will have a transformative effect on wind energy development in cold
climates by reducing ice formation, and thus increasing the turbine?s efficiency
and reliability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will be the first study to
investigate the performance of textured super-hydrophobic surfaces under real-
world conditions, and the first to design textured super-ice-phobic surfaces
that are specially engineered for the flow fields around wind turbine blades. By
taking into account the local flow field around a blade in our computational
simulations, we will optimally design texture patterns that may vary along a
blade, depending on the relative velocity of the blade and water droplets, in
order to achieve most effective super-ice-phobic surfaces. Furthermore, the CFD
tool that will be utilized represents a significant advance over the current
state of the art for analyzing wind turbine airfoil and blade aerodynamics. This
work will create a computational framework that uses a turbulence model designed
for the complex physics (including transition, separation, 3D boundary layers,
and rotation) occurring on a wind turbine blade, particularly those with
textured ice-phobic surfaces. These expected outcomes will provide the
predictive capabilities that are necessary to analyze and design the unique ice-
phobic blade surfaces that are capable of operating in cold environments,
enabling increased development of wind energy in these
regions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Accomplishing the research and student education
objectives will benefit society via increased production of renewable energy in
the U.S. and internationally. An international partnership with CanmetENERGY of
Natural Resources Canada will result from this project, including data sharing
and researcher interaction. Moreover, the research and education plans offer
exciting opportunities to promote cross-campus collaboration among two campuses
within the University of Massachusetts system. The participation of women and
underrepresented minorities in engineering will be increased by the activities
in this project. The computational tools developed in this project will be
utilized in the Computer Girl Power summer camp at UMass Dartmouth.
Undergraduate RAs will be recruited using the NSF-funded LSAMP program at UMass
Amherst and from UMass Dartmouth?s diverse population of undergraduates, 40% of
whom are underrepresented in the sciences. An extensive dissemination plan has
been developed to educate the general public about issues of wind energy and
icing in cold climates, including using public radio and YouTube.