* 1337449
* MRI: Acquisition of Autosampling Stopped-Flow Spectrometer for in vitro Kinetic Characterization of Biomolecule Binding and Enzymatic Activity
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Tobias Baumgart, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 08/31/2016
* USD 110,250.00

With this award from the Chemistry Major Research Instrumentation Program,
Professor Ernest Petersson from the University of Pennsylvania and colleague
Tobias Baumgart will acquire an autosampling stopped-flow spectrometer for users
at U Penn, Drexel University, Temple University, Thomas Jefferson University and
Swarthmore College. The proposal is aimed at enhancing research and education at
all levels, especially in areas such as (a) development of thioamide quenching
probes; (b) study of protein/membrane interactions; (c) investigation of
assembly kinetics of synergistic protein-nanoparticle assemblies; (d) small
molecules to probe and control RNA tertiary structure; (e) determining the
dynamics of programmed frame-shifting on the ribosome; (f) study of the folding
mechanism of intrinsically disordered proteins; (g) enzymological studies of
activation-induced deaminases; (h) studies to provide insight into class II tRNA
nucleotidyltransferase (CCA)-addition; (i) study of the mechanism of orotate
phosphoribosyltransferase; and (j) mechanistic studies of cellulase enzymes.

The stop-flow system allows rapid mixing of samples allowing the acquisition of
real time UV/visible absorbance and fluorescence data with millisecond time
resolution for the study of chemical kinetics of molecules binding to proteins
and nucleic acids or enzyme activities and simultaneously studies the changes in
the spectra. In general, in a stopped flow spectrometer the enzymatic reaction
is initiated by opening of valves followed by injection of the enzyme and
substrate. The quantities mixed are controlled by the action of the enzyme,
substrate, and stop syringe plungers. The mixed solution is irradiated at one
wavelength through an excitation monochromator, and absorbance (one wavelength)
and fluorescence (two wavelengths) outputs are simultaneously detected using
separate filter channels. The data are then processed by a computer and fit to
kinetic models specific to the reaction. The kinetic characterization of
biomolecules enabled by stopped flow instrumentation is fundamental to
understanding their function. Because most cellular processes take place far
from equilibrium they are thus governed by the relative rates of enzymes. The
instrumentation will be located in the Biological Chemistry Facility and will be
used by a large number of researchers and students in various institutions.