* 1337051
* Sedimenting Particulate Suspensions in Viscoelastic Fluids Under Shear
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Gianluca Iaccarino, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 09/30/2017
* USD 359,389.00

1337051&lt;br/&gt;PI: Shaqfeh&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Suspensions of rigid
particles in viscoelastic fluids play key roles in many energy applications,
materials design applications, and consumer product applications. For example,
in oil drilling the so-called drilling mud is a very viscous, viscoelastic fluid
designed to shear-thin during drilling, but thicken at stoppage so that the
cuttings can remain suspended. In a related application known as hydraulic
fracturing (an operation used to stimulate petroleum and gas production)
suspensions of solids called proppant are used to prop open the fracture by
pumping them into the well. Quality performance of the proppant demands
placement deep into the fracture requiring that the excess weight of the solids
be supported during the flow. A commonly used proppant-transport liquid is an
aqueous guar polymer solution, transiently cross-linked with borate ion, such
that it is highly elastic. It is well known that the sedimentation of particles
in a viscoelastic fluid can be quite different from that which is observed in
Newtonian fluids, especially under shear. For example, in a non-Newtonian
liquid, the complex rheological properties induce a nonlinear coupling between
the sedimentation and shear flow which is not found in Newtonian liquids and
which is critical to the function of the aforementioned drilling and fracking
fluids. In a related materials application, the cleaning of particulate matter
from surfaces, particularly in applications associated with etching of silicon
wafers is often done by a post processing known as rinse. Most recently, it has
been shown that a viscoelastic solution becomes a far more effective rinse agent
than a Newtonian solution, even at the same viscosity. Again, in this
application, the elasticity in a flowing, sheared fluid seems to change, in a
manner as yet unknown, the forces on particulates subject to gravity in
directions orthogonal to the shear flow, creating thereby an enhanced lift force
that cleans the surface. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the research
team will develop large scale, computer simulations of particle suspensions at
finite concentration in viscoelastic fluids. The focus will be on particles
acted on by a body force (i.e. gravity) as well as an applied shear flow in a
direction orthogonal to gravity with the goal of understanding the applications
described above. The computer simulations will be unique, first of their kind,
combining unstructured, finite volume technology with immersed boundary
techniques in elastic liquids. Such simulations are, in the authors view, the
only known way to understand the nonlinear physics in these highly
nonequilibrium flow applications and thus to engineer these fluids rather than
develop them based on historical precedent.