* 1337512
* MRI:   Acquisition of Mesoscale Network of Surface Sensors and Solar-tracking Spectrometers
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2016
* Steven Wofsy, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 07/31/2016
* USD 315,000.00

Urban environments lie at the core of many major environmental issues. Much of
the human burden of 'greenhouse' gases (GHGs: CH4, CO2 and others) and
pollutants (e.g. CO, black carbon aerosol, volatile organic compounds, NOx)
emitted globally originate in cities. Urban dwellers are also exposed to
radiatively important pollutants and toxic substances and their associated
health risks. Scientists must be able to understand and predict the distribution
of emitted species originating within urban atmospheres in order to assess the
validity of emissions inventories, the efficacy of emission reduction programs,
and the exposure of urban populations to associated pollutants.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This MRI acquisition seeks integration of three components
of a sensor network:&lt;br/&gt;1. FTIR SOLAR-TRACKING SPECTROMETERS. Three
automated solar tracking Fourier Transform Infrared (FTIR) Spectrometers will be
deployed to make accurate measurements of total column amounts of GHGs including
H2O. &lt;br/&gt;2. LIDAR. A Pulsed LiDAR will be acquired to determine time-
height cross sections of fine particles and hydrometeors, providing key data to
test meteorological simulations of the urban dome &lt;br/&gt;3. An existing
solar-tracking VIS-UV spectrometer (acquired at no cost to this project) will
also provide time series of total column O3, NO2, H2O and H2CO species, which
are reactive atmsopheric components.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Comprehensive
measurements of total column, surface, and vertically resolved distributions of
these chemical species will be assimilated into a very high resolution model-
data framework, enabling a more accurate and complete understanding of regional
rates of emission, production, transport, and transformation of these pollutants
and GHGs. The model that will be developed and validated using the network will
provide a variety of societal (economic, policy) benefits, initially for Boston,
and applicable to other similar urban centers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Elements of
an existing surface urban network have already established educational and
outreach activities with local (Boston) officials, and has engaged graduate and
undergraduate students interested in urban issues in which they live. Real-time
data access as an educational tool to engage the public more broadly is
intended. All data collected in the network will be available for download by
the public in near real time, and as soon as QA and QC checks are completed.