* 1337768
* MRI: Acquisition of a Multi-Material 3D Printer to Enable Novel Multi-disciplinary Research and Research Training
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Steven Rice, Union College
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Culbertson
* 07/31/2017
* USD 333,531.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) grant provides funding for the
acquisition of a high resolution, multi-material 3D printer at Union College. By
harnessing a huge demand for prototyping technologies, researchers will launch a
new era of innovative research, with applications ranging from the
neuromechanics of dragonfly capture to the manufacture of novel aerogel coated
surfaces to the design of completely soft robots. This will bridge the growing
rapid prototyping "knowledge gap" in higher education. The accelerated
development cycles facilitated by modern rapid prototyping will enable
researchers to continuously iterate and improve upon designs, "failing cheaply
and quickly" before arriving at novel and sometimes unexpected solutions.
Students across multiple disciplines experienced with the benefits of rapid
prototyping will find their services increasingly in demand by employers in
coming years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This 3D printer will be at the center of an
inherently cross-disciplinary and highly collaborative research program at Union
College. Providing a common space in which community members can design
solutions and solve problems together will help foster and spark spontaneous
interdisciplinary collaborations. Students using the space will be emboldened as
craftspersons and enabled as entrepreneurs. Educators at the college will be
able to design novel interactive models and demonstrations. Not only will this
acquisition help set the standard for the integration of rapid prototyping
techniques into undergraduate research and teaching, it will provide tools,
methods, and environments around which tomorrow's designers will coalesce and
thrive. This program will continue Union College's strong record of
undergraduate research among students from traditionally underrepresented
groups, through programs such as the Science and Technology Entry Program
(STEP), designed to prepare historically underrepresented students for the
sciences, and the POSSE program, designed to identify students with leadership
potential and strong academics who might be overlooked in the traditional
college selection process.