* 1337899
* MRI: Acquisition of Computing Equipment for Supporting Data-Intensive Bioinformatics Research at the University of Kansas
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* A. Townsend Peterson, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2017
* USD 500,000.00

Proposal #: 13-37899 PI(s): Huan, Jun Blumenstiel, Justin P.; Kuczera,
Krzysztof; Peterson, A. Townsend; Vakser, Ilya A. Institution: University of
Kansas Title: MRI/Acq.: Computing Equipment for Supporting Data-intensive
Bioinformatics Research Project Proposed: This project, acquiring a multicore
hybrid cyberinfrastructure instrument, aims to enable and empower several lines
of research requiring processing and/or storage of big and complex data. The
equipment services critical areas in data and computing intensive bioinformatics
research, mainly high-throughput sequencing data analysis, molecular dynamics
simulation, cell signaling and molecular recognition, computational chemical
biology environmental and evolutionary biology. Providing an open, extensible,
and scalable platform to support data-intensive science programs, the
instrumentation serves as a testbed for computing and simulation methodology
development utilizing advanced multi-core architecture as well as supporting
large-scale data analysis needs. The project responds to the clear trend towards
data driven science, in which large amounts of information coming from
instruments for automated sequencing, high throughput screening systems, and
other high volume analysis techniques, is mined and analyzed to look for
patterns from which hypotheses can be developed. Along with data-driven science
as a source of insights, detailed modeling and simulation of biological
structures and processes are becoming indispensable tools to test models, to
evaluate experimental methodologies, and to interpret the results. Evaluation
and interpretation drive the need across a broad spectrum of research. This
acquisition supports the current need and near-term research goals and aims to
maintain a forward position in computationally intensive research. Broader
Impacts: The instrumentation impacts the research it enables. It is also well
aligned to the institution?s strategic initiative it enables and contributes in
seeking other research opportunity initiatives such as BigData and XSEDE
(eXtreme Science and Engineering Discovery Environment). The equipment enhances
research opportunities for graduate students, increasing opportunities for
student to gain experience in parallel computing as part of course work, and
establishes a broader high-performance parallel computing base within the
institution and the surrounding region. The School of Engineering?s Diversity
Programs will help identify qualified students from underrepresented groups and
assist with the recruitment and retention for women and minorities possibly with
scholarships. The computing resource should have significant impact in the
region. Working with the Kansas IDeA Network for Biomedical Research Excellence
Bioinformatics core, bioinformatics expertise will be delivered to minority and
undergraduate-serving schools.