* 1337586
* MRI:   Acquisition of a Combined AFM and Fluorescence Microscopy System
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2015
* Richard Sinden, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 08/31/2015
* USD 282,942.00

1337586&lt;br/&gt;Smith, Steve&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award from the Major
Instrumentation program supports South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
(SDSM&amp;T) with the acquisition of a Atomic Force Microscope (AFM) optimized
for the study of biomaterials in aqueous environments, in combination with an
inverted frame fluorescence microscope, suitable for simultaneous topographic
and fluorescence imaging. This instrument will be used in research to correlate
the optical and electronic properties of biomaterials with nanometer scale
topography. The project will be the nexus for collaborative science undertaken
by a diverse group of Physicists, Chemists, Biologists and Chemical Engineers,
with broad scientific, educational and societal impacts. The instrument will
also enable and support studies on many other soft materials, which may be
immersed in liquids, and permit simultaneous and correlative fluorescence
imaging. The instrumentation will be unique in the State of South Dakota, and
will support several new graduate and undergraduate programs at SDSM&amp;T,
including undergraduate and graduate programs in nanotechnology, applied
biology, bio-chemistry and bio-physics. The instrument will facilitate
collaboration across the SDSM&amp;T campus and with South Dakota State
University. Many students in South Dakota will be exposed to the proposed
research, thus broadening the educational impacts. SDSM&amp;T also maintains a
permanent Native American outreach program, with established and well-organized
outreach programs such as SD GEAR UP, aimed at increasing the number of Native
American high-school students continuing on to college. On-going results of the
project would be incorporated into the educational portions of this
program.&lt;br/&gt;****&lt;br/&gt;This award from the Major Instrumentation
program supports South Dakota School of Mines and Technology (SDSM&amp;T) with
the acquisition of a Atomic Force Microscope (AFM) optimized for the study of
biomaterials in aqueous environments, in combination with an inverted frame
fluorescence microscope, suitable for simultaneous topographic and fluorescence
imaging. This instrument will be used in research to correlate the optical and
electronic properties of biomaterials with nanometer scale topography. The
project will be the nexus for collaborative science undertaken by a diverse
group of Physicists, Chemists, Biologists and Chemical Engineers, with broad
scientific, educational and societal impacts. The instrument will also enable
and support studies on many other soft materials, which may be immersed in
liquids, and permit simultaneous and correlative fluorescence imaging. The
instrumentation will be unique in the State of South Dakota, and will support
several new graduate and undergraduate programs at SDSM&amp;T, including
undergraduate and graduate programs in nanotechnology, applied biology, bio-
chemistry and bio-physics. The instrument will facilitate collaboration across
the SDSM&amp;T campus and with South Dakota State University. Many students in
South Dakota will be exposed to the proposed research, thus broadening the
educational impacts. SDSM&amp;T also maintains a permanent Native American
outreach program, with established and well-organized outreach programs such as
SD GEAR UP, aimed at increasing the number of Native American high-school
students continuing on to college. On-going results of the project would be
incorporated into the educational portions of this program.