* 1337727
* MRI:   Acquisition of a Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscope to Support Research and Education at UMBC
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Laszlo Takacs, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 08/31/2016
* USD 500,000.00

This award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program supports the
University of Maryland Baltimore County (UMBC) with the acquisition of a Nova
NanoSEM 450 high-resolution field emission scanning electron microscope (SEM)
with low-vacuum option. The instrument has nanometer resolution and it is
equipped with multiple detectors for secondary and backscattered electron
imaging, energy dispersive X-ray detector for elemental analysis and mapping,
backscattered electron diffraction for crystallographic and texture analysis,
and a detector for scanning transmission electron imaging. The ability of the
instrument to achieve nanometer resolution in low vacuum makes it a unique
addition to the pool of SEMs available in the Baltimore-Washington area and will
substantially enhance the research infrastructure of UMBC and the region. It
will accelerate progress in many existing research programs, allow them to
extend much farther than possible with the current SEM, and enables researchers
to move into areas that are beyond the existing capabilities. The instrument
will serve professors and their students from UMBC's science and engineering
departments, as well as users from other universities, government laboratories
and private firms. It will enable the study of the microstructure of alloys and
composites, a variety of thin films and multilayers, optical fibers,
functionalized gold nanoparticles, the texture of weld joints, aerosol
particles, and others. The low-vacuum option is suitable for the study of
partially insulating nanocomposite powders, dental tissue and restoration
materials, archaeological artifacts, etc. The Nova NanoSEM 450 supports teaching
through both undergraduate and graduate coursework and research projects. Many
potential users of the new SEM involve undergraduate students in their research;
those students will have the opportunity to use the instrument. Also, as UMBC
has very diverse student population, the prospect to use the new SEM will
certainly attract female and minority students to the STEM
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;****&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Modern materials science is
unimaginable without the scanning electron microscope (SEM) that can image
samples on multiple length scales and provides information on morphology,
chemical composition, and even crystallographic orientation. Although commercial
scanning electron microscopes have been around for more than 50 years, there has
been tremendous progress in SEM technology during the last decade. The Nova
NanoSEM 450 supported by this Major Research Instrumentation award is a cutting
edge instrument that has a unique combination of capabilities, such as nanometer
resolution in both high and low vacuum and a variety of detectors that make it
an extremely versatile instrument. It will be used to investigate nanocomposite
powders, thin films, dental tissue and materials, gold nanoparticles, the
texture of weld joints, aerosol particles, archaeological artifacts and others.
The instrument is a major addition to UMBC's research infrastructure. It will
serve researchers and their graduate and undergraduate students from several
science and engineering departments, as well as users from other universities,
government laboratories and private firms. It will accelerate existing research
programs and enable investigations that are beyond the capabilities of the
existing SEM. It will also be utilized in undergraduate and graduate courses. As
UMBC has a very diverse student population, the opportunity to use this cutting
edge instrument will certainly attract female and minority students to the STEM
disciplines.