* 1337428
* MRI Consortium: Acquisition of a Single Crystal X-Ray Diffractometer for Research and Pedagogy at Primarily Undergraduate Institutions
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2016
* Daesung Chong, Mount St. Mary's University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2016
* USD 183,250.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program that is co-
funded by the Chemistry Research Instrumentation and Facilities (CRIF) Program,
Professor Christopher Bradley from Mount St Mary's University and colleagues
Daesung Chong (Ball State University), Tomothy Brunker (Towson University),
Peter Craig (McDaniel College) and Timothy Funk (Gettysburg College) will
acquire a single crystal X-ray diffractometer for use by a consortium of
primarily undergraduate institutions that include Mount St Mary's University,
Ball State University, Towson University, McDaniel College, Gettysburg College
and Loyola University Maryland. The award is aimed at enhancing research and
education at all levels, especially in areas such as (a) arene effects on cobalt
catalysts for activated alkane dehydrogenation; (b) redox-induced linkage
isomerism in chiral ruthenium sulfoxide complexes; (c) investigation of the
stabilization of boron-containing cations by azametallocenes; (d) studies of
model enzyme complexes; (e) coordination chemistry studies; (f) development of
transition metal catalysts for organic transformations; (g) synthesis,
reactivity, and crystallographic characterization of transition metal carbonyl
complexes containing oxygen-donating ligands; and (h) catalysts for proton
reduction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An X-ray diffractometer allows accurate and
precise measurements of the full three-dimensional structure of a molecule,
including bond distances and angles, and provides accurate information about the
spatial arrangement of a molecule relative to neighboring molecules. The studies
described here will impact a number of areas, including organic and inorganic
chemistry, materials chemistry and biochemistry. This instrument will be an
integral part of teaching as well as research and research training not only at
Mount St Mary's University but also at the neighboring institutions included in
the consortium.