* 1337095
* Dynamic Life Cycle Assessment for Critical Energy Materials: Developing a New Framework for Integrated Industrial Ecology Methods
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2018
* Alissa Kendall, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 09/30/2018
* USD 260,922.00

1337095 (Kendall). Energy-related greenhouse gas emissions are expected to
double by 2050, leading to warming of the global climate by 6 degrees or more.
Rapid and extensive deployment of renewable and energy-efficient technologies is
required to change the course of these emissions. This deployment will increase
demands for materials important for clean energy technologies, leading to some
becoming critical energy materials. National and international agencies have
increasingly emphasized the role of critical energy materials in meeting climate
change mitigation goals and for developing a vibrant economy for clean energy in
the U.S. The complex interactions of supply, demand, and mineral extraction
delays, barriers, or incentives will lead to varying resource restrictions and
environmental impacts for critical materials over time. Thus, a dynamic and
prospective approach to modeling material availability and environmental impacts
is required for environmentally preferable material selection by technology
developers, and to support strategic clean energy policies. This research will
develop an integrated life cycle assessment (LCA) and material flow analysis
(MFA) framework to create a dynamic approach for material sustainability
assessment. LCA holistically analyzes the environmental performance of
technologies, yet current LCA methods rely on static life cycle inventory data
even in assessments of future technologies. This research will develop a
prospective and dynamic approach by coupling two methods from industrial
ecology: LCA and MFA. This coupling results in a new framework for dynamic LCA,
one that acknowledges spatial variability in mining and refining impacts, and
anticipates changes in a material's availability and environmental impacts over
time. The framework will be applied to four metals considered critical, near
critical, or watch list: two rare earths, neodymium and dysprosium; lithium; and
magnesium. All four are essential for producing electric vehicles, an important
clean energy technology. A dynamic LCA of future electric vehicles will serve as
an illustrative case for this new method. The models and datasets generated will
contribute to improved life cycle design, planning, and material selection for
this particular technology, and provide a framework for developing similar tools
and data for other technologies and materials. This research will contribute to
other methodological advancements in industrial ecology by addressing unresolved
issues in LCA, including recycling allocation practices for materials in long-
lived products, and the treatment of co-production in prospective LCAs. The
delay in secondary material availability when recyclable materials are bound in
long-lived products represents an interesting case for recycling allocation. In
addition, co-product allocation issues will be addressed because many critical
energy materials are produced as co-products because they co-occur in geologic
deposits. Application of enhanced LCA methods can help avert unintended
consequences and improve the effectiveness of climate change mitigation
strategies. This research will allow clean energy technology developers to
anticipate long-term negative environmental consequences of selecting a
particular material in a design, facilitating life cycle decision-making at the
earliest stages of product development. This research will also help
policymakers and industry anticipate the timing required for identifying
alternative materials and resources, and for developing robust recycling
infrastructure. The research methods and outcomes will be incorporated into
educational curricula research and should also help policymakers and industry
anticipate the timing required for identifying alternative materials and
resources, and for developing robust recycling infrastructure. The research
methods and outcomes will be incorporated into educational curricula for
graduate and undergraduate courses, exposing students to quantitative
sustainability methods and current issues. In addition, project-based seminars
will be developed to target first year undergraduates from educationally
disadvantaged backgrounds and community college transfer students considering or
enrolled in engineering fields. Seminars will use engineering design problems
with environmental sustainability themes to help students connect careers in
engineering with socially relevant themes. In addition, students in grades 6-12
will be targeted through teacher training materials. The project will support
one doctoral student in all years and provide two undergraduate summer research
experiences.