* 1337061
* Multifunctional and Stimuli-Responsive Core-Shell Nanoparticles Based on Liposome Templating
* ENG,CBET
* 12/15/2013,11/30/2016
* Geoffrey Bothun, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 11/30/2016
* USD 335,831.00

1337061&lt;br/&gt;PI: Bothun&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A versatile process will be
created where small lipid bilayer vesicles or liposomes will be used as
biocompatible templates for creating magnetic-gold core-shell nanoparticles with
varying core and shell morphologies. The core-shell nanoparticles will provide a
structure where the magnetic core responds to permanent magnetic or alternating
radiofrequency (RF) electromagnetic fields, and the gold shell responds
photonically to ultraviolet-visible or near infrared (NIR) light. RF and NIR
absorbance will be examined as a function of core-shell structure, including
spherical and tubular geometries. By exploiting the ability of the core-shell
nanoparticles to convert the absorbed field energy into heat, controlled release
from liposome-templated nanoparticles using dual NIR and RF triggers will be
examined. This approach represents an original strategy and the project is
expected to lead to transformative advances in the way multifunctional
nanoparticles are synthesized and the way nanoparticles respond and react to
simultaneous NIR and RF fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rises in the spread and
severity of chronic diseases coupled with the need for selective, non-invasive
treatments have created a demand for more effective therapies. In addition to
being economical and having long-term chemical and physical stability, the ideal
therapeutic system would be multifunctional providing disease targeting,
imaging, diagnostic, and drug delivery capabilities. Magnetic-gold core-shell
nanoparticles represent such a system where multiple therapeutic objectives can
be realized. Students will impacted by this work through direct training,
curriculum development, and STEM outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
jointly funded by Particulate and Multiphase Processes and Thermal Transport
Processing Programs in Chemical, Biological, Environmental, and Transport
Division in Engineering Directorate.