* 1337284
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Shared Laser Scanning Confocal Microscope at the Institute of Neurobiology
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2018
* Mark Miller, University of Puerto Rico Medical Sciences Campus
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 12/31/2018
* USD 431,523.00

An award has been made to the University of Puerto Rico Medical Sciences Campus
(UPR MSC) to acquire a state-of-the-art Laser Scanning Confocal Microscope
(LSCM). This instrument overcomes obstacles that previously limited the
detection and precise localization of fluorescent signals within nervous systems
and other complex three-dimensional structures. The LSCM will be housed at the
Institute of Neurobiology (IN), a freestanding unit of the UPR MSC. Eleven
laboratories that comprise the IN utilize a variety of model systems, ranging
from the neuromuscular junction of Drosophila to mammalian neurons in cell
culture, to address some of the most challenging issues facing modern
neuroscience. The LSCM will benefit the entire neuroscience community of Puerto
Rico as well as investigators in other disciplines that require precise spatial
localization of fluorescent markers within biological
tissues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to enhancing research objectives,
acquisition of cutting-edge imaging instrumentation will significantly impact
the educational goals and capabilities of the University of Puerto Rico Medical
Sciences Campus. The proposed instrumentation will benefit students associated
with two major NSF-supported initiatives: the Undergraduate Research Mentoring
(URM) program in Neural Networks and Behavior which supports year-round
investigation by undergraduate students in neuroscience labs throughout the
island, and the Center for Research Excellence in Science and Technology (CREST)
in Environmental Neuroscience which partners neurobiologists with ecologists
investigating the effects of anthropogenic factors on nervous system function.
Finally, this instrumentation will promote collaborations between the UPR and
leading international investigators, providing opportunities for students to
receive a part of their training at major research institutions. Such
experiences greatly expand their horizons and ultimately lead to broadened
participation in the nation's STEM workforce.