* 1337897
* MRI: Acquisition of Analytical Scanning Electron Microscope for Engineering and Earth Science Research
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2015
* Samuel Mukasa, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Culbertson
* 08/31/2015
* USD 683,558.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) grant provides funding to purchase a
state-of-the-art field emission scanning electron microscope (SEM) with extended
capabilities including an electron backscatter diffraction (EBSD) detector, an
in-situ loading stage with 500oC capability, a backscatter detector, 3D image
reconstruction software, and a color cathodoluminescence (CCL) detector. The
EBSD system and loading stage will be used to answer important questions in
manufacturing regarding the impact of part-to-grain size ratio on evolution of
grain structure and forming quality in micro and nanoforming, and the importance
of twinning and dislocation-based deformation in forming of hexagonal close-
packed alloys for lightweight structures. The information will be used to
construct microstructurally-informed modeling of microscale forming. The EBSD
system will also be used to map the orientation of the olivine crystals deformed
under a range of hydrothermal conditions for Earth Science research studies of
the deformation mechanisms that accommodate slip in fault zones. The CCL-enabled
SEM will be used by Earth Scientists from UNH and area universities to conduct
state-of-the-art investigations combining well-defined crystal growth zones and
geochronology or trace elemental analyses to investigate the formation of
Earth's lithosphere, fluid (including carbon) cycling within Earth's
lithosphere, plate boundary processes, and related topics. It will also be used
to characterize volcanic ash for atmospheric transport
studies&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The information obtained with this instrument will
be used to improve deformation-based manufacturing processes on the macro,
micro, and nanoscale. It will also lead to improved understanding of the
formation of the earth's mantle, formation and transport of volcanic ash, and
deformation of bio-inspired materials. The SEM will provide new opportunities
for undergraduate research. The instrument's remote access capabilities will
also be used to greatly enhance the University of New Hampshire's K-12 outreach
capabilities and to provide a resource for regional industry.