* 1337694
* MRI: Acquisition of an extreme-resolution low-voltage scanning electron microscope
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2014
* Elizabeth Dickey, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 08/31/2014
* USD 740,000.00

1337694&lt;br/&gt;Maria&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This Major Research
Instrumentation award supports North Carolina State University (NCSU) with the
acquisition of a high-resolution scanning electron microscope that can produce
electron beams with landing energies lower than 0.1 keV while retaining lateral
resolution below 1 nm. The proposed instrument enables imaging with beam
currents below 5 pA. This combination of low landing energy and low current
brings three transformational capabilities to NCSU: 1) it is possible to
eliminate surface charging by balancing energy dependent electron arrival and
emission rates; 2) it is possible to acquire information that is highly surface
specific; and 3) it is possible to minimize beam damage in materials that would
otherwise deteriorate rapidly. In combination, these capabilities will propel
existing research by providing structural information at dramatically higher
resolution and on samples that simply could not be imaged previously. These
capabilities will enhance materials research at NCSU that is increasingly
interdisciplinary, with focused efforts on electronic heterostructures,
nanofiber/nanoparticle composites, colloidal assemblies, and DNA-mediated
organic-inorganic assemblies. &lt;br/&gt;*****&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This Major
Research Instrumentation award supports North Carolina State University (NCSU)
with the acquisition of an extreme-resolution scanning electron microscope that
images with low energy electrons. The key benefit of this instrument is imaging
with a resolving power approaching atomic dimensions without the limitations due
to the accumulation of negative charges on the sample surface that severely
limits image quality and resolution. Furthermore, this low energy probe allows
researchers to explore organic substances like plastics, natural fibers, and in
some cases cells, which would decompose rapidly if imaged in a conventional
instrument. This instrument will strengthen existing interdisciplinary programs
at NCSU and is the greater Research Triangle region through its ability to
characterize a diverse palette of materials at extreme resolution. In addition
the instrument will create new outreach opportunities to inspire future
generations of students in science, technology and math disciplines.