* 1337860
* MRI:  Development of an Instrument for Quantitative Characterization of Behavior of Magnetic Particles and Magnetically-Labeled Biomaterials in Emerging Applications
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Kwang Oh, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 08/31/2017
* USD 535,315.00

1337860&lt;br/&gt;Swihart&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs will develop an
integrated multifunctional stand-alone instrument with unique capabilities for
imaging, tracking, and characterizing coupled magnetic, thermal, transport,
photonic and biofunctional properties and behavior of magnetic particles (MPs)
and magnetically labeled biomaterials (MLBs), in situ, for a broad range of
applications. The objectives are to integrate into one platform, state-of-the-
art techniques that combine (i) the ability to track and characterize the
dynamics of unlabeled MPs as small as 20 nm in diameter, (ii) high temporal
resolution (up to 500,000 fps), and (iii) hyperspectral imaging (~2 nm
wavelength resolution in the 400-900&lt;br/&gt;nm range, pixel-by-pixel) with
high optical resolution. They will co-develop and incorporate custom-designed
magnetic field sources to produce prescribed 3D magnetic fields (for field-
directed manipulation) and an RF source (for heating), combined with custom-
designed magnetically-functional microfluidic flow cells that will produce
controllable flow fields and enable sample manipulation during imaging. Custom
user-friendly computational magneto-fluidics software will be integrated as part
of the instrument to enable fundamental understanding and facilitate
interpretation of experimental results. A highly interdisciplinary team of
researchers with complimentary expertise will lead this effort. Development of
the proposed instrument will advance fundamental understanding of physical
properties and behavior of MPs and MLBs and the dynamics of interacting
populations of such particles, in situ, under well-characterized and adjustable
flow fields and in the presence of 3D static and low frequency and/or RF
magnetic fields. Moreover, the instrument, with its integrated unique state-of-
the-art capabilities, combining high resolution nanoparticle tracking and
characterization, hyperspectral microscopy, thermal imaging and high frame rate
imaging, represents a significant contribution to the fields of optical
engineering, nanoparticle characterization, and bioimaging that will enable
researchers to elucidate fundamental phenomena in fields that employ MPs/MLBs.