* 1337846
* MRI: Acquisition of field-portable x-ray fluorescence technology for undergraduate research and education
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Kirsten Schwarz, NORTHERN KENTUCKY UNIVERSITY RESEARCH FOUNDATION (DO NOT USE)
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Sanford
* 08/31/2016
* USD 106,552.00

An award is made to Northern Kentucky University (NKU) for the acquisition of
field-portable x- ray fluorescence (XRF) technology for undergraduate research
and education. XRF technology will advance and broaden socio-ecological teaching
and research at NKU. Specifically, XRF will be used to analyze soil lead
concentrations in Cincinnati, OH in order to better understand potential
tradeoffs with urban gardening activities and learn how information about the
landscape can be used to predict areas of elevated lead. Understanding the
distribution of a critical urban pollutant will improve our understanding of the
important link between urban structure and function, advancing urban ecological
theory. In addition, data and predictive models of lead distribution will be
shared with community partners and local health agencies to inform the design of
safe urban gardens and protect human populations from lead exposure. XRF will
advance ongoing projects on plant and microbe community effects on ecosystem
processes. This research will deepen our understanding of ecosystem processes by
examining linked biogeochemical cycles, specifically the role of heavy metal
dynamics in structuring aquatic ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Environmental
data, including heavy metal and nutrient content of soil and sediment samples
will be collected, analyzed, and archived by undergraduate students through
existing and newly developed courses in NKU's Environmental Science Program.
Data will be used in introductory courses to teach basic concepts of data
analysis and in upper level courses to teach concepts of sample design and data
collection. XRF technology enhances infrastructure for mentoring students in
both education and research. Acquisition of XRF technology strengthens NKU's
mission to provide undergraduate students with valuable research experience that
expands future career options. Undergraduate students and the surrounding
community will benefit from a greater understanding of coupled human-environment
interactions that drive the spatial distribution of heavy metals in urban soils.