* 1337791
* MRI: Acquisition of a Fluorescence Assisted Cell Sorter for Research and Teaching
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Xueya Hauge, Kennesaw State University Research and Service Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2016
* USD 303,025.00

An award is made to Kennesaw State University (KSU) to acquire a Fluorescence-
Activated Cell Sorter (FACS) for use in a diverse series of research and
teaching applications across multiple disciplines. The FACS instrument will be
used to identify, isolate, and purify a broad range of cells and cell components
including mouse embryonic stem cells, neurons, muscle cells, bacteria,
organelles, and liposomes. These FACS-purified samples will further research
programs that seek to understand brain, muscle, and skeletal development and
function, as well as the mechanisms behind bacterial locomotion,a key factor in
bacterial pathogenicity. In addition, the FACS will be used to identify and
isolate cells possessing novel proteins of interest and for the isolation of
specific cell types during molecular cloning studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
addition to expansion of research capabilities, the acquisition of cell sorting
technology will offer new avenues for course development in the science
curriculum at KSU. FACS experiments will be employed in undergraduate courses,
bringing state-of-the art instrumentation to cell biology, microbiology,
chemistry, and biochemistry instruction. FACS experiments will also be
introduced to the graduate curricula in biology and biochemistry, complementing
existing instructional modules in flow cytometry and confocal microscopy.
Opportunities for cell sorting experiments will facilitate recruitment,
training, retention, and graduation of undergraduate researchers in multiple
STEM programs. These include those funded by the KSU Center for Excellence in
Teaching and Learning, the College of Science and Mathematics, and the National
Science Foundation's Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (LSAMP).
Students trained in flow cytometry and FACS skills will be more competitive for
jobs in the biotechnology arena and will be better prepared for enrollment into
STEM graduate programs. Finally, the powerful capabilities of cell sorting will
promote international collaborations, engaging overseas students in research
endeavors at our institution and promoting a culture of global learning.