* 1337884
* MRI: Acquisition of an Instrument for Research in Irregularly Parallel Big Data Computation
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2016
* Enrico Pontelli, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 09/30/2016
* USD 224,074.00

Proposal #: 13-37884&lt;br/&gt;PI(s): Cook, Jonathan E.&lt;br/&gt; Cao, Huiping;
Cook, Jeanine M.; Pontelli, Enrico; Song, Mingzhou&lt;br/&gt;Institution: New
Mexico State University &lt;br/&gt;Title: MRI/Acq.: Instrument for Research in
Irregularly Parallel Big Data Computation&lt;br/&gt;Project
Proposed:&lt;br/&gt;This project, acquiring a computational instrument
configured to support data-driven graph computations (DDGC) that might enable-
to-scale and improve parallel computation that is generally irregular and hard
to scale and improve. (Very regular computations--for example, fluid dynamics--
already have a long history of development and are highly optimized to run on
modern high performance (HPC) instruments.) &lt;br/&gt;The instrument, with 320
cores and a node and system architecture, is designed specifically with
potentially transformative DDGC research in mind. The local node memory
hierarchy includes both fast solid state secondary storage and traditional
mechanical disk storage. Research projects explore ways to exploit the new layer
of fast solid state storage, not just as a standalone data container, but within
the memory hierarchy of the local node. The system has in its configuration both
GPU and FPGA computing support. Some of the research projects exploit non-
traditional, yet potentially powerful computation mechanisms. In particular, the
instrument supports the following projects:&lt;br/&gt;- Genome Assembly and
Annotation Computations,&lt;br/&gt;- Data Mining over Large Graphs,&lt;br/&gt;-
Reasoning with Big Knowledge,&lt;br/&gt;- Hardware Acceleration for Scalable
Graph-Based Computations, and&lt;br/&gt;- Data Driven Monitoring and Analysis of
Scientific Computations.&lt;br/&gt;Each of these projects will make use of the
general architecture of the instrument. GPU and FPGA capabilities will be used
to further explore and enhance the possibilities to improve performance of data-
driven graph computations. The instrument architecture is intended to enable
cross-fertilization between the research projects that will, in turn, contribute
to the development of new approaches that can perform DDG computations
efficiently.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;Due to the growth of data
analytics in so many areas of society, the techniques developed utilizing the
instrument should be valuable across society (from economic capacity to homeland
security needs). &lt;br/&gt;Techniques that can improve the DDG computations
within many of the big data computations (from improved algorithms to newly
demonstrated hardware approaches) are immediately useful. Moreover, the
instrumentation enriches the research and educational activities at a minority-
serving institution within an EPSCoR jurisdiction. The project offers
opportunities for students and professors to participate in novel computer
research.