* 1337237
* Instability in Education Systems, Randomized Controlled Trials, and Children's Achievement
* EHR,DGE
* 10/15/2013,09/30/2016
* Andrew Porter, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 09/30/2016
* USD 469,165.00

The mobility of teachers in schools is the focus of this project. Researchers
from the University of Pennsylvania and the 21st Century Partnership for STEM
Education are developing a system of indicators to measure the magnitude and
impact of changes in school system staffing, a construct they call Ambient
Positional Instability. The researchers are constructing case studies of school
districts working within the context of an ongoing multi-site STEM experimental
study. They are mapping the accessibility of teacher positional change data in
100 of the largest school districts in the United States, working with the
Council of Great City Schools, to identify potential models of that data to
better understand the phenomena. As a fourth component of the study, they are
conducting a review of published reports on randomized trials and interviews
with the authors to examine teacher instability that is not necessarily reported
in those studies. The findings from this study inform a Campbell collaboration
protocol for systemic review of the evidence.

Teacher mobility is caused by reassignments to grades or subjects taught,
promotions or demotions to non-teaching positions, and temporary appointments,
as well as school leaving. Schools are frequently indicated as being very
volatile environments with much turnover of staff and students a perennial
problem. Yet the extent to which this is a problem has not been well
characterized, and a system of indicators of this instability does not exist.
This study provides such an indicator system and much potential use for both
research and evaluation purposes. The instability in teacher positions has
implications for the implementation of educational interventions. It affects the
sensitivity of research and evaluation to detect the impact of interventions in
experimental studies. In addition, teacher mobility has implications for policy
decisions at the school, district, state and federal levels.