* 1337871
* MRI:  Development of an Ultra-High Vacuum Cryogen-free Low Temperature Proximal Probe System for the Exploration of Low Dimensional Materials and Nano-devices
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2013,04/30/2019
* Eric Garfunkel, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 04/30/2019
* USD 702,850.00

1337871 &lt;br/&gt;Andrei&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Low
dimensional materials, nanostructures and devices are the driving force behind
recent technological and scientific advances. Quantum fluctuations associated
with their reduced size lead to the emergence of novel physical and electronic
properties. As nanostructures are being produced in ever growing variants with
applications in fields as diverse as physics, biology, engineering and medicine
it is crucial to develop instruments capable of characterizing their properties
so as to fully exploit their potential. This award from the Major Research
Instrumentation program to Rutgers University at New Brunswick supports the
development of a versatile and unique proximal probe system (PPS) designed for
in-situ nano-scale characterization of low dimensional systems and devices. The
instrument is optimized for probing two-dimensional layers, correlated electron
materials and nano-structures. It is designed to give access to multiple
physical parameters at the nano-scale including electronic, magnetic and
mechanical response, in tandem with global transport measurements. The flexible
structure incorporating multi-functional characterization and sample
conditioning modules will make it possible to smoothly interface with existing
and future instruments. A UHV suitcase will allow transferring, under UHV
conditions and without breaking vacuum, samples synthesized by the Rutgers
cutting-edge MBE facility directly into the PPS for in-situ characterization.
This will enable discovery of novel correlated electron materials, topological
phases and new electronic applications. The instrument integrates state-of-the-
art commercial components with new concepts for sample loading and vibration
isolation to produce a compact and versatile scanning probe system. The
innovative design with small footprint internal isolator based on an
electrostatic negative stiffness mechanism will provide unprecedented levels of
vibration isolation. This will enable low temperature STM operation in a cryogen
free environment not presently available in existing commercial systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Major Research Instrumentation award
supports Rutgers University New Brunswick with the development of an Ultra-high
Vacuum Cryogen-free Low Temperature Proximal Probe System for the Exploration of
Low Dimensional Materials and Nano-devices. Low dimensional materials,
nanostructures and devices are the driving force behind recent technological and
scientific advances. Their reduced size promotes the emergence of novel and
unexpected physical and electronic properties. It is increasingly crucial to
develop instruments capable of characterizing their properties so as to fully
exploit their potential. The instrument will be a versatile and unique proximal
probe system. The instrument combines a set of capabilities, currently not
available in commercial systems, which will significantly expand the range of
physical phenomena and materials that can be studied. The modular design and the
ability to operate under conditions of ultrahigh vacuum, high magnetic fields
and in a cryogen free low temperature environment are unique to this
development. The instrument development will stimulate a broad range of
activities impacting education, training, outreach and industrial
collaborations. Its novel design concept allowing high quality imaging and
spectroscopy without the investment in costly structural modifications required
for external vibration isolation will bring these powerful techniques within the
reach of researchers and students beyond the cadre of elite institutions.
Students will be exposed to a wide range of scanning microscopy probes and
imaging techniques. Partnership with Attocube, a leading developer of cryogen-
free scanning microscopy probes, will help implement the novel design in future
commercial instruments. The wide gamut of images acquired with this instrument
which will be disseminated through open houses, high school visits and exhibits
will help communicate the excitement and richness of the nano world to the
general public.