* 1337371
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Multi-Functional Scanning Probe Microscope System for Nanoscale Surface and Interface Characterization
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Brian LeRoy, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 08/31/2016
* USD 317,351.00

DMR- 1337371 &lt;br/&gt;Armstrong&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;This
award from the Major Research Instrumentation program supports the acquisition
of a multi-functional Scanning Probe Microscope (SPM) system for nanoscale
surface characterization, to be housed in the W.M. Keck Center for Nano-Scale
Imaging at the University of Arizona (UA). This multi-user system will enhance
our understanding of the relationship between surface and interface topography,
mechanical composition, and electrical properties, at nanometer length scales,
and will enable the study for the first time of dynamic interfacial processes.
Understanding these surface and interfacial processes is critical since they
often underpin the development of new energy conversion and energy storage
technologies, new biosensors and biomaterials, and materials for a sustainable
future. Examples of new research activities and collaborations enabled through
the acquisition of this instrument are: i) exploration of the interfacial
chemistries and physics that control charge harvesting and charge injection, and
electrical conductivities in thin film materials envisioned for use in energy
conversion and energy storage technologies, ii) studies of organized thin film
assemblies of unique glycolipid surfactants, iii) nanometer-scale understanding
of the compositional variations in graphene-like materials which control work
function and related electrical properties, iv) studies of the heterogeneous
structure and nanomechanical properties of unique lipid bilayer constructs
created from cross-linkable lipids, and functionalized with trans-membrane
proteins, v) creation of nano-patterned oxide materials for nanoelectronic
devices, and vi) mapping variations in electric force with and without
photoexcitation for nanoparticle modified transparent electrode materials. This
new SPM system will directly impact a cohort of 45 principal investigators and
200 graduate students, postdocs and undergraduates from the UA
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;This
award from the Major Research Instrumentation program supports the acquisition
of a multi-functional Scanning Probe Microscope (SPM). This SPM will enhance
interdisciplinary research and training activities at the University of Arizona
(UA) focused on the development of new energy conversion and energy storage
technologies, new biosensors and biomaterials, and materials for a sustainable
future. This new instrument will expand the research, training and outreach
capabilities of the W.M. Keck Center for Surface and Interface Imaging which
currently serves the needs of a diverse University of Arizona community
interested in imaging, characterization and manipulation of matter at nanometer
length scales. The new SPM system will provide the capabilities to characterize
matter on small length scales, including mechanical and electrical properties,
and will in some cases provide for understanding of dynamic chemical processes
at interfaces in real time. It will play a critical role in the UA educational
mission through its use in our undergraduate and graduate-level instrumental
analysis laboratory courses, a popular SPM annual summer workshop, and various
outreach activities. The SPM will be featured in demonstrations for local K-12
students and UA hosted community activities such as Science City and UA Parent's
Weekend. The new multi-functional SPM system will enable new research
collaborations and innovations, and will serve to expose and inspire UA students
and the greater southern Arizona community with state-of-the-art nanoscale
scientific imaging.