* 1337372
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectrometer to Advance Undergraduate Education and Research
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Debra Dolliver, Southeastern Louisiana University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 08/31/2016
* USD 274,000.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program that is co-
funded by the Chemistry Research Instrumentation and Facilities (CRIF) Program,
Professor Debra Dolliver from Southeastern Louisiana University and colleague
Jean Fotie will acquire a 400 MHz NMR spectrometer. The proposal is aimed at
enhancing research and education at all levels, especially in areas such as (a)
development of synthetic techniques to make single geometric isomers of imine
derivatives; (b) design and synthesis of biologically active molecules as
potential antiprotozoan agents; (c) support of the program SEAL (Student
Entrepreneurs as Active Leaders) Research in Physics; (d) modeling atomic and
molecular properties, particularly those occurring under the influence of
electric, magnetic, and electromagnetic perturbations; and (e) synthesis of of
thiophene-based room temperature ionic liquids and the testing of such ionic
liquids as media for organic synthesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nuclear Magnetic
Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is one of the most powerful tools available to
chemists for the elucidation of the structure of molecules. It is used to
identify unknown substances, to characterize specific arrangements of atoms
within molecules, and to study the dynamics of interactions between molecules in
solution. Access to state-of-the-art NMR spectrometers is essential to chemists
who are carrying out frontier research. The results from these NMR studies will
have an impact in synthetic organic/inorganic chemistry, materials chemistry and
biochemistry. This instrument will be an integral part of teaching as well as
research.