* 1337152
* MRI: Acquisition of an ActiveTwo EEG/ERP Acquisition System
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2015
* Michael Tagler, Ball State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2015
* USD 86,321.00

With Major Research Instrumentation support, Dr. Stephanie L. Simon-Dack and her
collaborators will purchase a Biosemi Electroencephalography/Event-Related
Potentials (EEG/ERP) Active Two Acquisition System for the joint use of the
Department of Psychological Science and the Department of Counseling and
Guidance Services at Ball State University. The use of EEG/ERP technology is
ideal for studying how and when attention and specific cognitive resources are
recruited to perform functional acts of cognition that lead to human behavior.
Through the placement of electrodes on the scalp, the equipment will allow for
the non-invasive recording of electrical brain activity related to the timing
and location of cognitive and emotional processes of the brain.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The participating researchers who will use the equipment
collaboratively on four proposed research projects are all specialists in
different and dynamic areas of psychology, and thus the equipment will allow for
holistic study of thought and behavior. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research project 1
will examine the effects of multiple sensory inputs (e.g., such as touch and
hearing, or touch and sight) on the recruitment of attentional resources. This
will inform future situations involving the presentation of sensory information
to individuals when multiple inputs may be helpful or harmful to responding
expediently (e.g., instrumentation alerts for fighter pilots; educational
techniques for individuals with learning
deficits).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research project 2 will examine the
neurophysiological processes involved in the comprehension of uncertainty terms
(words that can have a wide range of interpretation, such as the word
"probably") and will contribute to our understanding of situated language
use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research project 3 will investigate the neural stages
and timing of decision-making in individuals exposed to information that is
consistent or inconsistent with previously held attitudes and beliefs. This
project will allow for insight into how a person's prior beliefs can influence
the decision making process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research project 4 will allow
the investigators to examine the relationship between brain processes and
psychological factors involved in good career decision-making. The high
unemployment rate in the United States underscores the importance of making
sound career decisions and this project aims for a greater understanding of the
psychophysiological correlates underlying this process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed projects will facilitate development of neurophysiological research and
training at Ball State University across multiple departments. Students (both
undergraduate and graduate) will be involved in the research programs and have
the opportunity to develop their own research projects using the EEG recording
equipment. By coordinating efforts with the Associate Provost for Diversity, the
PIs will work with the Office of Institutional Diversity to actively recruit
student researchers from underrepresented groups including women, minorities,
and low-income first generation college students, an endeavor that is consistent
with the emphasis on diversity at the PI's home institution. Students who
participate in these projects will be prepared for higher education
opportunities in an increasingly competitive and physiology-focused field.
Departmental and institutional access to this equipment will allow faculty and
students to remain competitive in the field of psychology as emphasis on the
neurophysiological correlates of thought and behavior continues to grow.