* 1337716
* MRI: Acquisition of a Scanning Microwave Microscope for Research on Materials and Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2015
* Gopalan Srinivasan, Oakland University
* Standard Grant
* Eyad Abed
* 09/30/2015
* USD 114,191.00

Objective: This project is for acquisition of a scanning microwave microscope
(SMM) system that integrates high resolution imaging and microwave network
analysis that operates at frequencies up to 6 GHz. It is capable of mapping
impedance, capacitance, dielectric permittivity, permeability and doping density
of semiconductors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The proposed
instrument evaporation system will enable researchers at Oakland University to
pursue a number of interdisciplinary research projects covering a wide spectrum
of technologically-important applications. The SMM is ideal for use on metals,
magnetic materials, ferroelectrics, and biological samples to map a range of
electromagnetic parameters that are dependent on interaction with microwaves.
The instrument will be shared by the Physics, Chemistry, and Engineering
faculties. The systems will enhance research infrastructure and will have
immediate impact on the following research programs: (i) Multiferroic Nano-
composites, (ii) RF-MEMS, (iii) Hydrogen fuel cells, and (iv) Chemical and
Biological sensors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The proposed
acquisition will significantly enhance interdisciplinary research and
educational opportunities for students at Oakland University. The shared
facility by Sciences and Engineering faculties will provide with a critical
imaging tool and foster collaborative research on new materials for useful
technologies. The instrumentation will also facilitate research training for
postdoctoral associates and graduate students, research experience for
undergraduates and high school students and out-reach activities involving K-12
students. The student population at Oakland University is 75% women and
minorities. Efforts will be made to identify, encourage and involve students
with disability into related research projects.