* 1337280
* MRI: Acquisition of a confocal laser scanning microscope for research in the life sciences at Skidmore College
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* David Domozych, Skidmore College
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2017
* USD 478,730.00

Confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM) is an essential tool for cell and
molecular biology research in the Biology, Neuroscience and Health and Exercise
Sciences programs at Skidmore College. Training and hands-on experience with
state-of-the-art CLSM is an essential facet of undergraduate training at
Skidmore College. This shared instrument supports faculty and faculty-student
collaborative projects in diverse areas, such as plant biology, neuroscience,
mammalian physiology and microbiology. Furthermore, it directly contributes to
active research collaborations between Skidmore scientists and researchers from
around the world. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The Olympus Fluoview 1200 confocal
laser system attached to a BX-61 light microscope is being used in multiple
research projects, including a comprehensive investigation of cell wall dynamics
in green algae, an elucidation of various dynamic processes in model animal
systems, including zebrafish and C. elegans, a study of muscle atrophy, a study
of cellular mechanisms involved in cerebellar ataxin-1 function, and an analysis
of biofilm formation in bacteria under metal stress. The instrument enables
current users and new faculty to implement more sophisticated experiments via
its advanced optical and software attributes (e.g., spectral imaging, SIM
scanner). This microscope is also a core resource supporting multiple
collaborative research projects involving Skidmore faculty and researchers from
institutions, including Cornell University, Albany Medical College, University
of Copenhagen, and National University of Ireland. Furthermore, the Fluoview
1200 provides superb opportunities for students of Skidmore to gain hands-on
CLSM experience in the classroom/laboratory and in a collaborative setting with
their faculty mentors in independent research and summer collaborative research,
better preparing them for employment or advanced study opportunities after
graduation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The Fluoview 1200 Confocal laser system
serves several outreach objectives. First, data obtained and protocols devised
in this project are being used in several courses, including Advanced Light
Microscopy, Plant Biotechnology and Cell Biology and the S3M Summer Transitional
Program (focused on STEM underrepresented groups) as well as for independent
student based research. Second, the microscope is also used for community
outreach programs, including the Johns Hopkins Center for Talented Youth, the
Skidmore Scholars in Science and Mathematics, Camp Northwoods, the Skidmore
Science and Math Open House, and SMIC Day. These programs provide opportunities
for students from grades 1-12 to engage in hands-on science and include schools
with large numbers of underrepresented groups. Furthermore, notice of the
availability of this instrumentation and news regarding the research facilitated
by it will be distributed throughout the greater Capital Region's academic and
biotechnology community through the College's membership affiliation with
Bioconnex.