* 1337670
* MRI: Acquisition of an Integrated Fluorescence and Atomic Force
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Khalid Lafdi, The University of Texas Rio Grande Valley
* Standard Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 08/31/2016
* USD 276,233.00

The objective of this project is to acquire a cutting-edge commercial multi-
functional Integrated Fluorescence/Atomic Force Microscope (IF-AFM) to support
fundamental and interdisciplinary research projects and the applied biophysics
and nanoscience education programs in the Rio Grande Valley, South Texas region.
The IF-AFM will be installed at the University of Texas at Brownsville (UTB) and
will be used as a shared characterization facility. This instrument is designed
to measure a variety of physical, chemical, and biophysical properties including
nanostructural, nanomechanical, and electrical at the single molecule level and
under a variety of conditions. The optical integration offers almost endless
possibilities in high resolution imaging, force measurements, and
nanomanipulations. The attractive feature of the IF-AFM is that the AFM tip can
be guided optically to perform nanomanipulations at specific areas of the
specimen. This technique is uniquely capable of shedding light on the interplay
between individual and collective behavior. This acquisition will enhance the
existing research and educational infrastructure and will provide the state-of-
the-art measurement system to a broad range of users in State of Texas, thereby
elevating advanced nano-materials research and educational programs in the Rio
Grande Valley to a globally competitive level. The IF-AFM instrument acquisition
will enable significant enhancement of basic research toolset across a wide
range of biophysical, biomedical, and material programs including physics of
biofilm formation, bacterial adhesion, bacterial mechanics and dynamics, protein
aggregation and interaction, bioimaging, and nanostructured surfaces. The
enabling IF-AFM capabilities will inspire development of new transformative
research directions to discover the underlying biophysical principles that
govern the operation of cellular machinery and use this knowledge to unravel the
mechanisms of many diseases that afflict millions of people. It is also expected
that what is learned will help in the development of new biologically-inspired
materials which will have far-reaching consequences for biomedical and bio-
nanotechnological applications. This project brings together a diverse group of
institutions in Texas and nationwide: University of Texas at Brownsville and
University of Texas Pan American (UTPA) - the minority Hispanic universities,
University of Texas at Austin and Dayton University. The IF-AFM has a wide range
of capabilities which will benefit potential users from physics, engineering,
biology, and biomedical fields. Shared use of the instrument will promote multi-
institutional, inter-disciplinary collaborations that will enhance the
educational experience of more than 80 undergraduate and graduate students of
participating universities. The IF-AFM will also become an essential element of
research-based training for physics, biology, biomedical, and engineering
science majors from underrepresented minority group. The educational plan
provides learning opportunities through combined (i) course development and (ii)
hands-on observations. The PI will develop and teach two new courses on
Biological Physics that integrate research results in a broader biophysical
context. To motivate the next generation of scientists, the PI will work with
local middle/high school students as part of UTB Science and Engineering Expo,
introducing them firsthand to the physics of cellular locomotion through
microscopy and modeling activities. The results of these research and teaching
efforts will be broadly disseminated through abstracts and peer reviewed
publications, as well as by active participation of students and faculty at
professional meetings.