* 1337229
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Scanning Electron Microscope with EDS
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Sharon Hamilton, Delta State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 06/30/2017
* USD 208,288.00

An award is made to the Division of Biological and Physical Sciences at Delta
State University (DSU), in Cleveland, Mississippi. The award allows the purchase
of a scanning electron microscope (SEM) with an energy dispersive x-ray system
(EDX) attachment. Acquiring an SEM will facilitate diverse scientific research
investigations pertaining to biology, chemistry, and environmental science at
DSU and will be utilized by professors and students. Assorted projects include
taxonomic studies such as studying structural details of fossil pollen and
spores from Jurassic, Cretaceous, and Quaternary formations throughout the
United States, bacillary bands of parasitic nematodes, surface patterns of
trichinelloid nematode eggs, leaf stomata and trichomes of native, invasive and
naturalized species that infer information on climate change with regards to the
local bottomland hardwood forests that are diminishing, and examining structural
differences that are correlated to bulk chemical properties and textures of
sheep wool when compared to synthetic yarns. Other projects are based on
environmental inferences such as examining surface features of yeast to
understand gene function in eukaryotic cells when subjected to differences in pH
and temperature, analyzing caveolae both in cultured cells and in muscle tissue
samples that pertain to obesity, and elemental mapping of heavy metals and
absorbed contaminants that occur in local brownfields associated with
agricultural and industrial sites so they can be restored for economic
development. Travel costs to utilize an SEM will no longer be an issue and many
laboratory experiences will be enhanced. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Obtaining an SEM
will help recruit and retain faculty at DSU with expertise in specialized
scientific areas. Faculty will utilize pictures they acquire from the SEM in
presentations that they give at scientific meetings such as the Geological
Society of America, Botanical Society of America, Southeastern Biology, and so
forth. Students also will be able to utilize this instrument for various
capstone projects that are associated with the undergraduate science degrees.
Additionally, this instrument will be part of regular classroom curriculums in
Anatomy and Physiology, Parasitology, Plant Anatomy, Environmental Chemistry,
Cell Biology, and Problems in Biology. Students, therefore, will obtain valuable
hands-on skills that will increase their admittance into graduate programs,
medical schools, and other academic pursuits as well as become marketable in
obtaining employment in scientific fields. In addition, faculty and staff from
neighboring institutions such as Mississippi Delta Community College, Coahoma
Community College, Mississippi Valley University and the USDA-Agricultural
Research Station will be able to utilize this instrument. As a result, the
entire Mississippi Delta will benefit from this acquisition and scientific
literacy of this community will be greatly enhanced.