* 1337293
* MRI: Acquisition of an Automatic High Pressure Physisorption Analyzer for the Creation of a Physical Adsorption Laboratory
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Agustin Rios, Universidad Del Turabo
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 08/31/2016
* USD 117,432.00

With this award from the Chemistry Major Research Instrumentation Program,
Professor Rolando Roque-Malherbe from Universidad Del Turabo and colleagues
Agustin Rios, Anastacio Emiliano and Cesar Lozano will acquire an automatic high
pressure physisorption analyzer. The proposal is aimed at enhancing research and
education at all levels, especially in areas such as (a) metal organic
frameworks for methane storage; (b) Prussian blue analogues for small molecules
separation from gas flows; and (c) pore size augmented nitroprussides for carbon
dioxide storage.

A high pressure physisorption analyzer takes advantage of the very weak
attractive interactions between molecules, which arise from so-called van der
Waals interactions. In general, high pressure is applied to a gas in contact
with a solid substrate. As the pressure increases, the gas molecules are
attracted to various degrees by the substrate. Under appropriate conditions,
these weak interactions allow separation of gases. If additionally the pores of
the substrate are manipulated, the interactions may increase and such solids may
be used to store gases. Useful examples are those of carbon dioxide, which may
contribute to global warming and may serve as feedstock for chemical reactions
under concentrated conditions.