* 1337965
* MRI: Acquisition of a DC/RF Sputtering System to Support Multi-disciplinary Research on Medical Sensors and Micro-generators in WBAN
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Stephen Blank, New York Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Eyad Abed
* 08/31/2016
* USD 230,063.00

Objective&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this program is to acquire a direct
current/radio frequency (DC/RF) sputtering system to support multi-disciplinary
research on medical sensors, micro power generators, miniaturized flexible tag
antennas, and novel bioengineering applications and implementations in robust
and energy efficient wireless body area network (WBAN)
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merit is to provide the basis for hardware implementation of wireless body area
networks for reliable data acquisition in patient diagnosis and health
monitoring scenarios. It will enhance the scope of the current research
activities and training capabilities as well as help to develop a new learning
environment by adding research exploration and hands-on instrumentation
experience to current undergraduate and graduate curricula at New York Institute
of Technology. The proposed equipment will be configured to accommodate various
materials and operate as a shared facility with access given to qualified
members of the research community in the Long Island
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts are to
provide invaluable educational and training opportunities for students at both
the undergraduate and graduate levels and to be a vehicle for enabling and
advancing faculty research. Using the proposed wireless body area network
system, patients in a hospital or clinic setting can receive constant monitoring
and care in an unobtrusive manner. Although not strictly limited to health care
applications, such efforts could significantly reduce the cost of medical care.
The proposed multidisciplinary research will also contribute to the recruitment
of potential students, especially women, for degree programs in engineering
fields.