* 1337592
* MRI:   Acquisition of Metal Organic Vapor Phase Epitaxy (MOVPE) Reactor for Nanostructured Materials Development
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2013,12/31/2015
* Sean Rommel, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 12/31/2015
* USD 706,671.00

This Major Research Instrumentation award to the Rochester Institute of
Technology funds the purchase of a metal organic vapor phase epitaxy (MOVPE)
system for growth of III-V thin film crystals and nanostructures. The MOVPE
system is customized for growth of an array of both traditional and novel
semiconductor materials containing arsenic, phosphorous and antimony. The
instrument will support the study of a range of new material systems spanning
research topics in next generation photovoltaics (PV), III-V on silicon
optoelectronics and electronics as well as quantum dot (QD) and nanowire based
lasers and photovoltaics. The MOVPE tool is further enabling research in the
area of heterogeneous integration of photonics which will enable the realization
of low cost high performance optoelectronic chips with active photonic
functionalities, such as, lasers, amplifiers, modulators and radio-frequency
photonic devices. Furthermore, this tool will support the seamless integration
of robust QD lasers with high performance silicon photonic devices, which has
the potentials to the meet challenges to the realization of complete optical
interconnects that are low-cost and have high performance and efficiency. The
tool will be part of RIT's state-of-the-art clean room user facility and be
available to research teams across multiple disciplines and universities. The
tool will play a central role in RIT's growing multi-disciplinary PhD program in
Microsystems Engineering, it will strengthen the graduate training program
around new material growth and epitaxy, and optical and electronic devices. A
new course based on epitaxy of thin-films is being developed. Other activities
include educating personnel from local companies in microelectronic technologies
through short course programs, collaboration with RIT Middle College program to
introduce high-school students to PV technologies through cleanroom tours and
hands-on experiences, and outreach sessions to the general public at RIT's
annual Imagine RIT festival. In addition, this tool serves to provide resources
and support for academic and industrial partners. It not only provides the
technical resources and development for state-of-the-art and next-generation
devices, but through the graduate training program, the next generation of
experienced scientists and engineers.&lt;br/&gt;*****&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Major Research Instrumentation award to the Rochester Institute of Technology
(RIT)supports the purchase of a metal organic vapor phase epitaxy (MOVPE) system
for growth of thin film crystals and nanostructures. The MOVPE system is
customized for growth of an array of both traditional and novel materials
containing arsenic, phosphorous and antimony. The system will be used to study a
range of new material systems spanning research topics in next generation
photovoltaics, optoelectronics and electronics as well as quantum dot (QD) and
nanowire based lasers and photovoltaics. The tool will be part of RIT's state-
of-the-art clean room user facility and be available to research teams across
multiple disciplines and universities. The tool will be playing a central role
in RIT's growing multi-disciplinary PhD program in Microsystems Engineering,
allowing for a strong graduate training program around new material growth and
epitaxy and optical and electronic devices. A new course is being developed
around the MOVPE and related characterization equipment. Other activities
include educating personnel from local companies in microelectronic technologies
through short course programs, collaboration with RIT Middle College program to
introduce high-school students to PV technologies through cleanroom tours and
hands-on experiences, and outreach sessions to the general public at RIT's
annual Imagine RIT festival.