* 1337147
* XPS: CLCCA: Enhancing the Programmability of Heterogeneous Manycore Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Ricardo Bianchini, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2018
* USD 749,995.00

As computing devices are used to solve increasingly complex and diverse problems
with ever-increasing multidimensional data-sets, programmers are tasked with
writing high-performance and energy-efficient code. To run this code, processor
vendors are adopting heterogeneous systems, where conventional general-purpose
cores are integrated with accelerators like graphics processing units (GPUs),
cryptographic accelerators, database accelerators, and video encoders/decoders.
To ensure the widespread adoption of these systems, it is essential that their
programming models are effective and easy to use. Unfortunately, current
programming models for these systems are challenging, requiring the programmer
to explicitly allocate, manage, and marshal memory back and forth between cores
and accelerators. As a result, software is often error-prone and buggy, and
suffers overheads from data replication and movement. As future systems
incorporate increasing levels of heterogeneity, this problem will
worsen.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal develops unified address spaces for
cores and accelerators, which is a key part of an effective programming model. A
unified address space (in both virtual and physical addresses) increases system
programmability because: (1) programmers need not manually allocate and manage
their data movement between hundreds of heterogeneous compute units; (2) the
system automatically allocates, replicates, and migrates data among
heterogeneous components as execution shifts; (3) these systems support new
algorithms that require simultaneous core and accelerator access to common data
structures (e.g., producer-consumer programs where CPUs and GPUs communicate
through software task queues); (4) programs are now more portable across systems
with alternate memory hierarchies. This work studies mechanisms to support these
benefits (while maintaining high performance and low power) by developing novel
hardware (e.g., new memory controllers, Translation Lookaside Buffer
augmentations, shootdown mechanisms) and operating system (OS) support (e.g.,
new OS memory allocation mechanisms and support for page allocation,
replication, and migration on heterogeneous systems and memory).