* 1337380
* Student Travel Support for the 2013 International Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA-40)
* CSE,CCF
* 05/15/2013,04/30/2014
* Rajeev Balasubramonian, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Hong Jiang
* 04/30/2014
* USD 15,000.00

The International Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA) is a premier forum
for presenting, discussing&lt;br/&gt;and debating new and innovative
architectural ideas and techniques for advanced computing
and&lt;br/&gt;communication systems. This symposium brings together researchers
in fields related to processor architecture,&lt;br/&gt;compilers, chips, and
systems. This proposal aims to support this highly regarded conference
by&lt;br/&gt;obtaining travel support for students in order to defray the costs
of attending and participating in the ISCA&lt;br/&gt;conference in June, 2013 in
Tel Aviv, Israel. Priority will be given to US&lt;br/&gt;citizens and permanent
residents, students from under-represented groups, and students&lt;br/&gt;that
will be presenting their research at ISCA or its joint workshops. &lt;br/&gt;The
ISCA conference will be strengthened as a&lt;br/&gt;result of the greater
attendance that this travel support will enable. Students receiving
travel&lt;br/&gt;support will personally benefit from the opportunity to
interact with peers and experts, as well as establish&lt;br/&gt;connections that
will help their professional careers.&lt;br/&gt;More broadly, we expect
additional indirect impacts. First, we plan to widely advertise the
available&lt;br/&gt;support in order to attract women and under-represented
minority groups (through postings on computer&lt;br/&gt;architecture web-sites
and mailing lists). Second, by focusing on students, the grant will help foster
the&lt;br/&gt;mentoring of subsequent generations of computer architects.