* 1337859
* MRI: Acquisition of an integrated atomic force microscope/ Inverted optical microscope for interdisciplinary research at Cleveland State University
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Orhan Talu, Cleveland State University
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 08/31/2016
* USD 289,939.00

1337859&lt;br/&gt;Kothapalli&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed instrument will
support a broad range of cutting-edge and innovative research&lt;br/&gt;projects
spanning five disciplines (Biomedical, Chemical, Electrical, Physics and
Chemistry)&lt;br/&gt;at CSU. This integrated instrument is of great value to a
growing core of CSU faculty&lt;br/&gt;whose research portfolios encompass: novel
materials for biomedical, electronics and energy&lt;br/&gt;applications,
biosensors, thermo-responsive polymers, nano-scale systems, biomechanics
of&lt;br/&gt;soft materials, and live imaging of cellular/ sub-cellular features
under physiological conditions.&lt;br/&gt;The projects that will benefit from
extensive access to the proposed equipment include:&lt;br/&gt;(i) Structural and
mechanical properties of soft materials, (ii) Mechanotransduction
effects&lt;br/&gt;on stem cell differentiation, (iii) Characterization of
chemically-selective and biocompatible-chemistry&lt;br/&gt;for biomolecule,
biomaterial and living-cell modifications, (iv) Design, synthesis and
evaluation&lt;br/&gt;of cell-surface mimetic molecules for biomedical
applications, (v) Characterization of functional&lt;br/&gt;molecular building
blocks for responsive materials, (vi) Image analysis of primary
cilium&lt;br/&gt;in living cells, (vii) Characterization of hybrid strategies
for fabrication of nanostructured&lt;br/&gt;arrays, (viii) Characterization of
nano-textured metallic substrates for bone tissue engineering,&lt;br/&gt;(ix)
Investigation of nano-porous anodized alumina templates and membranes for
hydrogen storage,&lt;br/&gt;and (x) Improving the stability of immobilized
enzymes for bioelectronic applications.