* 1337207
* MRI:   Acquisition of a Closed Cycle Cryostat for Low Temperature Optical Microscopy Studies of Dichalcogenides and Topological Insulators at a Predominantly Undergraduate Inst
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2015
* Paul Shand, University of Northern Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 08/31/2015
* USD 105,401.00

1337207 &lt;br/&gt;He&lt;br/&gt;Technical abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This Major
Research Instrumentation award supports the University of Northern Iowa
(UNI)with the acquisition of a closed cycle optical microscopy cryostat to be
interfaced with a Horiba Labram HR Raman Microscope. The combined system will
enable variable temperature optical microscopy studies of materials such as
2-dimensional dichalcogenide systems and low dimensional topological insulators
(TIs). The instrument will enable studies of a range of current condensed matter
topics such as the interplay between charge-density-waves and superconductivity,
the physics of quantum confinement effects of charges and phonons in
nanostructures, studies of surface properties of low dimensional TIs, and the
search for optical signature of Dirac cones on the surface of TI nanostructures.
The instrument will also be integrated in undergraduate students research and it
will be incorporated in three undergraduate courses at UNI. The state-of-the-art
optical microscopy cryostat will significantly broaden the scope of research and
teaching at UNI. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This
Major Research Instrumentation award supports the acquisition of an efficient
refrigeration system for variable temperature optical microscopy studies of
diverse materials. The system will be combined with a commercial Raman
microscope at the Physics Department of the University of Northern Iowa (UNI).
The combined system (Raman microscope and refrigeration system) will enable
variable temperature optical microscopy studies of a variety of materials and
will enhance and broaden the scope of the research at UNI. The acquisition of an
optical microscopy refrigeration system will have a powerful impact on the
undergraduate students at UNI. This equipment will be used in three
undergraduate courses and will extend the reach of the instrument to
approximately forty more students per year at UNI. It will also stimulate
participation of greater numbers of students in research activities and provide
undergraduate students with hands-on experience in low temperature optical
experiments using world-class research instrumentation.