* 1337932
* MRI: Acquisition of a Field-Emission Scanning Electron Microscope to Catalyze Campus-Wide Research in Bio/Nano and Advanced Energy Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Tsung-Cheng Shen, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Culbertson
* 08/31/2016
* USD 529,387.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) program award provides funding for
acquisition of an advanced analytical field-emission scanning electron
microscope (SEM) to enhance the research, education, and training capabilities
at Utah State University (USU). The new equipment replaces an existing imaging
device at the institution as the primary research device, and provides higher
resolution for a variety of research applications as well as the ability for
remote use by researchers and students at campuses across the state. At present,
the only electron microscopy service at USU is a 22-year-old analog SEM with
limited imaging capabilities and resolution. The new microscope provides
advanced technical capabilities to USU's researchers that currently are not
available at the institution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The acquisition of the
microscope will provide a transformative improvement in the materials
characterization infrastructure at USU, increase the quality and productivity of
faculty research, and directly impact funded research in processing and
manufacturing of biomaterials, nanomaterials, and energy materials for a number
of researchers. Specifically, the enabled research includes characterizing
nanoparticles for antimicrobial applications and biofuel production,
bioplastics, and food microstructures; nanoscale-composition analysis for
nanotubes, nanowires, nanoporous materials, nuclear materials, and charging
effects in insulators; and microscale-composition analysis for geothermal and
earthquake studies, soil, and leaf morphology correlated to climate. Overall,
the equipment will be integrated into the USU Microscopy Core Facility that
serves the research needs of faculty from at least six departments in three
colleges of the university. The microscope also will be used extensively for
educational outreach and training at USU and will be integrated into a new
course on electron microscopy to help train students using the new microscope.
Approximately 60 graduate and undergraduate students are expected to utilize
this microscope in their research. Additionally, the microscope's remote
operations will allow the microscope to be used for classes and research at USU
branch campuses across the state of Utah. Additionally, K-12 students visiting
the USU campus will take advantage of the unique capabilities of the instruments
during visits to the university.