* 1337916
* MRI:   Acquisition of a multifunctional magnetometer for advanced magnetic characterization and research training
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Manfred Wuttig, Morgan State University
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 08/31/2017
* USD 300,625.00

DMR - 1337916 &lt;br/&gt;Lisfi&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;This Major Research Instrumentation award supports Morgan
State University with the acquisition of a multifunctional magnetometer for
research and education. The instrument includes all the potential measurements
typically offered by a vibrating sample magnetometer (VSM), a torque
magnetometer (TMM), and a magnetoresistance setup (MRS). The multifunctional
magnetometer will play a key role in investigating the magnetic properties of
ferromagnetic functional materials such as highly magnetostrictive alloys, low-
dimensional magnetic hetero-structures, magnetic shape memories, magneto-
electrics, and organic exciton multiferroics. Researchers will be able to
conduct a range of magnetic and transport measurement These measurements
together with other techniques at the PIs institutions will be crucial in
conducting cutting-edge research and advancing scientific knowledge in the field
of magnetic materials. Knowledge acquired will contribute to engineering new
advanced magnetics with superior performances over traditional materials, which
will benefit the industrial sector.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;This Major Research Instrumentation award will provide Morgan
State University with funds for purchasing a multifunctional magnetometer for
collaborative research and education. The instrument will be used to fulfill the
needs of advanced magnetic characterization of various types of functional
materials developed by the principal investigators (PIs) and their research
partners at the University of Maryland, as well as to provide research training
to students and faculty from their own institutions. This new instrument will
facilitate the establishment of new research partnerships between the PIs and
other scientists at other academic institutions and in industry. It will enhance
the research infrastructure at Morgan State University (MSU), and will provide
research opportunities to African-Americans, who are underrepresented in this
field of science. The project will increase the competitiveness of the minority
students in the area of magnetic materials at MSU. This will be done by
providing a high quality of education and research training to the students
involved in this program. This will have a significant impact on enhancing the
opportunities for African-American graduates in the job market.