* 1337908
* MRI: Acquisition of a Small Molecule Single Crystal X-ray Diffractometer for Research and Education Across Montana
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Edward Rosenberg, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 08/31/2016
* USD 265,000.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program that is co-
funded by the Chemistry Research Instrumentation and Facilities (CRIF) Program,
Professor Orion Berryman from the University of Montana and colleagues Tom
Livingstone, Robert Szilagyi, Edward Rosenberg and Charles Thompson will acquire
a single crystal X-ray diffractometer. The proposal is aimed at enhancing
research and education at all levels, especially in areas such as (a)
development of organocatalysts with halogen bonding; (b) solid-state structures
of luminescent ruthenium diimine complexes; (c) development of molecular
yardsticks to determine the spatial dimensions and key binding motifs of
glutamate transporter proteins; (d) asymmetric catalysis of Group 3 metals and
cationic cyclizations; (e) development of structure activity relationships for
isoxazole containing drug candidates; and (f) electronic and geometric
structures of metalloenzymatic and organometallic
catalysts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An X-ray diffractometer allows accurate and
precise measurements of the full three-dimensional structure of a molecule,
including bond distances and angles, and provides accurate information about the
spatial arrangement of a molecule relative to neighboring molecules. The studies
described here will impact a number of areas, including organic and inorganic
chemistry, materials chemistry and biochemistry. This instrument will be an
integral part of teaching as well as research and research training and will
contribute to educate students both at the University of Montana and Montana
State University including those from a Native American background as well as
high school students and those at a tribal college.