* 1337108
* Meeting Proposal: C. elegans and other nematodes, bridging the divide. Los  Angeles June 26-30th, 2013.
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2013,05/31/2014
* Susan Strome, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Liliana Jaso-Friedmann
* 05/31/2014
* USD 14,284.00

Nematodes (roundworms) are the most abundant multicellular animals on earth,
colonizing virtually every terrestrial, marine and freshwater habitat. While the
nematode laboratory model C. elegans is the focus of intense, technically
sophisticated research, much less is known about other nematodes, despite their
biological importance. Of particular significance are parasitic nematodes, which
comprise more than half of the estimated 28,000 nematode species; these
parasites have important effects on the biology of their plant and animal hosts,
threatening agricultural crops, and causing debilitating human diseases that
affect over a billion people worldwide. By promoting interactions and
collaborations between C. elegans researchers and investigators of parasitic
nematodes, this project will increase awareness among C. elegans scientists of
the issues and problems that parasitic nematode researchers face, and will pave
the way for application of the powerful molecular and cell techniques developed
in C. elegans research to investigations of parasitic nematodes. The planned
symposium at the International C. elegans Meeting (Los Angeles June 26-30th,
2013) will provide an exceptional opportunity to reach the majority of C.
elegans researchers. Six internationally recognized experts on plant, animal and
human parasitic nematodes will speak on the life history and unique biology of
parasitic species and on the outstanding issues in their field. In addition to
formal education of the C. elegans community, this session will provide time for
researchers in the two communities to interact more informally as well. The
symposium aims to stimulate C. elegans researchers to think about problems
facing the study and control of parasitic nematodes and to apply their expertise
toward solving these problems. This session will be particularly valuable for
undergraduate and graduate students and post-docs by exposing them to new
possible career paths. Funds will also be provided for under-represented
minority graduate students to attend the session.