* 1337138
* Collaborative Research:XPS:CLCCA: Cross-layer Thermal Reliability Management in 3D Integrated Heterogeneous Processor for Breaking the Power and Bandwidth Walls
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Byunghyun Jang, University of Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* tao li
* 08/31/2017
* USD 208,679.00

3D stacked integration of CPU, GPU and DRAM dies vertically interconnected by
TSVs (Through-Silicon Vias) is emerging as a key enabling technology for
parallel and scalable computing systems of tomorrow. Such 3D Heterogeneous
Processor (3DHP) is expected to deliver much higher bandwidth, lower latency and
power consumption to break the power and bandwidth walls. Despite such
significant benefits, 3DHP comes with new domain-specific challenges that have
never been fully explored and addressed. Significantly higher power density,
thinned substrate and low thermal conductivity of inter-layer dielectric
material all make thermal management a serious problem that threatens overall
reliability and performance of 3DHP. This project aims to address this thermal-
integrity issue of 3DHP through a holistic cross-layer approach. Three major
thermal integrity issues at respective target system layers including physical,
architecture and runtime layers and their correlations will be extensively
investigated by a team of three PIs with necessary background and expertise. The
proposed novel cross-layer approach includes: 1) Self-calibrated on-chip
temperature/stress co-sensor framework at physical layer, 2) Adaptive Error
Detection & Correction (EDAC) and DRAM refresh engine at architecture layer for
reliable storage and transfer of data among CPU, GPU and DRAM dies, and 3)
Dynamic Thermal Reliability Management (DTRM) framework for fine-grained control
of interaction between workloads and HW resources at runtime layer. The proposed
layered techniques will be tightly interwoven to bring out the most synergistic
results. The research in this project will result in a solid thermal-integrity
design and simulation framework for viable 3DHP-based parallel and scalable
computing systems.