* 1337218
* XPS: FP: Real-Time Scheduling of Parallel Tasks
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2019
* Christopher Gill, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 08/31/2019
* USD 765,950.00

Tasks which must complete by specific deadlines (known as real-time tasks)
appear in many systems where computers interact with humans or the physical
environment such as autonomous vehicles, traffic management, robotics,
industrial process management, video surveillance, radar tracking, and hybrid
structural testing. With a growing number of application domains where this kind
of interaction occurs, there is an increasing need for systems that can run
complex tasks within stringent timing constraints. In a separate, but related
trend, processor clock speeds have largely stagnated, and most modern computers
are parallel computers with multiple cores or processors on each platform. Both
to keep up with the demands of emerging embedded systems, and to exploit the
capacity of multicore computers effectively, real-time applications must harness
parallelism more effectively than has been possible to date.  This research will
enable these important applications by conducting both theoretical and empirical
research on how to implement and execute parallel real-time tasks efficiently.

This research intends to develop provably good algorithms for parallel real-time
tasks.  These algorithms must provide guarantees of both correctness and
performance. The research focuses on three specific directions: (1) Scheduling
foundations: Design and analysis of efficient scheduling algorithms for parallel
real time tasks that take the complex characteristics of modern parallel
platforms into consideration.  (2) Synchronization mechanisms: Design of
effective synchronization techniques in order to allow coordination and resource
sharing between different tasks as well as different threads of the same
parallel task.  (3) Concurrency platform: Implementation of a modular and
extensible concurrency platform for real-time parallel tasks that will be used
to develop, test and validate the scheduling and synchronization mechanisms
required to run these tasks.  This platform will be made available under a
maximally permissible open source license to practitioners who wish to
parallelize their real-time applications or to extend the platform itself to
validate their own scheduling solutions.