* 1337513
* MRI: Acquisition of a BioMark HD System for single-cell genomics research.
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* J. Aaron Cassill, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Sanford
* 08/31/2016
* USD 370,570.00

An award is made to The University of Texas at San Antonio (UTSA) to purchase
the BioMark HD/C1 System (Fluidigm), a multi-mode instrument for high-throughput
single-cell sample preparation, real-time PCR (qPCR), end-point PCR, and digital
PCR that enables gene expression analyses (including on single cells),
genotyping and absolute copy number determination. This instrument addresses a
major limitation of contemporary biological research by permitting molecular
experiments at the level of individual cells, which may differ within a
population. By permitting single-cell analyses, this instrument enables novel
experiments that would otherwise be essentially impossible to pursue. The
BioMark HD/C1 system combines high-throughput nanofluidics with quantitative PCR
to measure the expression of hundreds of genes or gene sequence variations in
hundreds of individual cells or samples in just a few hours. Investigators Brian
Hermann, Rena Bizios, J. Aaron Cassill, Garry Sunter and colleagues from
multiple departments (Biology, Chemistry, Biomedical Engineering) within two
colleges (Sciences, Engineering) at UTSA and around San Antonio will utilize
this unique instrument to investigate basic biological questions in broad topic
areas including germ cell biology, neurobiology, cellular biophysics, plant
virus host defense, plant herbivore defense, and insect olfaction. This
instrument will be established as a core resource for research and research
training at UTSA and the San Antonio area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Acquisition of
the BioMark HD/C1 System at UTSA through the Major Research Instrumentation
program will provide scientists and students at all levels (high-school,
undergraduate and graduate students) with access to a cutting-edge scientific
instrument for research and training. This instrumentation will enhance the
research environment at UTSA and provide opportunities for training students and
postdoctoral fellows to become productive researchers. Since UTSA is a
designated Hispanic-serving institution, this award will broaden participation
of underrepresented groups at all levels. Indeed, the BioMark HD/C1 system will
be utilized by students in several educational programs at UTSA that are
specifically designed to attract and retain students from underrepresented
groups to scientific research and promote their interest in pursuing research
careers. This instrument will provide trainees with relevant experience using
cutting edge technology, which will pique their interest in research and
maximize their marketability for careers in academic and industrial science.
Training in the use of the BioMark HD/C1 instrument will also be integrated with
existing teaching and outreach programs to promote use of high-tech
instrumentation in a manner that integrates training with real-world
experimentation and discovery.