* 1337529
* MRI: Acquisition of Equipment to Establish Mobile Testing Infrastructure for Bring Your Own Device Research and Education
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Yong Wang, Dakota State University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2017
* USD 168,076.00

Proposal #: 13-37529 PI(s): Wang, Yong Institution: Dakota State University
Title: MRI/Acq.: Equipment to Establish a Mobile Testing Infrastructure- Bring
Your Own Device for Research and Education Project Proposed: This project,
studying fundamental issues in Bringing Your Own Device (BYOD) security, aims to
identify better approaches to protect enterprise and campus networks. The
following objectives are pursued: - Creating tools to facilitate mobile
penetration testing, and - Developing a mobile early warning Intrusion Detection
System (IDS) for malware utilizing network performance metrics (mobile
penetration test and early warning IDS, - Developing secret sharing schemes to
protect and share custody of sensitive data on BYODs (algorithms), and -
Establishing secure zones using secret sharing schemes on BYODs (BYODLib). These
research objectives are expected to lead to corresponding opportunities for
education in cyber operations and cyber security. Moreover, two educational
objectives are also sought: To - Extend laboratory assignments/class projects to
support mobile security devices (extend lab assignments) and - Increase research
productivity and enhance education on mobile security for undergraduate students
selecting the mobile minor (strengthen research and education on mobile
devices). This project extends penetration to mobile devices. The emerging
mobile-penetration testing area enables identification of unknown
vulnerabilities in a mobile device. Notwithstanding the challenge, protecting
sensitive data on BYOD is essential to protect enterprise and campus networks. A
novel scheme based on secret data could be used to protect sensitive data as
well as offline data, as it is likely to allow network administrators to
disabled users? access even if the data is on BYOD. The BYOD library based on a
secret sharing scheme should enable mobile applications to establish secure
zones on mobile devices and protect sensitive data. Broader Impacts: The
instrumentation will be made available to faculty and students from other
institutions in the state. The project meets the priority of South Dakota?s
Relevant and Technology Plan focusing on information technology, cyber security,
and information assurance. The infrastructure should increase the research
productivity on mobile devices and enhance education on mobile security for both
undergraduate and graduate students. The institution is one of only four schools
in the nation with NSA recognition in Information Assurance Education (CAE-
IASE), Research (CAE-R), and Cyber Operations (CAE-CO). The instrumentation
should contribute to conduct research in BYOD security and provide new
opportunities for education on cyber security and operations in an EPSCoR state.