* 1337566
* MRI Consortium: Acquisition of Remote Observing Instrumentation for the Southeastern Association for Research in Astronomy Jacobus Kapteyn 1.0m Telescope
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2016
* Terry Oswalt, Texas A&M University-Commerce
* Standard Grant
* James Neff
* 07/31/2016
* USD 473,950.00

The wide fields-of-view and scheduling flexibility of 1.0-m class telescopes
make them excellent tools for monitoring periodically-variable and transient
objects, carrying out large area surveys, and pre- or post-observations for
large aperture or space-based telescopes. Operating costs are significantly
reduced for robotic networks compared with on-site observing stations, and
networks that cover a wide longitudinal baseline are essential for avoiding
diurnal and seasonal cycle count ambiguities in variable sources.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Matt Wood, Texas A&amp;M University-Commerce, intends
to augment the facilities operated by the Southeastern Association for Research
in Astronomy (SARA) telescope consortium, which already include the 0.9-m
reflector at Kitt Peak National Observatory and the 0.6-m telescope at Cerro
Tololo Inter-American Observatory, with the recently-acquired 1.0-m Jacobus
Kapteyn Telescope (JKT) at Roque de los Muchachos Observatory on La Palma,
Canary Islands, to form a 3-telescope robotic telescope network covering more
than 90 degrees of longitude. The new telescope will be outfitted with an
improved secondary mirror, upgraded telescope drives and encoders, a CCD
photometric camera, and the same dome control/weather monitoring software that
is used on the other SARA telescopes. The science to be enabled is well-suited
to the emerging field of time-domain astronomy: asteroids, cataclysmic variables
and other types of binary stars, active galactic nuclei, and gamma-ray burst
events, and includes topics that are already research foci for consortium
astronomers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The remote operation of the JKT is expected to
allow SARA to add a minimum of 4 new members to the 11-member consortium, and
will extend the philosophy of ensuring that member faculty and students have
access to versatile, capable observational facilities. These institutions, with
relatively small departments of astronomy and physics, are typically under-
represented in the national research arena, but are important instructional
forums for scientific research because they allow undergraduate and graduate
students to carry out their thesis and capstone projects using consortium
facilities. Being able to remotely observe at a facility 6 hours ahead of the
eastern seaboard will also improve SARA's ability to perform public outreach
events in the U.S. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funding for development and
construction of the prototype spectrograph is being provided by NSF's Division
of Astronomical Sciences through its participation in the Major Research
Instrumentation program.