* 1337856
* MRI: Development of an Ion-Beam-assisted Glancing Angle Deposition Tool (iGLAD) for 3D Nanostructure Thin Film Preparation with in-situ Ellipsometry control
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Tino Hofmann, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Culbertson
* 09/30/2017
* USD 411,501.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) grant will enable the creation of a
new tool - Ion-Beam-assisted Glancing Angle Deposition Tool (iGLAD) - for
preparation of highly-defined sculptured columnar thin films (SCTFs), an
emerging class of highly-ordered, nano-engineered materials with high surface
area. The iGLAD tool will feature ion beam sources in addition to traditional
evaporation sources, providing multiple growth modes. The ion sources will allow
for substrate cleaning and prepatterning without sample exposure to the ambient
environment prior to fabrication, thereby enhancing control of the ordered
arrangement of the nanomaterials. The iGLAD tool will feature a novel adaptive
optics design for in-situ real-time diagnostics to track substrate movements
throughout the fabrication process. This will allow, for the first time,
monitoring and control of the nanomaterial formation process by generalized
spectroscopic ellipsometry--providing valuable insights into nanomaterial
formation mechanisms and strategies for improving their structural, geometrical
and material properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The iGLAD tool will make a new
class of nanomaterials widely available and will enable unique research training
and experience for internal and external students and researchers. The
instrumentation will substantially advance research in nanomaterials fabrication
and control and understanding of structure-property relations and design of
novel nano-engineered optical materials. It will enable new biosensors and new
chromatography principles, new tissue engineering and gene delivery concepts,
new high-speed electronics, energy storage, and environmental sensing research.
This research will inspire new applications for highly-ordered 3D nanomaterials
with potentially transformative scientific and commercial impacts, which are
further enhanced by partnerships with national laboratories and private sector
firms.