* 1337711
* MRI: Acquisition of reactive ion etching and chemical vapor  deposition instrument for electronic and optical device  fabrication.
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2015
* Shannon Boettcher, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 08/31/2015
* USD 217,687.00

DMR-1337711 Wang

This award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program supports the
University of Oregon (UO) Eugene with the acquisition of an inductively-coupled
plasma reactive ion etching instrument. The instrument will be housed in the
semiconductor nanofabrication/characterization facility of the Center for
Advanced Materials Characterization in Oregon (CAMCOR) at the UO. The instrument
will greatly augment the nanofabrication capabilities at CAMCOR and will play an
enabling role in a broad range of research programs at the UO and Oregon State
University (OSU). The instrument will enable the fabrication of three-
dimensional semiconductor nanostructures and hybrid inorganic semiconductor
interfaces for solar energy and energy conversion applications, the fabrication
of diamond nanopillars and microdisks for applications in quantum information
processing, the development and understanding of the patterning chemistry of
inorganic solution-processed films, and the fabrication of metallodielectric
structured materials with unique nano-optical properties. The instrument will
also be used for the UO Master's internship program in semiconductor devices and
photovoltaics. As a part of CAMCOR, the instrument will directly enhance the
research and education of a large number of graduate and undergraduate students.

Non-technical abstract: The ability to controllably remove or add material from
a surface is important for producing three-dimensional structures with
nanometer-scale features. These features are critical for building and studying
a variety of advanced materials and devices that are relevant to advancing new
energy conversion and computing technologies. The Major Research Instrumentation
program provides funds to support the University of Oregon (UO) with the
acquisition of an inductively-coupled plasma reactive ion etching instrument.
The instrument will provide state-of-the-art capabilities in etching (removing)
and deposition (adding) of inorganic materials that are not currently available
to researchers at both Oregon State University and the UO. The instrument will
be housed in an open-access shared nanofabrication facility, the Center for
Advanced Materials Characterization in Oregon (CAMCOR), on the UO campus and
thus be professionally maintained and available for use by researchers in
academia and industry throughout the region. The UO Master's internship program
in semiconductor devices and photovoltaics will incorporate the use of the
instrument into its curriculum, so that students entering industry are trained
in this important technology.