* 1337812
* MRI: Acquisition of Elemental Stable Isotope Chemistry (ESIC) Mass Spectrometer
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2014
* Luis Cifuentes, Texas A&M University Corpus Christi
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 09/30/2014
* USD 419,259.00

The PIs request funding for an elemental stable isotope chemistry (ESIC) mass
spectrometer. This instrument will serve South Texas, a geographically, socio-
economically and educationally isolated region. The ESIC is a modern requirement
for ecosystem-level research and applied environmental assessment. In the fields
of biological, geological and environmental sciences IRMS provides advanced
scientific understanding of key earth cycles. In addition, it is a primary
assessment tool to determine anthropogenic influences on environmental health,
enabling development of effective strategies to manage ecosystems. The ESIC will
enhance environmental research and STEM education at six South Texas Hispanic
Serving Institutes (HSI) through the NSF-funded Research Coordination Network
(RCN) - Climate, Energy, Environment and Engagement in Semiarid
Regions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funding of
this proposal will dramatically increase access of cutting edge research tools
to underrepresented Hispanics, as use of the mass spec will be incorporated into
many classes. Training on the IRMS and stable isotope biogeochemistry will be
incorporated into coursework, bolstering the technical proficiency of the
impacted local student population and generally improving the research
infrastructure in South Texas. The instrument is expected to foster
collaborations and training opportunities with six other Hispanic-Serving
Institutions in South Texas. The instrument is also anticipated to improve
faculty and student recruitment at multiple Hispanic-serving institutions.