* 1337601
* MRI:Development of an autonomous four dimensional planktonic microbial environmental sampling and survey system: MiVEGAS
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2018
* Christopher Scholin, Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 12/31/2018
* USD 2,355,885.00

The PI's request funding to design, build, integrate, field test, and make
available a stable shared-use instrument called that Multiple Vehicle EcoGenomic
Automated Sampler (MiVEGAS), for a broad community of microbial oceanographers
across the United States. The MiVEGAS is a novel instrument comprised of an
integrated robot system that can automatically and adaptively survey, sample and
preserve different size classes of microbial plankton. Deployments can range
from a few days to over three weeks. The robot system can be launched from shore
unattended by ships. It can survey and sample to depths of 300 m, with an
operational range exceeding 1000 kilometers and an endurance of greater than 10
days. The MiVEGAS instrument has the potential to provide capabilities that no
other instrument available today, and will provide new ways to observe and
characterize diverse microbial plankton, enabling correlation of oceanographic
parameters with microbial diversity and activity at high spatial and temporal
resolution. The joint development effort is a collaboration between the Monterey
Bay Aquarium Research Institute (MBARI) and the Center for Microbial Ecology:
Research and Education (C-MORE), a multi-institutional NSF-sponsored Science and
Technology Center.

Broader Impacts:

With the proposed development there are many excellent opportunities for
training and development of students and technicians. The combined technology
has the potential to collect extremely useful data. The knowledge gained will be
fundamental to our understanding of productivity in the oceans and of climate
change; the proposal will foster interdisciplinary interactions among engineers,
machinists, oceanographers, molecular biologists, genomicists, and
microbiologists; and attention to minority and educational outreach is
appropriate. Both institutions have a strong background supporting education and
research and have existing mechanisms to engage students ranging from middle
school to graduate school including women and underrepresented groups, including
naïve islanders.