* 1337678
* MRI: Acquisition of a nanofluidic quantitative PCR/genotyping system to enhance faculty and undergraduate research.
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* John Wertz, Calvin University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2016
* USD 338,004.00

An award is made to Calvin College to acquire a multi-functional instrument
capable of precise, accurate and cost-effective detection and quantification of
single DNA molecules to identify and characterize biological function of
microorganisms living in complex communities and to link the identity of these
microorgansms together with their function. Linking microbial identity with
function is essential in order to understand how each microbe contributes to the
health of its host animal or to ecosystem services (such as water filtration)
for humans. The technology allows for rapid data collection of samples without
the need for time-consuming and difficult isolation of these microorganisms from
their respective communities. Specifically, this project will (i) determine gene
function of specific bacteria from water treatment biofiltration systems,
contributing knowledge of how pharmaceuticals impact microbial populations
critical to effective water treatment, (ii) be used for extensive bio-monitoring
and microbial source-tracking of local impaired watersheds, (iii) determine the
role of single-cell protists in oxygen consumption in the economically and
ecologically important termite gut, and (iv) characterize bacteria and bacteria
viruses to determine whether the viruses stabilize or disrupt essential
symbiotic bacterial communities in animal hosts.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts of this project include advancement of numerous collaborative
research projects between undergraduate students and faculty, enhancement of
undergraduate research in the classroom, and recruitment of underrepresented
groups and women to STEM disciplines, through participation in research.
Calvin's science programs are built on the principle that scientific concepts
are best learned through performing experimental science. For undergraduates,
this instrument will provide unprecedented access to a high-throughput DNA
technology, enriching student research activities and investigative skills in
introductory and upper-level courses as well as one-on-one with research mentors
from the biology and engineering departments. In addition, two multi-
institutional community partnerships will gain the ability to do large-scale
monitoring of bio-contaminants in local watersheds. Societal benefits of these
projects may lead to improvements of water treatment system designs, cleaner and
safer streams and lakes, and new insights into the symbiotic microbial
communities critical to animal and human health.