* 1337609
* MRI:   Development of a Deployable Tertiary Mirror for the Keck I Telescope
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Jerry Nelson, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* James Neff
* 08/31/2018
* USD 1,763,471.00

Time-domain observations will serve as the backbone for 21st century
astrophysics. Wide-field imaging at all wavelengths demonstrates that the
universe is highly dynamic, with variability on all time-scales. Of great
interest are exploding stars, black hole mergers, eclipsing planets,
gravitational microlensing events, and flaring sources, which stem from a
diverse set of astrophysical processes. Central to resolving the astrophysics of
these events is high-precision spectroscopy and imaging, ideally at critical
times and/or high cadence. Such observations demand the use of large-aperture
telescopes; but while a telescope may possess a suite of suitable
instrumentation, the scientific returns of time-domain astrophysics are only
available if those instruments can be flexibly and rapidly accessed on each
observing night. Indeed, the growing demands for precious follow-up time using
the world?s largest telescopes conflicts with the classical approach of
telescope allocation: one night, one instrument.

Dr. Jason Prochaska of the University of California, Santa Cruz seeks to remedy
this situation for the 10-m diameter optical/infrared Keck I telescope at the W.
M. Keck Observatory atop Mauna Kea by replacing the manually positioned tertiary
mirror with a remotely-articulated mirror capable of rapid (~2 minutes)
switchover among the instruments that reside on the Cass focus and either of the
two Nasmyth foci. When coupled with a planned change in telescope scheduling,
this technologically straightforward modification will not only enable prompt
response to astronomical events (e.g., supernova eruptions, gamma-ray bursts,
planetary impacts), but also more easily permit cadence observing, address
limited-access targets, and select the instrument and observing program which
make best use of a particular night?s weather conditions. These developments
will further enhance the capabilities of what is by virtually any measure one of
the most productive and significant facilities available to modern-day
astronomers, and allow it to continue to play a major role in understanding the
time-variable universe.

Funding for development and construction of the prototype spectrograph is being
provided by NSF's Division of Astronomical Sciences through its participation in
the Major Research Instrumentation program.