* 1337569
* ELT Collaborative Research:  Restructuring of terrestrial environments following the Permian-Triassic mass extinction
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2020
* Christian Sidor, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Dena Smith
* 08/31/2020
* USD 643,472.00

ELT COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: RESTRUCTURING OF TERRESTRIAL ENVIRONMENTS FOLLOWING
THE PERMIAN-TRIASSIC MASS EXTINCTION.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Christian Sidor,
University of Washington&lt;br/&gt;Peter Roopnarine, California
Academy&lt;br/&gt;Kenneth Angielczyk, Field Museum of Natural History, Chicago,
Illinois&lt;br/&gt;Sterling Nesbitt, Virginia Technological
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the broad-scale effects of climate
change in deep time (between 245 and 120 million years ago) and its associated
mass extinction, on terrestrial communities has been hindered by the lack of
high-quality regional or global-scale data, as nearly all studies have been
restricted to sequences in Russia or South Africa. This research will build on
six prior seasons of fieldwork in Tanzania and Zambia (together TZAM) to bring
new data to bear on this major linked event of environmental, climatic, and
biotic change. Our team will gather multidisciplinary data (sedimentological,
geochemical, vertebrate paleontological, paleobotanical, and geochronological)
during two proposed seasons of fieldwork. In the lab, we will use geographic
distribution and community food web models to address more general questions
about mass extinctions and their subsequent recoveries. For example, do mass
extinctions consistently cause certain types of community restructuring or do
their effects vary with environment and geography? Does the ecological
rebuilding of terrestrial communities proceed in a stereotyped way, regardless
of the exact identities of the species involved? Answering these types of
questions is an important step in the process of moving from documenting the
causes and effects of this extinction event, to using it as a source of
predictive information for dealing with modern biotic
crises.&lt;br/&gt;Vertebrate paleontology fascinates the public. Because of
their visibility, dissemination of our results to the general public will
primarily occur at the natural history museums involved in the project. In
collaboration with the exhibits departments at the Field Museum and Burke
Museum, we will create two exhibit installations focusing on Asilisaurus kongwe,
a small dinosaur relative from Tanzania that is an icon of our research project.
At the conclusion of the grant, the installations will be permanently
transferred to the National Museum of Tanzania (Dar es Salaam, Tanzania), and
the Livingstone Museum (Livingstone, Zambia) where they will introduce local
citizens to the rich paleontological heritage of their nations. We will also
develop a level of the FMNH's paleontology video game Game of Bones focusing on
Asilisaurus. The game level will be centered around discovering and excavating a
specimen of Asilisaurus, reconstructing its anatomy, and making inferences about
its paleobiology. The game level will be promoted on the main websites of the
Field Museum of Natural History (FMNH), University of Washington Burke Museum
(UWBM), and the California Academy of Science (CAS), the museums' social media
sites, and web pages targeting science enthusiasts (e.g., FMNH: Science@FMNH,
The Field Revealed; UWBM: BurkeBlog; CAS: Science Today and Science in Action).