* 1337582
* MRI: Acquisition of a portable photosynthesis system for plant ecophysiology research
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2015
* Dean Malvick, Augsburg University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Sanford
* 08/31/2015
* USD 122,684.00

An award is made to Augsburg College to purchase a Li-Cor LI-6400XTR portable
photosynthesis system to investigate the physiology of economically important
plants infected by fungi and also to study mathematical modeling of
ecophysiological processes. The portable photosynthesis system will support
interdisciplinary research in the plant biological sciences, mathematics, and
environmental sciences, and collaboration between a liberal arts college and a
large research institution. The LI-6400XTR will be used for a wide range of
research activities including: 1) The physiology and productivity of
economically important plants colonized by pathogens that do not cause symptoms
of disease; 2) The functional role of endophytes in plants; 3) The impact of
sublethal infections by soilborne pathogens of roots on plant productivity; and
4) The measurement of leaf-level physiological processes to parameterize
ecosystem models of carbon cycling. This research will largely focus on soybeans
as a model plant because it is economically important and grown throughout the
U.S.

The portable photosynthesis system will be used for faculty research and
undergraduate research in plant biology, environmental science, and mathematics.
Augsburg College is a primary undergraduate institution and dedicated to
providing training and research opportunities for undergraduate students.
Undergraduate students are introduced to research early in the curriculum, and
many students participate in faculty led research. The portable photosynthesis
system will generate data sets that are large and complex, resulting in research
students to be involved in extensive quantitative data analysis in biology and
mathematics. The instrument will also improve collaborative and
interdisciplinary research projects with faculty at the University of Minnesota.
Results from these collaborations will improve our understanding of plant-fungal
interactions, and will be applied to improving soybean yield and productivity.
New research findings will be published in peer reviewed journals and presented
at national scientific meetings