* 1337993
* MRI: Acquisition of an Additive Manufacturing Machine for 3D Metal Components for Research and Education
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2015
* Jack Beuth, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Culbertson
* 07/31/2015
* USD 546,000.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) grant provides funding for acquisition
of an additive manufacturing machine for direct fabrication of three-dimensional
(3D) metal components to facilitate integrated research and education. This
equipment performs the laser-based direct metal additive manufacturing process
(sometimes referred to as 3D printing), which uses a metal powder bed, and
selectively melts the powder to fabricate, layer-by-layer, three-dimensional
metal components from many different metals, including titanium alloys and
stainless steel. This enables the creation of complex components, including
those with features that are impossible to fabricate using alternative
techniques. The equipment will enable the realization of two research thrusts
aimed at (1) advancing additive manufacturing science and engineering, where the
proposed instrument will be used as a testbed for research and training on
additive manufacturing, and (2) enabling cutting-edge research in medical
devices, robotics, and tribology, where the equipment will be used to build
unique structures and devices for research projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
acquisition of this equipment will have a wide-ranging impact on science and
technology of advanced manufacturing by enhancing our understanding of additive
manufacturing and by enabling novel discoveries in other fields, such as medical
devices, robotics, aerospace and energy systems. The objective of this project
is to acquire a laser-based additive manufacturing machine for fabrication of
metal parts for research and education. Additive manufacturing processes for
fabricating 3D metal components are starting to revolutionize both manufacturing
and other science and engineering fields; the acquisition of this equipment will
accelerate current efforts. The equipment is also expected to bring new design
and manufacturing paradigms that future engineers must learn and practice. The
equipment offers important opportunities for the college curriculum. It is also
a promising platform for exciting K-12 students about manufacturing--the lack of
such interest is one of the most important challenges for the future of
manufacturing in the United States.