* 1337497
* MRI:   Acquisition of a High Resolution LC-MS/MS System for Research and Education
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Rachel Bowden, Board of Trustees of Illinois State University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 08/31/2016
* USD 399,981.00

With this award from the Chemistry Major Research Instrumentation Program,
Professor Christopher Mulligan from Illinois State University (ISU) and
colleagues Michael Byrns, T. Mitchell, Brian Brennan and Rachel Bowden will
acquire a high resolution liquid chromatograph-tandem mass spectrometer (LC-
MS/MS). The proposal is aimed at enhancing research and education at all levels,
especially in areas such as (a) embryonic regulation of the endocrine
environment via the sulfotransferase-sulfatase pathway in an oviparous
vertebrate; (b) detection of steroid hormones in treated sewage flowing through
a constructed wetland; (c) natural products inspired organic synthesis; (d)
peptidic and peptidomemetric therapeutics; (e) studies of the enzyme
phosphocholine cytidylyltransferase; (f) molecular mechanisms regulating
cytoskeleton organization in plant cells; (g) roles of microtubule-associated
proteins in plant cell expansion; and (h) biomimetic studies of gold-based
metallopharmaceuticals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mass Spectrometry (MS) is one of
the key analytical methods used to identify and characterize small quantities of
chemical species embedded in complex matrices. In a typical experiment, the
components flow into a mass spectrometer where they are ionized into the parent
ion and its fragment ions and their masses are measured. This highly sensitive
technique allows detection and determination of the structure of molecules in a
complex mixture. An instrument with tandem capability provides additional
structural identification power through further fragmentation of ions produced
in the spectrometer. Several project personnel have secondary interests in
chemical education research and, through on-site LC-MS/MS access, will develop
discovery-based laboratory curricula incorporating concepts in proteomics and
natural product-inspired organic synthesis. Extensive, hands-on experiences
provided to undergraduates from this acquisition will better prepare these
students for careers in science and further graduate studies. The ISU Department
of Chemistry also regularly participates and directs nationally-funded
undergraduate education initiatives. Examples of recent/current efforts include
the nationally-recognized American Chemical Society Project SEED (Summer
Experience for Economically Disadvantaged high school students) program, an NSF-
funded Undergraduate Research Center, which provided summer research experiences
for City Colleges of Chicago students with ISU Chemistry mentors, and faculty
participation in the ISU chapter of the NSF-sponsored Lewis Stokes Alliance for
Minority Participation (LSAMP) Program.