* 1337854
* MRI: Development of a Testbed for Side Channel Analysis and Security Evaluation (TeSCASE)
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2018
* Miriam Leeser, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 09/30/2018
* USD 524,000.00

Proposal #: 13-37854 PI(s): Fei, Yunsi; Kaeli, David R.; Leeser, Miriam E.
Institution: Northeastern University Title: MRI/Dev.: A Testbed for Side Channel
Analysis and Security Evaluation (TeSCASE) Project Proposed: This project,
developing a common free testbed, called TeSCASE, for side-channel analysis and
security evaluation of cryptosystems, targets research and development in
hardware security. The instrument under development, consisting of two platforms
for hardware and software, fulfills the following objectives: - Holistic
testbed: For side-channel leakage acquisition, TeSCASE provides both hardware
measurement setup on real systems and a set of tools and methodologies for
evaluating system specifications at different levels. (Most existing tools
target hardware and not the design.) - Comprehensive attack library: The
development includes various attacks (power analysis, timing-based, electro-
magnetic emanation, and fault analysis) to evaluate the vulnerability/resilience
of a target system. - General compatibility: TeSCASE includes measuring
interfaces for different devices and consequently can be adapted in diverse
application domains. - Open source: Facilitating research proliferation, the
instrument results will be made open to the public. Analyzing side-channel
information and exploiting it in side-channel attacks is expected to contribute
in the understanding of the design, implementation, and new countermeasures. The
work facilitates research on developing provable (side-channel analysis) SCA-
resilient cryptographic systems that could lead to discoveries and inventions in
multiple aspects of hardware security, fundamental side-channel analysis
modeling, effective countermeasures, leakage-resilient cryptography, and fields
products in security evaluation. This work develops an open holistic testbed for
analyzing a system?s side-channel leakage and hardware security. While the
testbed hardware platform services various side-channel leakage acquisitions,
the software platform controls the hardware interface, simulates designs at
different levels, estimates side-channel leakage, analyzes the leaked
information, and evaluates hardware security with multiple metrics. The side
channel analysis library provides a suite of known side-channel attacks and
countermeasures. Broader Impacts: This development project could lead to the
formulation of test metrics and evaluation standards. TeSCASE can be
incorporated into the design process opening opportunities for exploring
security countermeasures early in the design process. In addition to the
contribution in research, the instrument might aid the semiconductor business
and the government. On the educational side, a new graduate level course and an
undergraduate-level lab should raise awareness of the need for security in the
design and implementation of computing systems, consequently enabling the
training of students with adequate hardware security knowledge and skills.
TrustHub and cybersecurity competitions will help to disseminate the results.
TeSCASE will be evaluated with selected applications on realistic devices and
systems. Furthermore, the project seeks women and minority groups.