* 1337895
* MRI: Development of W2 - Multidirectional Offshore Wind-Wave Generation System
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2016
* Habib Dagher, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Culbertson
* 07/31/2016
* USD 983,997.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) grant will enable the University of
Maine (UMaine), along with partners Sandia National Laboratories, the National
Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL), and Maine Maritime Academy (MMA), to design,
develop and construct a unique multidirectional Wind-Wave generating system,
called W2. With a novel rotating open-jet wind tunnel positioned over a 30m long
x 9m wide x 5m deep wave basin, W2 will use a programmable directional wave
maker to simulate wave and wind environments typical of the Gulf of Maine, Gulf
of Mexico and elsewhere. The pivoted wind generator will produce hurricane-speed
winds, while allowing variation in wind direction from 0 -180 degrees relative
to the wave. The wind environment will replicate wind shear effects, as well as
turbine wake effects over water in the ocean, making possible new breakthrough
research on ocean-related processes and energy harvesting devices.

W2 will provide a research platform for developing novel offshore wind concepts
and software tools to optimize the performance of renewable energy devices and
design of offshore and coastal infrastructure. Undergraduate and graduate
students will use the facility for their capstone projects, internships and
research. The instrumentation will also enhance the research team's
participation in the NSF ADVANCE project and other university efforts to
increase the participation of underrepresented minority and Native American
students in doctoral STEM programs. The equipment will be used for K-12 outreach
activities and by other users including the offshore oil and gas industry, ocean
energy developers, coastal engineers, and oil spill management companies.