* 1337693
* MRI: Acquisition of a Multi-collector Inductively-coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometer for Research and Education in the Earth and Environmental Sciences
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Tom Johnson, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 08/31/2018
* USD 894,906.00

The principal investigators will purchase a new instrument (a mass spectrometer)
that they will use for two main purposes. They will perform chemical analyses on
cave deposits collected from caves in North America, South America, and Eurasia.
The analyses will provide information about the climate history at each of the
cave sites. The climate records will provide us with an idea of the extent of
natural climate change, how much, how rapid, how extensive geographically. They
will also help us to understand the causes of natural climate change. The
principal investigators will also use the new mass spectrometer to develop
capabilities for more sensitive and precise measurements of trace amounts of
uranium present naturally in seawater. These measurements will provide insight
into how rapidly the ocean circulates and information about the chemical cycles
of carbon and uranium in the ocean. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To the extent that
this project furthers our knowledge of the character of past climate change and
our understanding of the causes of climate change, it is of broad societal
value. This project will also stimulate the already extensive collaboration
among hundreds of scientists nationally and internationally with the University
of Minnesota group and contribute to the training of the next generation of
Earth scientists.