* 1337616
* MRI: Acquisition of Advanced Laser PIT Thermal Diffusivity Instrument for Advanced Research on  Hybrid Photovoltaic-Thermoelectric and Thermoelectric Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2014
* Mohammad Alim, Alabama A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Eyad Abed
* 08/31/2014
* USD 189,300.00

The objective of this program is to provide the measurements and analysis of
thermal conductivity of various material systems for a useful direction and a
new dimension in understanding material systems to be used for potential
applications in photovoltaic and thermoelectric systems. Students at all levels
(both undergraduate and graduate) will have access to this facility as the
facilities in the Clean Room. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit is to
make available this instrument for across the campus and other legitimate
research and training purposes to all institutions in the neighborhood. Although
primary thrust goes to the undergraduate program, the faculty members are highly
diversified to conduct advanced research to enhance multidisciplinary Master's
program in Materiel Engineering. Thus, the graduate students are involved in the
high quality research activities under the guidance of the faculty members. A
specific objective is to expand the numbers of students, particularly
undergraduate students, participating in research, and increase the numbers of
minority students continuing their education towards the Ph.D.
degree.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts are to advance research in
micro- and nano-fabrication, enhance educational opportunities and provide
hands-on training to both undergraduate and graduate students, and contribute to
the research and educational goals of the University. A very important result of
the acquisition of the instrument will impact the advancing careers of
traditionally underrepresented minorities that comprise the overwhelming
majority of the students at Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical University.