* 1337614
* MRI: Acquisition of an Electroencephalography (EEG) System for Integrated Cognitive, Perceptual, and Social Neuroscience Research at Colgate University
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Spencer Kelly, Colgate University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2016
* USD 199,307.00

With support from the Major Research Instrumentation Program, Dr. Bruce C Hansen
and his collaborators will purchase a state-of-the-art electroencephalography
(EEG) system from Electrical Geodesics Incorporated (GES 300 system) for shared
use by faculty and undergraduate students in Colgate University's Department of
Psychology and Neuroscience Program. The EEG technique itself involves placing
surface electrodes on the scalp of a human participant and recording electrical
signals generated by the brain in real-time, thereby allowing for a wide variety
of analyses focused on the temporal localization of different brain signals. The
system will enable this group to adopt an integrated model for understanding
human behavior by blending traditional psychological methodology with functional
neuroelectric activity in humans. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientists involved
in this proposal are all active researchers from a broad range of disciplines
including cognitive, perceptual, and social psychology. Five research projects
(each consisting of several studies) are proposed. Project 1 uses machine
learning for the classification of visual evoked potentials (VEPs) to
investigate the time course of the brain's recognition and categorization of
complex visual scenes in order to understand how such representations guide
actions in different environments. Project 2 examines how biases in perception
of novel social categories (e.g., multiracial groups), as well as individual
differences in opposition to equality, contribute to the perpetuation of group-
based social inequality (e.g., racial inequality). It will use event related
potentials (ERPs) to explore how social motivations (e.g., anti-egalitarianism)
and social contexts (e.g., economic progress for ethnic minorities) influence
the way people react to multiracial individuals. Project 3 proposes to combine
EEG frequency band power analyses with behavioral paradigms in order to
establish a more direct and conclusive indicator of whether encoding or
retrieval based memory processes determine the impact of changing task demands
on development of expertise. Project 4 investigates how social power evokes
self-deception and, as a consequence, enhances persuasive abilities.
Specifically, the project combines traditional behavioral measures with ERP
analysis to trace the timing of brain signals that selectively unleash changes
in awareness. In essence, it aims to elucidate how lying to others may begin
with lying to the self. Project 5 will utilize ERPs to explore whether embodied
language instruction (i.e., speech, gesture, facial expression, eye gaze, etc.)
is effective for inducing neural changes in second-language (L2) learning in two
different contexts: face-to-face versus online instruction. The project will
focus on components that reflect early perceptual and late semantic processes in
the learning of novel speech sounds and new words.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A shared
EEG system at Colgate will allow this group to directly engage their students in
laboratory techniques that unite psychology and neuroscience into one cohesive
field of study, thereby fostering non-traditional research connections that
should spur fresh insights and creative new areas of study. Such an approach
will no doubt yield students who are better prepared for graduate research labs
at an early stage (most undergraduates at other schools will not have this sort
of highly technical experience), thereby guaranteeing the rapid advancement of
the broader field of science. Lastly, the majority of psychology and
neuroscience concentrators at Colgate are female, and the enhanced training made
possible by a shared EEG system will therefore increase the competitive
representation of women pursuing advanced degrees in a STEM field.