* 1337120
* MRI: Acquisition of an Infrared Eye Tracker to Study the Emergence, Use, Loss and Reacquisition of Communication Skills
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Joanne Lasker, Emerson College
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2016
* USD 41,575.00

Using a Major Instrumentation award from the National Science Foundation, Dr.
Rhiannon Luyster and three co-investigators at Emerson College will purchase a
Remote Eye Tracking (RED) System from Sensomotoric Instruments. By using
infrared light, the RED system allows users to record eye movements and
fixations to images or videos; this technology has been used across a wide range
of disciplines to learn about what aspects of visual images attract a viewer's
attention.

The four collaborating investigators are faculty in the Department of
Communication Sciences and Disorders and plan to use this advanced technology to
study the emergence, use, loss and reacquisition of communication skills across
the lifespan. One study explores the role of visual attention to speaking faces
in early childhood language learning and language deficits. A second study
addresses how children visually scan the facial expressions of peers with and
without autism and how these visual scan patterns relate to the perception of
awkwardness in the social communication attempts of children with autism. A
final set of projects studies how adults with aphasia attend to verbal and non-
verbal communication channels when trying to understand messages and how
potential communication partners of adults with aphasia rely on verbal and non-
verbal channels to understand people with aphasia. Together, this program of
research has the potential to reveal new insights into the role of communication
across the lifespan, from young children to adults. The goal is to answer core
questions about the value of communicative cues, and how variations in the use
of communicative cues might be associated with deficits, or, conversely, support
healthy development.

This equipment will have broad benefits for faculty scholarship, student
learning and community engagement at Emerson College. First, in addition to the
four faculty associated with the present proposal, several faculty members
throughout the college have expressed an interest in incorporating eye-tracking
technology into their own work, covering topics from cross-cultural consumer
behavior to the role of media in journalism. Second, the equipment will be made
available to undergraduate and masters students from any college department,
many of which (Marketing, for instance) produce graduates who will encounter
eye-tracking technology in the professional world. Finally, the acquisition of
this equipment will strengthen current Emerson College outreach programs,
including an existing partnership with the Boston-area Science Club for Girls
(connecting college students in the sciences with elementary and middle-school
aged girls from underrepresented groups), the Boston Museum of Science, and the
Cambridge Science Festival, where our students present pieces on science and
science education to a large and diverse audience. Finally, the School of
Communication at Emerson recently began recording a series of podcasts to
showcase the research programs and innovations of its faculty. These podcasts
are aired in a variety of contexts, including on WERS - the Emerson-owned radio
station - thus disseminating information about Emerson's eye-tracking research,
recent findings and the value of science in our society.