* 1337097
* Suspension Rheology at Constant Pressure
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* John Brady, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 08/31/2016
* USD 300,000.00

1337097&lt;br/&gt;PI: Brady&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Colloidal suspensions are
widely used in industry, medicine and in natural environments, and encompass
systems as diverse as toothpaste, paints, the interior of a cell and sprayable
solar panels. Understanding the rheological properties of suspensions is
critical to their processing, dispensing, durability and performance. Most
studies of suspension rheology have been at fixed volume (or fixed volume
fraction). While this may be adequate for many applications, often suspension
flows are not at fixed volume but rather at fixed stress (or fixed pressure or
pressure drop). Is the flow behavior the same at fixed volume and fixed
pressure? If the volume fraction of suspended particles is low enough it should
be possible to covert one measurement into the other. But as the maximum flowing
fraction is approached, it is no longer clear that the two conditions will lead
to the same flow behavior. A simulation study of colloidal suspensions at fixed
pressure, allowing the system to dilate or contract and the volume fraction
fluctuate as necessary, is proposed. The Accelerated Stokesian dynamics
simulation methodology will be adapted to permit the simulation volume to change
and used to study the flow behavior of Brownian hard-sphere suspensions as the
strength of the shearing forces compared to thermal Brownian forces is varied
over a wide range. Complete microscale detail is available from simulation,
including particle distribution functions, order parameters, short- and long-
time particle displacements, etc., and will connect the observed macroscopic
behavior to the underlying particle dynamics. Particular attention will be
focused on the flow behavior as the maximum flowing fraction is approached and
the scaling of the flow properties near this
point.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding suspension rheology is an important
subject in its own right, but examining the flow behavior as the maximum flowing
fraction is approached may have important implications for glassy and jammed
systems. Colloidal dispersions at rest are known to form a glass at volume
fractions near 0.58, well below random close packing (0.64 for monodisperse
spheres). Experiment on both rapid granular flows and viscous non-Brownian
suspensions at fixed pressure and shear stress have shown very similar
behaviors: the ratio of shear to normal stress - the friction coefficient - is
the same in the two systems, as is the maximum flowing volume fraction, despite
the very different microscale physics - inertial dynamics versus viscous forces.
It is quite possible that Brownian colloidal dispersions will display a similar
behavior, which would then make an important link between jammed granular media
and colloidal glasses. If demonstrated, such a connection would transform our
understanding of glasses and jammed systems, and possibly provide a universal
understanding of jamming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will enable the
design, at the particle scale, of colloidal dispersions to meet the flow
requirements of specific applications in, for example, the paints and coatings
industry, thus reducing energy consumption and product waste. Contributing to
the understanding of glasses and glass-forming systems, and particular their
dynamic properties, would have broad impact across disciplines from fundamental
physics and chemistry to biology - the motion of proteins and protein complexes
in the crowded interior of a cell has strong similarities with the hindered and
heterogeneous motion in colloidal glasses. Finally, the graduate student
supported by this research will be well-trained in continuum and statistical
mechanics, colloidal physics and computational science, and will join the
scientific workforce of the nation.