* 1337173
* MRI: Development of a Scanning Probe Microscope for Resolving Fast Local Dynamics in Nanostructured Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* David Ginger, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 08/31/2016
* USD 599,964.00

Technical Description: This Major Research Instrumentation award supports
development of a scanning probe microscope capable of following dynamic local
changes in charge density, ionic motion, polarization, and molecular cooperative
phenomena with ~100 nanosecond temporal resolution. The instrument will allow
these transient phenomena to be measured following optical, electrical, or
thermal excitation while probing the system response with nanometer-scale
spatial resolution in a controlled atmosphere and at varying temperatures. The
instrument will offer capabilities including: (1) the ability to measure events
taking place on ~100 ns timescales by analysis of the dynamic cantilever motion
following a transient excitation; (2) the ability to excite the sample with
optical pulses synchronized to the cantilever motion and to detect the resulting
transient electrical, thermal, and dielectric relaxation processes with high
resolution using robust, commercial AFM tips, and; (3) the ability to perform
high-bandwidth non-contact frequency-modulation based dielectric measurements,
and compare them with contact mode dielectric spectroscopy over a wide frequency
range. By permitting these dynamic measurements to be performed at high
bandwidth and high spatial resolution, the instrument will allow for future
materials advances by directly connecting performance with specific structural
features, even in heterogeneous films as are often encountered in real
technological materials and applications.

*******

Non-Technical Description: The investigators at the University of Washington
will build, and commission a unique scanning probe microscope capable of
following dynamic local changes in electronic, ionic, and molecular properties.
The microscope will be able to capture changes happening faster than 100
billionths of a second in features smaller than 20 billionths of a meter (20,000
times smaller than a hair) in size. Once completed, the microscope will be made
available as part of an existing shared user facility, providing researchers
within and beyond the University of Washington with capabilities to study new
materials for applications that advance economically and environmentally
important technologies such as new solar photovoltaics for generating low cost
energy, Li-ion batteries for consumer electronics and transportation
applications, thermoelectric materials for waste heat recovery and thermal
management, novel ferroelectrics for use in flexible electronics and sensors,
and membranes for industrially and environmentally important separations. The
equipment will support the ongoing training and outreach efforts of the Advanced
Materials for Energy and Molecular Engineering and Sciences Institutes at the
University. The program will support training of student and postdoctoral
scholars in the construction and use of next generation of instrumentation, and
by encouraging ties with industry will not only provide them with educational
enrichment but also support future possibilities for commercialization and
widespread adoption of the developed instrumentation.