* 1337647
* MRI: Acquisition of a Fluorescence-Activated Cell Sorter for Multidisciplinary Research and Teaching at Central Michigan University
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Gary Dunbar, Central Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2017
* USD 415,199.00

An award is made to Central Michigan University to purchase a fluorescence-
activated cell sorter (FACS). A FACS instrument measures multiple physical
characteristics of single cells as they flow in a fluid stream one cell at a
time past a point of measurement. Thousands of cells per second are passed
through one or more laser beams and the light that is emitted or scattered from
the cell is detected. The system converts the detected light signals into
electronic signals that are processed by a computer software program. Cell
properties that can be measured include number, size, shape, and fluorescence
intensity. A FACS can also sort cells into different populations based on these
properties. The acquisition of a FACS will make a substantial improvement in the
ability of faculty at CMU to conduct leading-edge research. The FACS will be
used by at least 21 faculty from the Biology, Chemistry, and Psychology
Departments and the College of Medicine. The faculty users will use the FACS in
many diverse research projects ranging from assessing the microbial diversity of
the Great Lakes to producing stem cells for transplantation into brains of
animals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The acquisition of the FACS will also direct the
training of the next generation of scientists by providing access to state-of-
the-art equipment. It is estimated that 35 students/year will be trained to use
the FACS through faculty-directed research projects. In addition, several of the
faculty users serve as research mentors for undergraduate students participating
in programs that are designed to increase the diversity of students pursuing
careers in biological research. Many more students will be exposed to the FACS
through coursework. The PI and co-PIs will develop a short course on FACS
technologies available to faculty and students interested in utilizing the
instrument for research. In addition, there are several current 500-level
Biology and Neuroscience courses servicing both undergraduates and graduate
students in which laboratory exercises using flow cytometry and cell sorting
will be incorporated. The FACS will potentially benefit society through research
projects that assess and protect the environmental health of the Great Lakes,
further our knowledge of basic cellular processes, and understand brain
function.