* 1337414
* Measuring the benefits of museum experiences as preparation for future learning
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2015
* Daniel Schwartz, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 09/30/2015
* USD 250,000.00

This project researches what museum visitors learn from hands-on experiences.
Evaluating this kind of learning can help educators design more effective
informal learning experiences while also addressing questions concerning self-
selected and self-directed learning. Using the Preparation for Learning (PFL)
conceptual approach developed by Bransford, the project will address several
specific questions: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Are there alternatives to measuring
informal science learning to using administered tests or other methods that may
not be relevant to the actual types of learning that occurs in informal
settings? &lt;br/&gt;2. Can informal learning experiences prepare/increase
learning from subsequent experiences in the case of the proposed research,
learning from a science video? &lt;br/&gt;3. Do variations in hands-on
experiences (i.e., self-directed vs. guided) affect learning transfer?
&lt;br/&gt;4. Can informal science learning experiences help prepare some types
of students more effectively for formal learning (i.e., can informal learning
experiences help prepare students, who traditionally score lower on science
achievement, for classroom learning)? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
look at transfer of learning when students participate in hands-on activities on
specific topics, then watch a video with content information about the specific
topic they had experience with, concluding with a posttest assessing how much
content was learned about the topic with which the students had a hands-on
experience. The general hypothesis is that the hands-on experience (with no
specific content information presented) prepares students for learning more
about the topic. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;After an initial phase that develops and
refines the learning opportunity and the posttest, the Phase 2 proof of concept
experiment will be conducted where students will be assigned to two groups. Each
group will participate in one open-ended activity (circuits or wind) in the
Exploratorium's Tinkering Studio. A week after the visit, the students will
watch a video that contains information relevant to both topics. They will then
take a posttest that will assess how much was learned from the video. The
hypothesis is that each group will learn more from the video regarding the topic
they explored in the Tinkering Studio. The cross-over design was presented as a
stronger design than a main effects design because there would be no halo
effect. The Phase 3 study will examine whether one designed experience is better
than another contrasting self-directed maker station) versus a teacher-guided
hands-on station. A control group will also be included where students have no
experience in the Tinkering Studio. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of the
study will be published in scholarly journals, but the design and results will
also be widely disseminated to educators and researchers of learning in informal
settings.