* 1337454
* ELT COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Investigating the Biotic and Paleoclimatic Consequences of Dust in the Late Paleozoic
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2013,07/31/2015
* Linda Hinnov, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 07/31/2015
* USD 67,319.00

Collaborative Research:&lt;br/&gt;Investigating the Biotic and Paleoclimatic
Consequences of Dust in the Late
Paleozoic&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;by&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Gerilyn Soreghan,
University of Oklahoma, EAR-1338331&lt;br/&gt;Sarah Aciego, University of
Michigan, EAR-1337440&lt;br/&gt;Linda Hinnov, Johns Hopkins University,
EAR-1337454&lt;br/&gt;Nicholas Heavens, Hampton University,
EAR-1337463&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Overview&lt;br/&gt; Geologic data indicate that
the tropical atmosphere during the Permo-Pennsylvanian (300 Million years ago)
was dust-rich. In addition, algae predominated in late Paleozoic marine
ecosystems. These observations, combined with predictions from climate modeling,
prompt two over-arching hypotheses driving the proposed research: 1) the unusual
tropical dustiness reflects dust production by tropical upland glaciers, and 2)
atmospheric dustiness fertilized marine ecosystems. Dust forces the climate
system by affecting radiative forcing and atmospheric moisture, and by
influencing the biosphere, but these effects are poorly known. In this research,
PIs will collect data to constrain spatial (low-mid latitude) and temporal
(glacial-interglacial and longer) variations in atmospheric 'dustiness,' sources
of the dust, and influences between dust and ecosystem composition in order to
address their over-arching hypotheses, and clarify the relationships among
atmospheric dustiness, climate, and the
biosphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;This research will
reveal process links among dust, climate, and the biosphere within an icehouse,
at glacial-interglacial scales. Owing to the known importance but great
uncertainty of both the direct and indirect effects of dust on climate, results
will expand understanding of Earth-system behavior. Tropical glaciation at low
elevations implies much more widespread glaciation than currently accepted, and
--if verified-- would force the community to test this hypothesis with new
modeling approaches. The models to be used are identical to those used for
present and future climate, and thus improvements made through the proposed work
will inform modeling of Earth's climate in general. If the hypothesis that
atmospheric dustiness forced marine biotic systems toward nutrient-rich
conditions is confirmed, it implies a remarkably dusty Earth, and clarifies
Earth-system behavior to dust-sourced fertilization. These results are relevant
to growing discussions regarding geo-engineering schemes to control future
climate change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;Cross-
disciplinary training will occur via exchanges between geological and
geochemical labs, geologists and modelers, and in joint field excursions and
progress meetings. PhD students will mentor middle-school teachers through a
formal summer program. Undergraduates will conduct senior theses and present at
Undergraduate Research Day and national meetings. Both will interact with
middle- and high-school students through a formal course on STEM education. The
lead investigators will use components of the research to teach at university
levels, as well as in museum, and community outreach. Ties will be established
and strengthened among all participant institutions, which includes an
Historically Black University, as well as international partners. This research
will help ignite the research careers of three young investigators (2 with no
prior NSF support). Data will be archived and shared via publications, and web-
accessible tools.