* 1337742
* MRI: Acquisition of a Scanning Electron Microscope for Cross-Disciplinary Research, Education and Community Outreach
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2014
* John Mathis, Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 08/31/2014
* USD 365,197.00

1337742 Rollin

This Major Research Instrumentation Award supports Embry-Riddle Aeronautical
University with the acquisition of a Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) with
energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy and remote operational capability. The
instrument will support research in nanomaterials characterization, along with
development and characterization of emerging aerospace materials/structures that
further improve safety, performance, fuel economy, longevity, and affordability.
The SEM will have an impact on research and education at Embry-Riddle
Aeronautical University. The institution recently launched several initiatives
to upgrade its research programs at both the masters and PhD level, and the
undergraduate level. The SEM will be integrated in current courses in the
Colleges of Aviation, Engineering, and Arts and Sciences, and support new
research areas at the undergraduate and graduate levels both on and off campus.
It will also help attract and retain new research-oriented faculty to help
develop the new PhD programs in Aerospace Engineering and Engineering Physics.
The SEM will also be used in an existing outreach program to bring high-school
teachers to visit the University during summers and conduct research projects
with professors. Moreover, several local companies will also be using the SEM
for their own research and development. ****** This Major Research
Instrumentation Award supports Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University with the
acquisition of a Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) with energy-dispersive X-ray
spectroscopy and remote operational capability. The instrument will support
research in nanomaterials characterization, along with development and
characterization of emerging aerospace materials/structures that further improve
safety, performance, fuel economy, longevity, and affordability. The SEM will
have an impact on research and education at Embry-Riddle Aeronautical
University. The institution recently launched several initiatives to upgrade its
research programs at both the masters and PhD level, and the undergraduate
level. The SEM will be integrated in current courses in the Colleges of
Aviation, Engineering, and Arts and Sciences, and support new research areas at
the undergraduate and graduate levels both on and off campus. It will also help
attract and retain new research-oriented faculty to help develop the new PhD
programs in Aerospace Engineering and Engineering Physics. The SEM will also be
used in an existing outreach program to bring high-school teachers to visit the
University during summers and conduct research projects with professors.
Moreover, several local companies will also be using the SEM for their own
research and development.