* 1337080
* MRI: Acquisition of an Atmospheric Pressure Ionization Mass Spectrometer for Measurements of Trace Gases and Secondary Organic Aerosol Components in Air
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Michael Kleinman, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 08/31/2016
* USD 278,658.00

With this award from the Chemistry Major Research Instrumentation Program,
Professor Barbara Finlayson-Pitts from University of California Irvine and
colleagues Michael Kleinman, Sergey Nizkorodov, Donald Blake and Eric Saltzman
will acquire an atmospheric pressure QTrap mass spectrometer that is capable of
highly sensitive and specific measurements of both gases and particles. The
instrument is capable of carrying out tandem experiments involving molecular
analysis of secondary organic aerosols (SOA) using nano-desorption electrospray
ionization (nano-DESI), extractive electrospray ionization (EESI), atmospheric
solids analysis probe (ASAP) ionization and atmospheric pressure ionization
(API). The proposal is aimed at enhancing research and education at all levels,
especially in areas such as (a) determination of the products of isoprene
photooxidation and the effects of relative humidity on the aerosol composition;
(b) real-time measurements of the composition of SOA particles formed in complex
volatile organic compounds (VOCs)-nitrogen dioxide-ozone mixtures; (c)
elucidation of the efficiency of aerosol mass spectrometry (AMS) for
measurements of organic nitrates by comparison to Fourier Transform infrared
(FTIR) measurements; (d) measurement of VOCs in tobacco smoke; (e) measurement
of nitrogen-containing VOCs from isoprene photooxidation; (f) determination of
products of photochemical oxidations of aqueous phase acids and aldehydes; (g)
real-time measurement of gaseous precursors and products in an aerosol flow tube
during new particle formation and growth; (h) real-time measurement of gaseous
p-cymene from the reaction of alpha-pinene with ozone, OH, and nitrate; (i)
measurement of oxygen/carbon ratios of SOA and comparison to results from high-
resolution electrospray ionization mass spectrometry; (i) real-time measurements
of acetone and other oxygenated organic species during a cruise that is part of
a North Atlantic gas flux study as well as other research
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mass Spectrometry (MS) is one of the key
analytical methods used to identify and characterize small quantities of
chemical species embedded in complex matrices. In a typical experiment, the
components flow into a mass spectrometer where they are ionized into the parent
ion and its fragment ions and their masses are measured. This highly sensitive
technique allows detection and determination of the structure of molecules in a
complex mixture. An instrument with tandem capability provides additional
structural identification power through further fragmentation of ions produced
in the spectrometer. The instrumentation provided by this award will provide
faculty and students in several departments the opportunity to pursue research
projects using modern instrumentation not heretofore available at the
institution. The research will impact not only the field of Chemistry but also
provide important knowledge of atmospheric phenomena. The instrument will also
be used in several laboratory courses to train significant numbers of students
in the use of this important analytical technique.