* 1337554
* MRI:   Acquisition of a New Thermal Ionization Mass Spectrometer for High-Precision Isotope Chronology and Chemistry
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2014
* Justin Ries, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 07/31/2014
* USD 451,508.00

With assistance from this award, the Department of Geological Sciences at the
University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill (UNC-CH) will acquire a new thermal
ionization mass spectrometer to perform high-precision measurement of isotope
ratios. The instrument will be used for high precision age determination to
investigate the rates of geologic processes, and the analysis of isotopes as
tracers to address questions in plate tectonics, petrology, paleoclimatology,
environmental geology and archaeology. Specific research in the laboratories by
the PIs includes investigation into the rates of magma accumulation associated
with "supervolcanoes"; the connections between magmatism and economic gold,
silver and molybdenum mineralization; ancient climates as recorded in the
sediments of the US middle Atlantic coastal plain; and the carbon sequestration
potential of oceanic crustal rocks. Our research is integrated with many
geochronologic techniques and is playing a significant role in intercalibration
of techniques. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The lab will continue a strong history of
teaching graduate and undergraduate students from both UNC-CH and elsewhere. We
fully support external users (PIs and students, mostly supported by NSF) by
providing data, but more importantly, by training them in techniques for sample
preparation, data acquisition and analysis. The lab actively participates in the
NSF-funded Increasing Diversity and Enhancing Academia (IDEA) program by
sponsoring and training undergraduate students drawn from underrepresented
groups in the geosciences. The lab is a participant in the national EARTHTIME
initiative and regularly contributes data to national and international geologic
databases including NAVDAT and EarthChem.