* 1337615
* MRI:   Acquisition of an X-Ray Diffractometer for Undergraduate Education and Research in Materials Characterization
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2015
* Corneliu Rablau, Kettering University
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 08/31/2015
* USD 77,808.00

Technical Descrition: This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) grant will
support acquisition of a X-Ray diffraction system for undergraduate education
and research in materials characterization across multiple disciplines including
Physics, Chemistry, Chemical Engineering, Mechanical Engineering and Industrial
Engineering at Kettering University, Flint, Michigan The award will enhance
cross-disciplinary research and training at all levels, especially in areas such
as, a)investigation and characterization of La(1-x)SrxMnO3 and iron oxide
(Fe3O4) nanoparticles for biomedical applications, b) characterization of carbon
nanotubes (CNTs) synthesized by atmospheric plasma method, c) characterization
of polymer based composite materials incorporating CNTs, d) characterization of
atmospheric plasma deposited thin films, e) characterization of composite
materials for biogas separation membranes, and f) investigation and
characterization of ceramic materials for solid oxide fuel cells. The
investigators of this proposal mentor a number of undergraduate students in
their research efforts; the results of their investigation are usually published
in peer reviewed journals. These students also make presentations at the local,
regional, and national meetings. Thus, the instrument will help talented
students in their research exploration. In addition, more than twelve courses
across four departments will be benefited by the development of new laboratory
experiments and teaching aid that will use X-Ray diffraction instrument.

Non-technical Description: This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) grant will
support acquisition of a X-Ray diffraction (XRD)system for undergraduate
education and research in materials characterization across multiple disciplines
including Physics, Chemistry, Chemical Engineering, Mechanical Engineering and
Industrial Engineering at Kettering University, Flint, Michigan. The award will
play a major role in original contributions to research in the areas that are
identified as national grand challenges with broad societal impact in
technologies involving novel materials, renewable energy production and storage,
and nanotechnology for biomedical applications. It will also add an extra
dimension to the existing materials characterization techniques at Kettering,
which include an environmental scanning microscope, Raman spectrometer, and
photoluminescence instrument for characterizing materials. The X-Ray diffraction
system will facilitate stronger integration of the on-campus and off-campus co-
op-work mediated education into a holistic education model. In addition, the
system will help develop a stronger research and education liaison between
Kettering University and its industrial partners. The award will help with
recruitment and retention of students, including under-represented groups into
careers in science and engineering by using the XRD to spark interest through
nationally recognized outreach and recruitment programs at Kettering University.
The instrument will also be used for professional development for high school
and middle schools teachers.