* 1337887
* MRI:   Acquisition of a Thermal Ionization Mass Spectrometer to Support National Multi-User Access to High-Precision U-Th-Pb Geochronology
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2015
* James Crowley, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 08/31/2015
* USD 744,036.00

This award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program (MRI) provides funds
to acquire a Multi-Collector Thermal Ionization Mass Spectrometer (TIMS) for the
Isotope Geology Laboratory (IGL) of the Department of Geosciences, Boise State
University, as the next step in creating a national multi-user facility for
high-precision geochronology. The IGL is dedicated to the calibration of Earth
history and quantification of the rates of geological processes through the
application of high-precision U-Th-Pb geochronology and radiogenic isotope
tracers. Since its creation, the IGL has established itself as a critical node
in the isotope geochronological community through its efforts with the EARTHTIME
Initiative for the Calibration of Earth History. The requested instrument will
complement the existing TIMS and LA-ICPMS equipment in the Isotope Geology
Laboratory, and will be specifically tasked with expanding community access to
high-precision U-Th-Pb geochronology. The instrumentation will be configured
with the latest in ion-counting and high-ohmic Faraday amplifier technology, to
continue innovations in the precise and accurate analysis of very small amounts
of parent and daughter isotopes. Expansion of the analytical infrastructure of
the IGL will help to meet the burgeoning geochronology needs of the national
user community, for state-of-the-art applications including: high-precision,
high-accuracy U-Pb dating for chronostratigraphy, paleobiology and
paleoclimatology; tandem in situ (ion microprobe or LA-ICPMS) and chemical
abrasion TIMS analysis of detrital zircons for robust maximum age constraints;
coupling of in situ geochemical and isotopic analyses to high-precision analyses
of the same grains to explore silicic volcanic and plutonic igneous processes;
and the characterization and calibration of mineral standard materials for in
situ geochronology and geochemistry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Expanding the
instrumentation base of the Isotope Geology Laboratory is a sound investment
capitalizing on existing infrastructure, a larger laboratory in the newly
constructed Environmental Research Building, an exceptional personnel base of
technical support, and a working and successful cost recovery management plan.
Inreach to the scientific community will continue to center around student and
early-career scientist training and multi-disciplinary integration. The Isotope
Geology Laboratory will also continue to host a portfolio of in-person and web-
based education and outreach activities including research-based science lessons
to middle and high school students and community members via informal science
education center partners, and a series of web-based learning objects to teach
the science of geochronology and Earth history.