* 1337156
* MRI:   ACQUISITION OF A MODERN ELECTRON MICROPROBE
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2015
* John Valley, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 07/31/2015
* USD 960,312.00

The University of Wisconsin-Madison is acquiring a modern Electron Microprobe
(EMP) to replace a worn 21-year-old instrument. It is the only EMP in Wisconsin
and is heavily used by many NSF-funded researchers. No other technique matches
the versatility or accuracy for in situ chemical analysis of major to trace
elements at the micron-scale. It is non-destructive, permitting chemical data to
be correlated with other forms of analysis. A modern EMP will also have new
capabilities including enhanced imaging and a more intense LaB6 source that will
permit sub-micron analysis. The new capabilities and enhanced reliability of a
modern EMP are required by over 116 currently funded federal (74 NSF) grants,
valued at $18M in Geoscience (64 federal grants, 47 NSF), &gt;$30M in Materials
Science (30 federal grants, 14 NSF) and $19M (22 federal grants, 13 NSF) in
other departments (Chemistry, Physics, Limnology, Soils, Pharmacy). Projects
supported by NSF-EAR include many studies of deep-crustal processes:
petrogenesis of magmatic systems, causes of explosive volcanic eruptions,
conditions of granulite and of eclogite facies metamorphism, the genesis of
economic deposits of metals and fossil fuels, tectonics of major shear zones,
Hadean zircons, and meteoritics. Studies of near surface processes include:
astrobiology, paleoclimatology (biogenic carbonates and foraminifera,
speleothems), diagenesis and basin evolution, cementation in shallow fault
zones, and nano-minerals. In Materials Science, projects include synthesis of
new materials and advanced processing methods for materials for new electronic,
magnetic and optical devices, renewable energy materials/processes, and high
temperature structures. The capabilities of the UW-Madison EMP complement and
are essential to the operation of WiscSIMS, an NSF-supported National Facility
at UW-Madison for in situ analysis of stable isotope geochemistry.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability of the EMP Lab at UW-Madison to build on its
47-year record of education, service and research in the public interest will be
enhanced by acquisition of a modern electron microprobe. PI and Lab Director Dr.
John Fournelle has for over 20 years contributed to advancing the science of
electron microprobe analysis. The research that will be facilitated by a modern
EMP will address many problems of societal concern, including: paleoclimate,
development of natural resources (oil, gas, water, metals, strategic elements),
volcanic hazards, environmental remediation, and development of new materials
with desirable properties such as electronics, refractories, and ceramics.
Research conducted on our current instrument has resulted in &gt; 650
publications. Learning to use the electron microprobe and to evaluate data is a
key component to the educational development and maturing of students. Over the
past 20 years, more than 200 graduate students in Geoscience and other STEM
disciplines critical to our national economic competitiveness, including 66
women (49 in Geoscience) have used our EMP Lab for research. Geoscience faculty
from smaller Wisconsin colleges bring their undergraduates to the Madison lab
for their first experience running a microbeam analytical instrument.