* 1337522
* MRI: Development of a High Resolution UV-VIS Coherent Multidimensional Spectrometer
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Peter Chen, Spelman College
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 08/31/2017
* USD 644,800.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program, Professor
Peter Chen from Spelman College and his undergraduate student colleagues will
develop a high resolution UV-VIS coherent multidimensional spectrometer by
extensively upgrading an instrument that has been used to demonstrate high
resolution coherent 2D spectroscopy capable of obtaining new information in
complex molecular (electronic) spectra. This coherent multidimensional
spectrometer is unique because of its ability to analyze gas phase samples with
higher spectral resolution than traditional one-dimensional methods. Professor
Chen and his team will test the capabilities of the new instrument through
extensive collaboraiton with research groups at Emory University, MIT, the
Univeristy of Chicago, and Georgia Tech. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The methods and
instrumentation that is being developed by Professor Chen and his student
collaborators will be useful in identifying the underlying molecular physics
that makes some molecular spectra very difficult to understand. In addition, the
spectrometer may also find use in identifying the photochemcial processes taking
place in atmospherically important species. The undergraduates working with
Professor Chen will learn valuable skills with lasers, electronics, optical
detectors and the design of complex instruments, giving them an excellent
background for work in graduate school or the wider technological workforce.