* 1337069
* Development of a classroom observation format and protocol to assess student participation and interactivity in undergraduate STEM courses
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2016
* Mark Felton, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* John Cherniavsky
* 09/30/2016
* USD 249,283.00

In higher education, classroom observations are typically conducted to review
and evaluate an instructor's performance. There are two main problems with this
approach. First, different observers have their own ideas of what constitutes
"good teaching," and often rely on these personal standards in their judgments.
Thus, in principle, different observers will review the same class differently.
Worse, the evaluation provides suboptimal feedback to the observed instructors
because it is not typically based on evidence-based methods linked to positive
student outcomes.

The focus of this project is the testing of an evaluative observation tool that
is more object and informative than traditional methods. This work in progress
is known as the Student Participation Observation Tool (SPOT). It is being
designed as a computerized observing format and protocol that will allow an
observer to categorize classroom actions during an observation, resulting in
detailed time-stamped information about the progression of the class. SPOT is
being designed to capture data about the use of teaching practices that promote
positive student outcomes, in order to be useful to both evaluators and
instructors. As a design consideration, SPOT will be easy to use and therefore
will have potential for widespread adoption among faculty developers and others
who routinely conduct classroom observations. This exploratory project
integrates research and design components to 1) develop the observation tool
based on a series of design goals, and 2) evaluate the effectiveness of the tool
(how well it meets the design goals). The design objective is drawing on
education research and existing observation tools to develop a format and
protocol that allows collecting real-time data about student and teacher
behaviors that are linked to positive student learning outcomes.

The evaluation objective is to assess the usability and usefulness of the
observation format and protocol to provide valid and reliable data to
instructors and evaluators about classroom practices so that they may make
evidence-based decisions regarding STEM education. SPOT is being developed based
on a similar well-tested tool that categorizes classroom behaviors in real time.
The protocol is being developed based on a review of K-12 literature and
discipline-specific higher education research regarding instructor and student
classroom behaviors that result in positive student outcomes. Subsequent field-
testing of SPOT in a wide-range of courses at San Jose State University will be
undertaken to improve usability, and establish the validity and reliability of
the tool.