* 1337731
* MRI:   Acquisition of an Environmental Transmission Electron Microscope for Research and Education in Materials Chemistry
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Judith Yang, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 08/31/2016
* USD 1,155,034.00

1337731&lt;br/&gt;Yang&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;This Major
Research Instrumentation Award supports the acquisition of an environmental
transmission electron microscope (ETEM), a high-resolution electron microscope
with a simplified differential pumping system that permits gas introduction
directly into the column. As a conventional TEM the instrument will enhance the
current electron microscopy capabilities in teaching, user training and
research. The capability to visualize structural changes at the sub-nanoscale
level under operational environmental conditions will bring essential insights
to many materials issues, such as the effect of dopants and impurities on
processing and corrosion, defect (dislocation, grain boundaries and interface)
migrations, thermally induced phase transformations, heterogeneous catalyses,
nano-scale functional materials, and the environmental stability of materials in
general. The low accelerating voltage minimizes damage of oxide species and soft
materials, thereby providing the ability to visualize the dynamics of polymers,
tissue engineering, drug delivery, biomaterials and biomineralization. This will
be the first ETEM in the greater Western Pennsylvania area. It will be housed at
the University of Pittsburgh in the Swanson School of Engineering (SSoE) and
will be a part of the Nanofabrication and Characterization Facility (NFCF) in
the Peterson Institute of NanoScience and Engineering (PINSE). It will be linked
to the electron microscopy facility in the Structural Biology department, School
of Medicine. The NFCF is a user facility available to all national and
international researchers. The broad visibility and access to this instrument
will contribute to nano- and meso-scale science and technology, biology, energy
and sustainability research and to the training of post-docs, graduate students
and undergraduate students. This instrument will also be used in teaching
courses in Electron Microscopy, Nano-characterization, Thin Films, Biomaterials,
Nanomaterials and Nanotechnology. As a part of PINSE, it will contribute to the
education of high school students and under-represented groups, especially
African-American, as part of the NSF-Nanotechnology Undergraduate Education
(NUE) outreach program and Pitt Engineering Career Access Program (PECAP)
program, respectively. &lt;br/&gt;******&lt;br/&gt;This award from the Major
Instrumentation program will support the installation of the first Environmental
Transmission Electron Microscope (ETEM) in the greater Western Pennsylvania
area. The instrument will be housed at the University of Pittsburgh in the
Swanson School of Engineering (SSoE) as part of the Nanofabrication and
Characterization Facility (NFCF), a user facility available to all national and
international researchers. TEM is a powerful tool to visualize materials at the
nanoscale and below. ETEM enables unique insights on the dynamic
processing/structure/property relationships of nanomaterials with impact in a
broad spectrum of science and engineering areas, such as oxidation, corrosion,
catalysis, nano-processing, bio-mineralization, tissue engineering and drug
delivery. The broad visibility and access to this instrument will contribute to
nano- and meso-scale science and technology, biology, energy and sustainability
research and education of post-docs, graduate students and undergraduate
students. This instrumentation will also be used in teaching Electron
Microscopy, Nano-characterization, Thin Films, Biomaterials, Nanomaterials and
Nanotechnology courses. It will contribute to the education of high school
students and under-represented groups, especially African-American, as part of
the NSF-Nanotechnology Undergraduate Education outreach program and Pitt
Engineering Career Access Program, respectively.