* 1337227
* MRI: Acquisition of High Speed Video Imaging System for Electromagnetic Shockwave Control and Shockwave-Boundary Layer Interaction Research at AAMU
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2014
* Zhengtao Deng, Alabama A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 07/31/2014
* USD 157,950.00

1337227&lt;br/&gt;Deng&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this proposal is to
acquire a high-speed video imaging system for the Mach 4 supersonic wind tunnel
at Alabama A&amp;M University (AAMU). The imaging system will enable researchers
to conduct electromagnetic shockwave control and shockwave/boundary layer
interaction research, both require capturing the shockwave location and movement
near the area of extreme heat fluxes where the shockwave is typically
oscillating at 1kHz to 20 kHz frequency. The AAMU supersonic wind tunnel is a
state-of-the-art facility for shockwave experiments. This wind tunnel facility
can provide stable air at speed of Mach 4 for 20 seconds within 6x6x18 inch test
section. The existing instrumentation for the wind tunnel includes a sting
balance, an optical imaging Schlieren system and a computer controlled high
speed data acquisition system with 48 channels. However, this wind tunnel system
does not have any high speed imaging capability, which is critical to the
supersonic shockwave interaction research. The proposed project will acquire a
high-speed high-resolution digital video system, the Phantom V1210 camera, made
by Vision Research. It is the necessary instrument for the supersonic wind
tunnel facility. It will immediately enable the research in electromagnetic
control of shockwave and shockwave-boundary layer interaction using AAMU?s
Supersonic wind tunnel.