* 1337780
* MRI: Acquisition of Instrumentation for Investigations of Metal-Organic Marine Bioinorganic Chemistry
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2015
* Carl Lamborg, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 07/31/2015
* USD 198,866.00

The PIs request funding to acquire coupled liquid chromatography/mass
spectrometry instrumentation (LCMS) that will provide them with a unique
research capability in the fields of microbial biogeochemistry, trace metal
geochemistry, metallomics, and marine proteomics. The power of this approach
lies in the ability to determine speciation and structure of metal-organic,
metalloprotein, organometallic and organic nutrient compounds in the environment
which will be unique in ocean sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The system will
provide the capability to separate organic compounds, isolate from the marine
environment and culture samples, and pass this material to the inductively
coupled plasma mass spectrometer (ICP-MS) for elemental analysis. The ICP-MS
detectors are particularly well suited for determination of metals and some non-
metals (e.g., Fe, Zn, Co, Hg, P, As, Se, halogens). Very little is known about
the organically bound forms of metals and nutrients in the ocean, even though
trace metal organic complexes and organic nutrients play a critical role in
regulating the size and composition of marine microbial communities. Recent
studies suggest that organic species may be linked to marine greenhouse gas
production, and that climate driven changes in seawater chemistry feedback to
impact organic speciation. Similarly, there is great potential for discovery of
novel metalloproteins in the marine environment, which evolved under the unique
biogeochemical conditions of the oceans compared to terrestrial environments,
where most model organisms are from.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This instrumentation will support a wide variety of
projects at WHOI, visiting scientists, and external collaborators. These
instruments will provide necessary analytical power for expediting the study of
metal complexes in the ocean which will further the mechanistic understanding of
biogeochemical cycling. Graduate students in the WHOI-MIT Joint Program will be
trained to use the instrumentation either as part of the Marine Bioinorganic
Chemistry class or as students in one of the PIs' labs. In addition,
undergraduate students participating in the WHOI Minority Summer Student
Fellowship program will have the opportunity to participate in the proposed
research activities. The results of this research will increase our overall
understanding of biogeochemical cycling in the ocean.