* 1337840
* MRI: Acquisition of a Nanotopography Capability at the University of Washington Microfabrication Facility
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Karl Bohringer, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Eyad Abed
* 08/31/2016
* USD 1,030,000.00

The main objective of this proposal is to acquire an I-line stepper tool for
high-throughput lithography with 350 nm feature resolution bridging the gap
between electron-beam lithography and contact lithography. Nano-imprint and
photolithography are usually done in separate machines and this proposal is to
acquire an integrated machine that can do both simultaneously resulting in
superior alignment. Numerous exciting projects will benefit from the acquisition
of this equipment. Contact guidance studies using nanotopography, creating
nanorachets for microfluidics, nanoelectrodes for energy, plasmonics are all
high quality projects that will benefit from this acquisition. Overall, the
projects are interesting and potentially transformative. The projects are
cohesive and will rely on the stepper tool, it is well written and well
organized proposal in all aspects. The PIs have the required expertise for use
of this instrument in current and future research projects. The proposed tool
will have a broad impact in research and education. The combination of projects
including junior faculty with senior faculty is unique and well thought of. The
acquisition of this tool will benefit the academic researchers and overall users
for the UW NNIN node. The outreach efforts are broad and well described
including involvement of students from community colleges, high schools and
underrepresented minorities. The cleanroom facilities are already funded by
NNIN, hence having this tool in the facility not only will serve a larger group
of researchers, but also will be maintained well. More than100 academic users
and about 40 industrial users are expected to use the tool.