* 1337141
* MRI: Acquisition of a Portable SEM with EDS to Investigate Damages to Metallization Structure and its Interface with WBG Semiconductor in Harsh Environments.
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2015
* Aswini Pradhan, Elizabeth City State University
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 08/31/2015
* USD 237,423.00

DMR - 1337141 Adedeji

Technical This award from the Major Research Instrumentation program supports
Elizabeth City State University (ECSU) with the acquisition of Portable Scanning
Electron Microscope (SEM) with Energy Dispersive Spectroscopy (EDS) detector.
The instrument will be used to investigate the effects of high temperature and
high energy proton irradiation on Wide Band Gap (WBG) semiconductor surface
based device characteristics. This instrument will enable the researchers to
develop an advanced metallization scheme that minimizes surface deformation
because of the harsh environment. Wide band gap semiconductors are capable of
surviving in harsh environments because of their intrinsic properties. In
principle, WBG semiconductor based devices can operate in environments such as:
(a) inside or in close proximity to an automotive engine block (for efficient
fuel usage and reduced atmospheric pollution due to incomplete gas combustion);
(b) the control electronics for nuclear power plants; (c) the sensor electronics
for space exploration and more. The goal is to investigate and explore
conducting ternary refractory barrier layer to minimize damages to contact metal
and semiconductor surface in high temperatures (between 500 and 800 degree
centigrade) and high energy proton irradiations over a long exposure time. The
equipment will be the first electron microscope at ECSU. It will therefore serve
as a great educational tool for underrepresented and underserved STEM students.
It will also be an important outreach tool to K-12 science teachers and students
in the northeastern North Carolina region. ***** Non Technocal

This award from the Major Research Instrumentation program supports Elizabeth
City State University (ECSU) with the acquisition of Portable Scanning Electron
Microscope (SEM) with Energy Dispersive Spectroscopy (EDS) detector. The SEM and
EDS system will be used to investigate the effects of high temperature and high
energy proton irradiation on Wide Band Gap (WBG) semiconductor surface based
device characteristics. This instrument is essential to be able to understand
and develop a durable and robust metallization scheme for materials and devices
in harsh environmental conditions. Such condition exists in defense and weapons
systems and in automobile industries for in-situ monitoring of gas combustion
and control of environmental pollutant from incomplete gas combustion. Many
faculty members across disciplines from technology to biology will be using the
electron microscope for research and education. It is expected that more than 50
undergraduate students will make use of the equipment on a short-term basis per
year. About 5 undergraduate students and 3 graduate students will routinely use
the equipment for research per year. Teachers from the K-12 public schools in
the region will be trained and aided to use the equipment to educate and
motivate their students for a career in STEM disciplines. Samples will be viewed
with SEM to introduce students to sub-micron length scale, structures and
patterns that are not visible with common light microscope. SEM with EDS at ECSU
will enable increased intra-university and interdisciplinary research
collaboration between faculty members. It will also enable stronger
collaboration with the center for materials research at Norfolk State University
and the Applied Research Center at Newport News, Virginia where faculty may use
more expensive SEM/TEM for detailed studies.