* 1337740
* MRI Consortium: Acquisition of an Integrated System of Instruments for Multichannel Biopotential Recording of In-vitro and In-vivo Experiments
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2015
* Kyo Song, Norfolk State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2015
* USD 239,630.00

An award is made to the Norfolk State University (NSU) to build an integrative
research platform for neural recording and analysis and provide the resources
for students, faculty and associated collaborators for their research activities
from electronic and optical engineering, biology, computer science,
nanotechnology, immunology, and neuroscience fields. The addition of this system
to the existing research infrastructures will directly benefit and upgrade
investigator?s research programs at NSU, Eastern Virginia Medical School and Old
Dominion University, as well as the collaborative network capabilities in the
Hampton Roads area. Applying the multichannel biopotential recording system,
neural and cardiac potentials, and neurochemicals such as neurotransmitters can
be measured in-vivo and in-vitro, and analyzed by embedded software. The
instrument will be applied for the study of neural mechanisms underlying the
interactions under various behavioral, stimuli, and disease conditions. In
addition to the biopotential recording, the instrumentation will allow in-vivo
assessment of neural sensing devices to be developed by engineering research.
Furthermore, in-vivo and in-vitro real-time measurement and monitoring of
sensing signal can be applied for the development of novel therapeutic treatment
strategies of neurological disorders and degeneration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
outcomes of this synergetic research will be positively transferred to achieve
their STEM educational and outreach goals, especially focused for under-
represented minority (URM) students in the project?s leading institution, NSU,
one of the largest Historically Black Colleges and Universities in the U.S. This
project will specifically place a high priority on training of URM students in
Hampton Roads region and extend their efforts to URM students nationwide through
an aggressive set of research, training and outreach activities utilizing
current outreach programs on each campus. The outcomes of this project will be
incorporated in their Bioengineering Minor program curriculum. Furthermore, they
will also integrate this infrastructure with activity of the newly created
Hampton Roads Neuroscience Network.