* 1337722
* MRI: Development of Large-Scale Dense Scene Capture and Tracking Instrument
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Gabriel Sibley, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2018
* USD 500,000.00

Proposal #: 13-37899&lt;br/&gt;PI(s): Hahn, James K.&lt;br/&gt; Lee, Taeyoung;
Philbeck, John W.; Rickmond, Brian G.; Townsend, Gabe
Sibley&lt;br/&gt;Institution: George Washington University &lt;br/&gt;Title:
MRI/Dev.: Large-Scale Dense Scene Capture and Tracking
Instrument&lt;br/&gt;Project Proposed:&lt;br/&gt;This project, developing a
large-scale, dense 3D measurement instrument for capturing dynamic environments,
integrates devices such as range-and-color sensing devices like depth cameras
(RGB-D sensors) by designing and developing key technical methodologies to fuse
the data received from remote networked sensors. The instrument will
collectively cover a large space at a sampling resolution of at least 1cm with
submillimeter resolution in localized regions. These data are then fused into a
single underlying representation. The work involves developing a system that
possesses both large-scale and real-time dense capture capabilities.
Specifically, &lt;br/&gt;- Experimentally validating perception, planning and
control algorithms of agile mobile robots (particularly those that operate with
deformable objects) requires ground truth representation of those
environments.&lt;br/&gt;- Validating computational tools for tether dynamics and
control for flexible multibody systems requires the capture of their environment
in a large environment.&lt;br/&gt;- Study of human motion for biomechanics,
physical therapy, and exercise science applications requires accurate capture of
dynamically changing deformable human shapes in a large environment.&lt;br/&gt;-
Image-guided surgical procedures require capture of localized dense patient
anatomical surface registered in a larger surgical environment.&lt;br/&gt;-
Human visual perception and navigation require a dense model of the surrounding
environments that include object in motion, thus advancing the state of eye
movement analysis by enabling fast, automated and objective coding of object
analysis by enabling fast, automated, and objective coding of objects people see
as they move through the environment.&lt;br/&gt;- The study of foot deformations
enabled by dense shape capture during running and walking on real sediments will
shed light on the evolution of gait and human anatomy, and the biomechanics of
barefoot walking and running. &lt;br/&gt;Thus, facilitating new research, the
developed system enables rapid capture and construction of large dynamic high-
resolution virtual environments that duplicate specific real-world environments,
including deformable objects, with unprecedented density of detail.