* 1337356
* MRI: Development of an infrared scanning nanoscope for research and education in ultra-small and  ultra-fast properties of advanced materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* David Kleinfeld, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 08/31/2016
* USD 451,000.00

Technical abstract: This Major Research Instrumentation award supports a team of
investigators at the University of California San-Diego to develop a state of
the art infrared (IR) nano-spectrosopy system for ultra-fast (10's of fs)
spectroscopic pump-probe measurements in the setting of a near field nano-scope
enabling imaging at ultra-small length scales down to 5-10 nm. This one-of-a-
kind system is a hybrid of an amplified ultra-fast laser beamline and an atomic
force microscope. The IR beamline is based on a Ti:Sapphire amplifier driving an
optical parametric amplifier, difference frequency and optical rectification
unit. This versatile system enables intense pump pulses and highly stable probe
pulses over a broad frequency range from visible to far-IR frequencies. The
tunable repetition rate of the proposed Ti:S amplifier will allow the
investigators to optimize data acquisition conditions of near-field spectra and
images. The apparatus will allow a broad group of researchers to address some of
the problems at the forefront of contemporary physics, chemistry, materials
science and biological physics. These issues include among others: a
spectroscopic characterization of ultrafast electronic and plasmonic dynamics in
graphene, photo-induced phase transitions in correlated electronic systems,
phase separation and competition between many body effects in high-Tc
superconductors and dynamics of confined water and lipid bilayers. A common
aspect of these projects is that they all require ultra-fast pump-probe
measurements with nanoscale spatial resolution.
&lt;br/&gt;****&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical abstract: Infrared (IR) light
provides a universal means for probing the vibrational and electronic properties
of matter. Near-field IR optics enable spatial resolution beyond the so-called
diffraction limit, thus opening access to the world of the ultra-small (down to
~5-10 nm) and overcoming the limitations of commonly employed ultrafast
experiments using conventional diffraction-limited optics. This Major Research
Instrumentation award supports a multi-disciplinary team of researchers
comprised of a physicist, a chemist and a neuroscientist to develop a state-of-
the-art facility for IR nano-imaging and spectroscopy analysis of materials and
life science specimens from across the sciences. Once built and commissioned,
the nano-spectrometer will meet the research and pedagogical needs of the
sciences at the University of California San Diego and facilitate greater
exposure of advanced scientific instrumentation to faculty, students, partners
in industry and government laboratories. The commercialization of the
instrumentation will help to maintain US leadership in manufacturing state-of-
the-art tools for probing matter at the nanoscale.