* 1337567
* MRI:   Acquisition of SQUID Magnetometer for the Exploration of the Next Generation of Materials and the Study of Complex Spin Phenomena
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2015
* Stephen Wilson, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 08/31/2015
* USD 300,000.00

DMR-1337567&lt;br/&gt;Stephen&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award through the Major
Research Instrumentation (MRI) program at NSF supports the acquisition of a
state-of-the-art magnetometer for education, research training, and the
exploration of a host of novel materials. The magnetometer utilizes a
superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID) for magnetic flux detection
providing extremely high resolution and a critical characterization tool in the
study a broad array of magnetic phenomena in complex materials. Researchers ate
Boston College and numerous, regional, external users all engage in substantial
materials synthesis and discovery efforts that will, along with their
educational activities, tremendously benefit from the acquisition of the
magnetometer. In particular, the instrument will support the exploration of the
next generation of materials in fields ranging from complex oxides, to catalyst
development, to energy harvesting materials, to high temperature superconductors
---all of which hold the promise of pushing the frontiers of modern materials
discovery. Additionally, the instrument will support undergraduate involvement
in leading edge research as well as serve as a tool for stimulating interest in
science for underrepresented high school interns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SQUID
magnetometer acquired through this award will have an immediate impact in its
operation as a user facility to support both research and materials exploration
at Boston College and in regional research programs. Fostering this discovery
and development of novel materials has both near term and long-term societal
significance where advances in materials historically underlie a significant
fraction of technological advances. Additionally, the ability to operate this
instrument without the loss of liquid helium renders it a high-throughput, low-
cost, facility that stands to dramatically amplify its long-term regional
scientific output. The ease of access and low-cost operation of the instrument
will enable the training of the next generation of research scientists at
undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral levels and provide a critical resource
for the discovery of the next generation of functional materials.