* 1337065
* SusChEM: High Throughput Screening of Anti-fouling and Anti-bacterial Coating Films
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2018
* Richard Kaner, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 07/31/2018
* USD 389,999.00

CBET-1337065 Eric M.V. Hoek University of California, Los Angeles

The health issues surrounding the diminishing supply of global freshwater are
well known and new ecological, agricultural, and geopolitical implications are
now being recognized. It is even predicted that developed nations such as the
United States will be considered "water-stressed" by 2025. Currently, polymeric
membrane technology is the state-of-the-art method to produce clean, potable
water from unconventional sources such as seawater or wastewater. The feed water
is pumped through the highly selective plastic films and pollutants are
rejected: however, the membranes quickly foul due to accumulation of rejected
pollutants on the membrane surface and/or within membrane pores. A significant
amount of energy and water are lost to membrane cleaning with frequent permeate
backwashes and periodically cleaning with harsh chemicals that degrade membrane
polymers resulting in premature replacement. The aim of this project is to
develop fouling-resistant membranes to reduce increased energy demand and
operating costs associated with water treatment membranes by modifying the
surface of the membranes with compounds that repel or deactivate fouling
materials. Membrane surface modifications have been demonstrated in past, but
most have required exotic reaction conditions, long reaction times, and/or
expensive reagents that limited their commercial application. The project team
recently developed a novel surface modification chemistry that covalently
attaches anti-adhesion and anti-bacterial compounds to the surface of polymeric
membranes. The reaction is performed in water at room temperature and
atmospheric pressure while using inexpensive reagents and environmentally benign
processing conditions. Preliminary results demonstrate that commercial RO and UF
membranes are easily modified by a variety of compounds. The membranes retain
their basic separation performance characteristics, but have dramatically
altered surfaces. The result is that by altering modification chemistry and
conditions we can modulate bacterial adhesion to RO membranes. To determine
optimal anti-fouling compound properties, several compounds will be synthesized
and screened for anti-fouling behavior using High-Throughput Screening protocols
previously developed by the project team. The compounds will have varying
electrostatic charge, molecular weight, and anti-bacterial functionality.
Commercial membranes will be modified with the new surface chemistries and
evaluated for their resultant productivity, pollutant rejection, improved
fouling-resistance and ease of cleaning.

This project will develop new anti-fouling membranes materials for large-scale
water treatment. By modifying membrane surfaces with different properties,
optimal surface properties will be ascertained to help understand the mechanisms
that contribute to surface fouling and biofilm formation in aqueous
environments. The result of this project will provide an effective way to
produce anti-fouling membranes on a large scale to reduce energy demand and
operating costs associated with converting seawater or wastewater into clean,
usable water.