* 1337873
* MRI: HPLC/ESI-MS System for the Analysis of Strategic Chemical Species
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Craig Ogle, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 08/31/2016
* USD 266,955.00

With this award from the Chemistry Major Research Instrumentation Program that
is co-funded by the Chemistry Research Instrumentation and Facilities (CRIF)
Program, Professor Craig Ogle from University of North Carolina Charlotte and
colleagues Olya Keen, John Daniels, Jerry Troutman and Pinku Mukherjee will
acquire a high-pressure liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry
(HPLC/ESI-MS) system and associated equipment. The proposal is aimed at
enhancing research and education at all levels, especially in areas such as (a)
quantification of trace organic contaminants (TrOCs) in the environment; (b)
characterization of polysaccharide products of sugar polymer biosynthesis
systems and of isoprenoid-linked sugars produced in vivo; (c) elucidation and
characterization of defined protein-protein interactions governing oncogenic
signaling pathways; (d) elucidatation of the mechanisms associated with
imparting hydrophobicity on soils and industrial byproducts; (e) evaluation of
recreational water quality (in swimming pools, spray pads, and water parks); (f)
characterization of synthesized complexes of Ni(II), Al(III), and Si(IV) with
several dipyridophenazine ligands; (g) electrochemical breakdown of toxic
organic chemicals using low power alternating and direct currents (AC/DC); and
(h) characterization of porphyrin based dyads, polymers, and nanomaterials
synthesized by coupling mixed-substituent porphyrin compounds.

Mass Spectrometry (MS) is one of the key analytical methods used to identify and
characterize small quantities of chemical species embedded in complex matrices.
In a typical experiment, the components flow into a mass spectrometer where they
are ionized into the parent ion and its fragment ions and their masses are
measured. This highly sensitive technique allows detection and determination of
the structure of molecules in a complex mixture. An instrument with tandem
capability provides additional structural identification power through further
fragmentation of ions produced in the spectrometer. The instrumentation provided
by this award will provide faculty and students in several departments the
opportunity to pursue research projects using modern instrumentation not
heretofore available at the institution. Availability of the proposed
instrumentation will increase existing collaborations and foster new
partnerships that will expose undergraduate and graduate students to a more
diverse research environment than they would have otherwise experienced, thus
providing them a chance to better direct their scientific ambitions. It will
impact the broader community through the activities of the Energy Production and
Infrastructure Center (EPIC), which has a mandate to foster university-business
relationships, and the Regional Analytical Chemistry Laboratory (RACheL), which
carries out chemical analyses for over 150 client companies in the greater
Charlotte region and beyond.