* 1337127
* MRI: Development of a Radiation Tolerant Low-mass Silicon Tracker for the LHCb Upgrade
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Sheldon Stone, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* James Shank
* 08/31/2016
* USD 396,900.00

This is a MRI development award to the particle physics group at Syracuse
University to design and build the central core of the Upgrade Tracker (the UT)
for the LHCb Experiment, located at the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) at CERN,
Geneva, Switzerland. LHCb is currently the premier dedicated experiment for the
study of hadronic production of heavy quark systems containing charm and beauty
quarks. The UT is a silicon tracking detector, and the Syracuse group has key
expertise to develop and deliver this important instrumentation to the
experiment, including fundamental knowledge of the underlying physics, devices,
metrology, simulations, and implementation. The scientific focus of the Syracuse
group is directed toward the study of B decays, Charm decays, and study of CP
violation processes which are related to and potentially important for the
understanding of the matter-antimatter asymmetry observed in the universe. The
proposed UT will enable LHCb to study these very rare processes effectively and
to fully exploit the increased luminosity planned for LHC operations at
collision energies up to 14 TeV and collision intervals of 25 nsec. The broader
impacts of the program are significant for the training of young research
scientists in instrumentation development and will greatly enhance their
training and exposure to state of the art hardware and electronics systems.