* 1337676
* MRI: Acquisition of a small volume isothermal titration calorimeter
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2014
* Evgueni Kovriguine, Marquette University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2014
* USD 102,468.00

An award is made to Marquette University for the acquisition of a small volume
isothermal titration calorimeter (ITC) for the purpose of supporting research
and education in the departments of Biological Sciences and Chemistry. ITC
allows simultaneous measurements of multiple binding parameters in a single
experiment, allowing quantitative thermodynamic analyses of biomolecular
interactions in solution. A highly sensitive, small-volume instrument is
particularly amenable to research in the life sciences, where sample preparation
is time-consuming and expensive. This award will enhance research efforts aimed
at (a) characterizing binding interactions between proteins and small molecules
that will reveal new mechanistic details for metabolic and cell signaling
enzymes; (b) characterizing protein:protein, protein:nucleotide and
protein:lipid interactions in regulatory systems involved in maintaining
cellular homeostasis; (c) measuring detailed thermodynamic profiles of
biomolecular binding events in order to complement and enhance existing
spectroscopic methods. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will provide new
instrumentation to support biochemical and biophysical research programs at both
Marquette University and Concordia University, and will expand the biophysical
infrastructure available to the broader Milwaukee research community. The ITC
instrument will support educational initiatives at Marquette University through
its incorporation into existing advanced laboratory courses in biochemistry and
biophysics. It will also be accessible to students participating in
undergraduate research programs in both biology and chemistry. The ITC
instrument is easy to operate, allowing undergraduate students to gain first-
hand experience in obtaining and interpreting thermodynamic data that are
central to modern biochemistry and biophysics.