* 1337831
* MRI Consortium:  Development of A Large Plasma Device for Studies of Magnetic Reconnection and Related Phenomena
* MPS,PHY
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2019
* James Drake, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 09/30/2019
* USD 3,078,369.00

Magnetic reconnection, the topological rearrangement of magnetic field,
underlies a huge range of explosive and other plasma phenomena at all scales in
the universe. It is also ubiquitous in magnetized laboratory plasmas. Its
ubiquity, perhaps second to no other plasma phenomenon, is matched by the
scientific challenge of its understanding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
Magnetic Reconnection Device (MRD) will be a multi-user, multi-disciplinary,
multi-institutional instrument that will open up new physics regimes for
controlled experimental study of magnetic reconnection, regimes that are
otherwise unavailable in a controlled laboratory setting. MRD will allow access
to dimensionless physics parameters orders of magnitude beyond that presently
obtained in dedicated reconnection experiments, increasing the dimensionless
electrical conductivity by two orders of magnitude and the dimensionless size by
one order of magnitude. This introduces new physics, beyond the standard single-
reconnection-site models, that is believed to be active and crucial in nearly
all plasmas of interest (space, solar, astrophysical, fusion). The instrument
will allow study of the major open questions in reconnection physics: Why is
reconnection so fast? When do multiple reconnections occur and how do they
affect the reconnection rate? How does partial ionization affect reconnection?
How do 3D geometries alter reconnection? What causes the onset of reconnection?
How does reconnection accelerate particles to high energy?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Progress in these questions is impeded in other venues: in
space observations by the small number of in-situ measurements, in solar and
astrophysical observations by the limited spatial resolution of remote sensors,
in fusion lab plasmas by limited detector accessibility, and in dedicated
reconnection experiments by limitations in dimensionless physics parameters. MRD
avoids all these limitations, offering a new instrument designed to discover new
insights in reconnection physics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The interdisciplinarity
of this project lies in the marriage of expertise from the areas where is
magnetic reconnection is known to occur. That is in the areas spanning a wide
variety of spatial scales from astrophysics, to solar physics, to magnetospheric
physics, and down to laboratory plasma (fusion physics) scales. Undergraduate
plasma physics programs will also be enriched by the availability to do research
on the MRD at such institutions as Princeton University, and Swarthmore and
Wheaton colleges.