* 1337450
* MRI:   Acquisition of a Powder X-Ray Diffractometer for Research and Teaching in Earth and Environmental Sciences at Rutgers University in Newark
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Yuan Gao, Rutgers University Newark
* Standard Grant
* herbert wang
* 08/31/2016
* USD 109,465.00

1337450&lt;br/&gt;Elzinga&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Major Research
Instrumentation (MRI) Program grant supports acquisition of a powder x-ray
diffractometer (XRD) to support research and research education at Rutgers
University Newark. The XRD will support the research programs of six groups in
the Department of Earth &amp; Environmental Sciences (DEES) at Rutgers-Newark
(RN) and the Department of Environmental Sciences at Rutgers-New Brunswick.
Research will entail characterization of fine grained mineral phases in soils,
sediments, and aerosols for studies of: 1) autochthonous biomineralization
processes in soils and mineral transformations that regulate the release and
speciation of heavy metals (e.g., Arsenic, Uranium); 2) mineralogical controls
of eolian Fe transport to the world's oceans and its effect on primary
productivity; 3) controlled experiments of the electromagnetic signatures of
mixed mineral materials; 4) mineralogical process influence on methanogenesis in
high latitude peat soils; and 5) studies of soil mineral influence on forest
ecosystem carbon and nitrogen cycling. Students will be trained in methods of
XRD-based phase identification and crystallographic structure refinement and
will use the XRD for regional studies of urban impacted ecosystems and soils.
Rutgers-Newark has been consistently ranked over the last fifteen years as the
most ethnically diverse academic institution in the
U.S.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;***