* 1337638
* MRI: Acquisition of a Circular Dichroism Spectrometer
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Michael Nichols, University of Missouri-Saint Louis
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 08/31/2017
* USD 100,000.00

With this award from the Chemistry Major Research Instrumentation Program,
Professor Michael Nichols from University of Missouri Saint Louis will acquire a
temperature-controlled, stopped-flow circular dichroism (CD) spectropolarimeter
with absorbance and fluorescence capabilities and temperature control system as
well as a scanning emission monochromator. The proposal is aimed at enhancing
research and education at all levels, especially in areas such as (a) early
stages of protein folding and self-assembly; (b) protein self-assembly at the
air-water interface; (c) transferrin iron release, (d) structural aspects of
hormone sensitive lipase; (e) mutational studies of proteins involved in auxin
homeostasis; (f) studies of Puf proteins mutants; (g) DNA-ligand interactions;
(h) deoxyribozymes and DNA aptamers; (i) structural features of nucleic acid
complexes; (j) peptide-based synthetic ion channels; (k) carbohydrate anomeric
assignment, and (l) chirality-at-metal complexes.

A circular dichroism spectrophotometer will produce spectral data that provide
information on molecular structure and especially the conformations of bio-
molecules such as nucleic acids, proteins, and enzymes. The principle
measurement is based on differential absorption of left and right circularly
polarized light by optically active samples such as those in the double helix of
DNA. The stop-flow system allows rapid mixing of samples allowing the
acquisition of real time data for the study of chemical kinetics. In general, in
a stopped flow spectrometer the enzymatic reaction is initiated by opening of
valves followed by injection of the enzyme and substrate. The quantities mixed
are controlled by the action of the enzyme, substrate, and stop syringe
plungers. The instrument will provide research and laboratory training in
analytical techniques that allow measurement of physical properties of organic
and inorganic molecules to graduate and undergraduate students as well as
postdoctoral fellows. The CD spectrophotometer will be integrated into training
of students in Chemistry and Biochemistry for the study of intermolecular
interactions, geometric isomers and protein structure.