* 1337438
* MRI: Development of an Integrated Image-guided Thermal Therapy Platform
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2017
* Stefan Bossmann, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 07/31/2017
* USD 1,201,568.00

Bossmann&lt;br/&gt;1337438&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A team of five investigators
from three colleges of Kansas State University will develop a fully integrated
image-guided thermal therapy platform by designing a radio-frequency (RF-)
hyperthermia unit and integrating it into a 600MHz NMR Bruker AVANCE IIITM High
Performance Digital NMR Spectrometer. Stefan Bossmann (Chemistry) will serve as
coordinating PI of this endeavor. The proposed instrumentation will be the first
high field (14 T) system capable of imaging the physiological effects and
temperature distribution in small animals during RF-hyperthermia treatment. This
will permit targeting, monitoring and feedback-control of nanoparticle-enhanced
RF hyperthermia in cell-mediated therapies with unprecedented sensitivity. Due
to the technical similarities of NMR and Magnetic Resonance Imaging devices, the
resulting technology will eventually enable personalized hyperthermia treatment
for treating infectious diseases and cancers in animals and humans. The highly
interdisciplinary nature of the team of developers will facilitate rapid
technology transfer between the Colleges of Engineering, Arts and Sciences and
Veterinary Medicine. Although hyperthermia has great potential for the treatment
of numerous disorders, its full potential has not been explored because of
technical obstacles. A fully integrated image-guided thermal therapy platform
will provide atraightforward approach to the utilization of hyperthermia as
monotherapy and in synergy with other therapies, such as cytotherapy or
radiation therapy. The thermal therapy platform will be made available to the
research community through the participating colleges, the University of Kansas
Cancer Center (UKCC), the Terry C. Johnson Cancer Center at Kansas State, the
Nanotechnology Innovation Center of Kansas State (www.NICKS.edu), and the U.S.
Department of Homeland Security Center of Excellence for Emerging and Zoonotic
Animal Diseases (CEEZAD, http://www.ceezad.org/) at Kansas State. Collaboration
with The National Bio- and Agro-Defense Facility (NBAF) will begin as soon as it
is operational.