* 1337983
* MRI: Development of High-Throughput ad High-Resolution Three-Dimensional Tissue Scanner with Internet-Connected 3D Virtual Microscope for Large-Scale Automated Histology
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Jaerock Kwon, Kettering University
* Standard Grant
* Eyad Abed
* 08/31/2017
* USD 341,563.00

The objective of this program is to develop a high-throughput and high-
resolution 3D tissue scanner with an Internet-connected 3D virtual microscope
for large-scale automated histology. The instrument will digitize a wide variety
of organs and generate 3D data sets. A data processing pipeline will
automatically convert the raw data sets into aligned volumetric data sets
without human intervention. Therefore immediate access to the large-scale
histological data will be possible for a wide variety of research and research
training communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit is as
follows. Large-scale output data of the instrument will be easily acquired and
shared through the fast scanner, data processing pipelines, and web-based
visualization framework. In the past, investigation of biological organs were
limited to either gross system-level studies or highly detailed microscopic
analysis of small subsets of the organ. The new tissue scanner will digitally
restore tissue structure in 3D with a specialized visualization framework that
helps researchers to fully understand function of biological organs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts are three folds: (1) Obtaining
digitized high-resolution data for multi-scale investigation of biological
organs at a high acquisition rate will open up new areas of research in the
community. (2) For education infrastructure, microscopic atlases of whole
biological organs can serve as educational materials for students and educators
at all levels. (3) For dissemination, the project results will provide research
communities with a new 3D tissue scanner with a virtual microscope by which
researchers can obtain digitized 3D tissue data in sub-micron level resolution
from a tissue sample.