* 1337050
* Nature-inspired 1D-Oxide 1D-Chalcogenide Nanocomposites for Efficient Broad Spectrum Absorption and Photoelectrocatalysis
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2016
* Vaidyanathan Subramanian, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 07/31/2016
* USD 174,022.00

PI: Subramanian, Vaidyanathan Proposal Number: 1337050 Institution: University
of Nevada Reno Title: Nature-inspired 1D-Oxide 1D-Chalcogenide Nanocomposites
for Efficient Broad Spectrum Absorption and Photoelectrocatalysis

The PI seeks to test the hypothesis: A nature-inspired ?tree-like? architecture
consisting of 1D oxide nanotubes-1D chalcogenide nanowires will facilitate 1)
broad spectrum light absorption, 2) a significant improvement in photogenerated
charge separation, transport, and utilization, and 3) enhanced photocatalytic
processes. The key objectives of this 2-year activity is to i) test this
hypothesis using a TiO2 nanotube?CdS/PbS nanowire as a representative
photocatalyst and ii) use the content in a) 2 courses, b) a book, and c)
educating a minority student. An experimental approach to hypothesis validation
will be implemented. The methods will involve synthesis, characterization, and
testing the applicability of the photocatalysts in solar-related energy
conversion processes.

To test the hypothesis, a suite of complementary tools that provide further
insights into optical, electronic, photoelectrochemical, and photocatalytic
properties of the nanocomposites, will be employed. Preparing and testing
various TiO2/CdS nanocomposites by combining 0D oxide and 1D oxide separately
with 0D chalcogenide forming 0D/0D oxide-chalcogenide and 1D/0D oxide-
chalcogenide composites will ensure a systematic baseline comparison and
rigorous hypothesis testing. The examination of the structure- property
relationships will involve evaluation of a) the role of the physical dimensions
of the nanowire/nanotube towards facilitating broad spectrum absorption, b)
charge separation and transport using standard and specialized
(photo)electrochemical techniques, and c) improvement in the performance
efficiencies of 1D oxide-1D chalcogenide nanocomposites compared to the
performances of 0D equivalents. Further, experiments that provide insights into
the applicability of these nanocomposites in a lesser-known sustainable approach
- solar-driven waste-to-fuel production (H2 generation) - will be conducted. The
aforementioned strategy to seek a fundamental understanding of the 1D
nanocomposite properties, will address the principal challenges currently faced
in photocatalysis: maximize visible light absorption by the photocatalyst and
employ it for efficient and sustainable solar energy utilization.

This project will facilitate a transformative impact on basic as well as applied
science aspects of solar-driven energy generation. From a basic science
standpoint, it will help answer questions on whether grain boundary reduction
can help realize the formation of superhighways for charges to travel and
significantly reduce recombination rates to promote redox reactions. From an
applied science standpoint, improved charge separation can directly and
immediately benefit a multitude of solar-related applications including: i)
solar cells, ii) photocatalysis for fuel production, and iii) environmental
remediation. Allied technologies such as energy conversion (fuel cells) and
energy storage (batteries and capacitors) will benefit from i) being able to
template the synthesis strategies developed herein and ii) draw from the
insights on the role of physical dimensions on charge mobility and customize
experimental protocols based on these insights for further application-specific
improvements. The research efforts will be incorporate into the educational and
outreach efforts.