* 1337431
* Creating A Research Agenda for the Ecological Implications of Synthetic Biology
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2013,12/31/2014
* Kenneth Oye, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Susanne von Bodman
* 12/31/2014
* USD 223,916.00

The global market for a synthetic biology industry is predicted to grow to $10.8
billion by 2016, with the largest share of growth in the chemicals and energy
sectors. A preliminary inventory compiled by the Woodrow Wilson International
Center for Scholars indicates a broad array of products moving towards
commercialization over the next five years. Inevitably, some of the applications
necessitate the intentional release of synthetically engineered organisms into
the environment. There is a need to address the potential risk to the
environment and society from large-scale production scenarios using
synthetically modified organisms. This project takes advantage of an opportunity
to develop, fund, and execute an interdisciplinary research agenda that will
enable a broader understanding of the evolutionary and ecological implications
of synthetic biology.

Intellectual Merit: This project seeks to bring together the "upstream"
scientists that develop synthetic biology applications and the "downstream"
scientists who focus on risk assessment. Traditionally, these groups have
somewhat diverging perceptions of the technologies and the potential risk they
pose. A key aspect of this workshop is to explore funding models for synthetic
biology that incorporate direct input from evolutionary and environmental
biologists. The hope is that these interactions will lead to the development of
environmentally benign organisms capable of producing useful bio products.

Broader Impact: The expectation is that the project will first, build
productive, on-going collaborations between synthetic biology researchers and
evolutionary biologists, ecologists, and environmental scientists, to assess the
knowledge gaps and uncertainties related to the ecological impacts of synthetic
biology. Second, the project will create a research agenda for the ecological
implications of synthetic biology based on existing, near-, and long-term
applications of engineered organisms and achieve buy-in and support for the
research from key stakeholder groups. Ultimately, the proposed activities should
help ensure that synthetic biology investments achieve broad societal benefits
while mitigating potential environmental risks.