* 1337880
* MRI: Development of a high energy, ultrabroadband, ultrashort infrared laser source
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Eric Borguet, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 08/31/2017
* USD 575,002.00

With this award from the Chemistry Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program
that is co-funded by the Chemistry Research Instrumentation and Facilities
(CRIF) Program, Professor Eric Borguet from Temple University in collaboration
with his colleagues Hai-Lung Dai, Robert Stanley and Robert Levis will develop
an instrument capable of acting as a high energy, ultrabroadband source of
ultrashort infrared (IR) pulses at wavelengths beyond 2500 nm by pumping
nonlinear optical materials such as AgGaS2 and AgGaSe2. This new system will
produce attosecond pulses that will allow study of electron motions in atoms and
molecules in real time. This mid-infrared pulsed laser source will open a window
for exploration of materials, biomolecules and chemical reactions. The system
will build upon existing techniques including non-collinear optical parameter
amplification (NOPA). This new source will allow researchers to do new types of
nonlinear experiments such as mutidimensional IR spectroscopy and interface
sensitive vibrational sum frequency spectroscopy. Intense mid-IR photons will
extend the cut-off energy in high-harmonic generation (HHG) processes deeper
into the X-ray region. The proposal is aimed at enhancing research and education
at all levels, especially in areas such as (a) nonlinear optical spectroscopy of
interfaces; (b) multidimensional infrared spectroscopy; (c) sum frequency
generation vibrational spectroscopy of colloid interfaces; (d) ultrabroadband
infrared spectroscopy of photobiological processes; (e) filamentation with IR
pulses; (f) coherent control via vibrational excitation; and (g) long-wavelength
ultrashort pulse sources as a driver of high-harmonic
generation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The laser system to be developed will generate
electromagnetic radiation, light, in the infrared region of extremely short
duration, attoseconds. This is one quintillionth of a second. To put this into
perspective, an attosecond is to a second, what a second is to about 32 billion
years. This type of light can directly excite the vibrational motion of
molecules and the subsequent distribution of this energy into a material. This
technique advances ultrafast laser technology. As the field grows, the
significance of molecular phenomena on time scales of attoseconds and shorter is
being realized. Arguably, some of the most fundamental processes in chemistry
(e.g., bond breaking and formation, electron transfer, and others) occur on
these ultrafast time scales. This development effort will create a new
instrument with high versatility that will be used in the growing field of
ultrafast spectroscopy. The instrument is part of a program to develop a strong
ultrafast spectroscopic capability to stimulate a number of research programs as
well as to provide a base for collaborations with colleagues. These unique
attributes indicate that the new instrument will have broad applicability across
many fields. During development, construction, testing and commissioning of the
instrument many students will participate. This will provide a rich training
experience in the growing field of ultrafast methodology while allowing study of
unstable reaction products or excited states of molecules, and at the same time
determining their structure while combining spectroscopy (giving structural
information) and dynamics (revealing details of the reactive events).