* 1337374
* MRI: Acquisition of an X-ray/Ultraviolet Photoelectron Spectrometer (XPS/UPS)
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2015
* Jeffrey Catalano, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 08/31/2015
* USD 521,043.00

1337374&lt;br/&gt;Fortner&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal requests funding
for the acquisition of a X-ray and ultraviolet photoelectron spectrometer
(XPS/UPS) for Washington University in St. Louis. The greater St. Louis
metropolitan region does not have an XPS/UPS instrument within a 100 mile radius
and this proposal therefore fills a critical gap in the advanced analytical
needs of the region. The instrument will be housed, supported and staffed in the
materials characterization area of the newly formed Institute of Materials
Science and Engineering (IMSE) at Washington University. The system
configuration requested is designed to facilitate a wide spectrum of research,
supporting XPS/UPS needs for five regional universities and three multinational
corporations in eastern Missouri and southern Illinois. The VersaProbe II will
come equipped with an Al K&amp;#56256;&amp;#56388; x-ray source to help
determine chemical states of surfaces a few nanometers deep. He I and II
ultraviolet sources will provide information on the valence band of materials.
The system will also be equipped with mapping and imaging capabilities in the XY
direction and sputter capabilities which will afford depth analysis in the Z
direction. A separate glove box with a portable transfer chamber will allow air
or O2 sensitive samples to be prepared and delivered to the load lock of the
XPS/UPS system without risking oxidation or degradation.