* 1337000
* Fast simulations of turbulent flows based on spatiotemporal statistical information
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Prakash Vedula, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* William Olbricht
* 08/31/2016
* USD 330,000.00

1337000 &lt;br/&gt;Vedula&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project
is to significantly enhance the speed, accuracy, and spatiotemporal prediction
capabilities of large eddy simulations of turbulent flows using a new modeling
framework. Such enhancements in prediction of large-scale eddy interactions
across multiple points in space at multiple time instances are of importance in
several applications including (i) statistical prediction of the path of a
destructive tornado and (ii) prediction and control of jet-noise intensities at
various locations away from the source. While the development of such models for
turbulent flows requires a fundamental understanding of the statistical nature
of spatiotemporal interactions in turbulence, sufficient knowledge in this
context (e.g., regarding multi-point space-time correlations at high Reynolds
numbers) is currently lacking. To address this knowledge gap for isotropic and
wall-bounded turbulent flows and to develop the proposed framework based on
space-time structure, the PIs will focus on achieving the following objectives:
(1) conduct a comprehensive study of statistical properties of spatiotemporal
fluctuations in (1D) Burgers turbulence, (3D) isotropic turbulence and turbulent
channel flow configurations at high Reynolds numbers using traditional and novel
computational approaches, (2) develop new, optimal turbulence models for Burgers
and isotropic turbulence with highly improved prediction capabilities, based on
space-time structure of turbulence, and (3) generalize the proposed framework
for turbulent channel flows. The proposed framework would significantly advance
the state of the art in turbulence modeling by addressing a major drawback of
existing models arising from their inability to accurately capture the large-
scale spatiotemporal structure of turbulent flows. The hypothesis is that the
speed and accuracy of large eddy simulations can be significantly improved if
the relevant subgrid-scale stress models are constructed based on information
that is consistent with the underlying spatiotemporal statistics of the
turbulent flow. In accordance with this hypothesis, the effects of unresolved
spatial and temporal scales on the resolved scales are carefully considered in
the filtered (or coarse-grained) governing equations via new subgrid scale
models, based on the optimal prediction formalism, principles of error
minimization, stochastic estimation, and relevant information on spatiotemporal
correlations. The resulting subgrid scale models will not only attempt to
preserve the spatiotemporal structure of the turbulent flow but will also enable
faster simulations of turbulent flows by allowing for larger time steps in
numerical simulations due to inclusion of coarse-grained temporal information
contained in the space-time correlations. The proposed framework appears to be
promising for fast and reliable turbulent flow simulations, as preliminary
studies by the PIs demonstrated that the method was successful when applied to a
broad range of other canonical nonlinear dynamical systems. Through the proposed
test problems and objectives, the PIs also plan to demonstrate the utility of
the proposed framework for turbulent flows and gain insights for applications
for more complex flows. In terms of the broader impacts, this project is not
only expected to make important contributions to the fundamental understanding
of turbulence, but is also expected to have an impact on fast and reliable
turbulence simulations in various scientific and engineering applications and
product innovations relevant to jet noise acoustics, fluid-structure
interaction, turbulence control, gas turbines, pollutant dispersion, and weather
phenomena. In order to disseminate knowledge about the underlying basic concepts
and research results to students from different disciplines, the PIs plan to
offer a new graduate level multi-disciplinary course on turbulence simulation
and reduced order modeling, with lecture notes to be made available to the
general public through a website. For further impact, the PIs also propose to
organize a minisymposium on recent advances in turbulence modeling at the US
National Congress on Computational Mechanics to communicate the framework and
results to other researchers in the field. This project will support the
training of researchers including Ph.D. and undergraduate students, who will be
actively recruited from underrepresented groups through Diversity Enrichment
Programs at U. Oklahoma.