* 1337943
* MRI: Acquisition of a High-Performance Computing System for Research, Education, and Training
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Burt Tilley, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2017
* USD 363,579.00

This award will be used to acquire a high-performance computing (HPC) system for
Worcester Polytechnic Institute. The targeted system consists of 64 16-core
central processing units (CPUs) augmented with 64 high-performance general-
purpose graphical processing units (GPUs). Together, the CPUs will provide 1024
compute cores, and the GPUs will offer an aggregate peak performance rating of
42.56 trillion floating-point operations per second beyond that of the CPUs. In
both computing power and architectural sophistication, this system is far beyond
anything currently available at WPI. It will provide a much-needed shared
resource for major large-scale computing tasks, an advanced-architecture
platform for algorithm development and experimentation, and a highly effective
vehicle for education and training in HPC and applications. It will be used
immediately to advance research projects of the investigators that address
three-dimensional modeling of sperm motility and interactions, parallel solution
methods for coupled multi-block multi-physics systems, computational modeling of
human ventricles and plaques, computational validation of effective multi-scale
models of thermal behavior in liquid-cooled electronics, and acceleration
methods for fixed-point iterations. Additionally, it will be made available from
the start for use by other faculty, students, and postdoctoral researchers
across the university.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This high-performance computing
(HPC) system will enable new levels of research for the investigators and
others, provide new opportunities for education and training at Worcester
Polytechnic Institute (WPI), and be used to raise awareness among young people
of the potential of HPC to address problems of societal concern. The
investigators will develop a new graduate course in HPC methods and
applications, in which the system will play a central role, and they will
promote the system's use in existing courses and programs, in particular in
WPI's new Bioinformatics and Computational Biology program. WPI's distinguished
project-based undergraduate program will provide unique opportunities for
involving undergraduates in HPC research, and the investigators will jointly
develop and advise undergraduate projects that use the HPC system. To further
involve undergraduates in HPC applications, they will introduce "real world"
industrial projects that use the HPC system to WPI's NSF-funded Research
Experience for Undergraduates in Industrial Mathematics and Statistics. To
broaden awareness of the role of HPC in science and society, they will develop
programs for demonstrations and interactive simulations that will use the HPC
system to illustrate how HPC can be used to address problems of societal
concern. A number of possibilities for using these programs in outreach
activities have been identified, and more will be sought. Also, internship
opportunities involving HPC activities will be developed with the WPI-affiliated
Massachusetts Academy of Mathematics and Science, a state-wide magnet school for
advanced students.