* 1337818
* MRI: Development of multi-parametric/multimodal spectroscopy (MPMS) apparatus for characterization of functional interfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Bryan Chin, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 08/31/2017
* USD 514,358.00

1337818&lt;br/&gt;Simonian&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With increasing interest in
functional interfaces, it becomes increasingly important to characterize
chemical structures and biomolecules on surfaces in a quantitative fashion, and
to test their proper allocation orientation, conformation, activities,
stability, etc. This proposal will enhance the power and capabilities of
interface characterization sensing techniques by integrating several synergistic
surface characterization spectroscopy methods such as surface
plasmon,fluorescence, and electrochemical spectroscopies into one new surface
analytic system. Although the reasoning for combining all of these techniques is
straightforward, currently there is no such instrument available. The main
objective of this proposal is to develop a multi-parametric/multimodal
spectroscopy (MPMS) system for simultaneous application of surface-mediated
optical and electrochemical techniques The proposed MPMS system, which combines
three spectroscopic techniques, will facilitate new quantitative insights into
the interactions of a broad range of chemical and biological species with
rationally designed interfaces. Through the combination of synergistic sensing
techniques, this new approach can overcome several key limitations of current,
widely-used surface characterization technologies.