* 1337502
* EAGER: The Sleep Environment as a Risk Factor for Eye Pressure Elevation
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2016
* Alison Flatau, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 07/31/2016
* USD 196,000.00

PI: Flatau, Alison&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
1337502&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed EAGER research project will
lead to obtaining the preliminary data needed to establish that a correlation
exists between the physical environment in contact with eyes during non-supine
sleep and sustained periods of elevated intraocular pressure (IOP) during non-
supine sleep. The hypothesis to be tested by this research is that a traditional
sleep environment, i.e. resting on a conventional mattress and pillow, places
the eyes of non-supine sleepers in a physical environment that leads to an
elevation in IOP. To test this hypothesis, study subjects, half with healthy
eyes and half with asymmetric glaucoma damage, will be fitted with two Sensimed
Triggerfish® wireless, contact-lens-based strain sensors (one in each eye).
These sensors will be used to record changes in IOP throughout the night. The
studies will be conducted at the Johns Hopkins Sleep Center to simultaneously
record video of sleep positions. IOP and position data will be used to correlate
eye contact with the physical environment to changes in IOP as well as to
establish potential differences in the sensitivity of subjects with and without
glaucoma to variations in physical environment properties. &lt;br/&gt;The
technical merit of establishing the hypothesized correlation lies in advancing
the understanding of a here-to-fore overlooked factor that contributes to the
elevation of IOP. The significance of is that IOP elevation is primary risk
factor associated with eye damage and vision loss in individuals with glaucoma.
(Glaucoma is the second leading cause of blindness worldwide and affects an
estimated 60 million people globally at this time; a number is expected to
increase to 80 million by 2020) The impact of validating this hypothesis is that
understanding that the sleep environment contributes to the primary risk factor
for disease progression will lead to developing strategies to fix or alter the
environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The exploratory nature of the proposed
research, i.e. that funding is needed to obtain preliminary results that
substantiate the proposed hypothesis, is the reason the proposed research does
not fit well within the existing programmatic opportunities. The justification
for seeking support for this research through the EAGER mechanism is that the
proposed research is high risk, exploratory, and potentially transformative. The
research is high risk in that conventional wisdom suggests that the result will
be negative. After almost 400 years of study related to different aspects of
this disease, how is it that this macro-scale concern has been neglected? Vision
experts readily provide the following as the justification for the current
practice of ignoring loads from the sleep environment as a risk factor for
glaucoma patients: the pre-operative application of compressive loads to the eye
is routinely used to increase aqueous outflow and thereby lower IOP. This
argument, however, neglects the potential importance of differences in the eye
environment during load application; the importance of these differences is
precisely what we aim to discover with the proposed research. Next, the proposed
research is exploratory in that this will be the first quantitative study of the
interaction of environment to which the eye is exposed during non-supine sleep
with IOP. The ability to obtain preliminary result to address this research is
greatly facilitated by of the advent in 2011 of Sensimed's Triggerfish® wireless
contact-lens-based strain sensors.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Finally, if/when the
research hypothesis is demonstrated to be correct, the broader impact of the
research on those with glaucoma-related visual impairment will be
transformational. The impact on altering conventional wisdom, which completely
neglects sleep environment as a risk factor for those with glaucoma, will be
immediate. Further research will be necessary to address how to most effectively
alter sleep environments to mitigate IOP elevation. Results from the proposed
EAGER research will provide the preliminary results needed to raise awareness of
that sleep environment can pose a significant risk for glaucoma patients who are
non-supine sleepers, and that modifications to a sleep environment can be used
to slow the progressive loss to field of vision experienced by these
individuals.