* 1337399
* XPS: SDA: Elasticizing the Linux Operating System for the Cloud
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2019
* Richard Han, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2019
* USD 757,992.00

One of the major recent advances in computing is the development of large scale
data centers, wherein hundreds of thousands of computers may be housed in each
data center. In cloud computing, individual applications can each lease
computing space to execute on one or more of a data center?s computers. Cloud
applications often need to dynamically adjust the amount of resources that they
lease, elastically scaling up or down the amount of processing, memory, storage
and/or network bandwidth that they need. Today's cloud-based systems burden
application developers by requiring elasticity to be explicitly encoded into
their software. This project seeks instead to investigate an approach that eases
the task of elasticizing cloud-based applications by automatically incorporating
elasticity at the operating system (OS) level to support dynamic scaling of
applications. This project plans to develop an open source software tool called
ElasticOS that incorporates elasticity into the Linux OS, with the hope that
such a practical tool could lead to significant broader impacts for society,
namely transforming the way that major cloud providers deploy applications
within their cloud infrastructure, and benefiting application developers by
easing the complexity of elastic programming in the
cloud.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit and research advances
expected from this project concern the development of novel techniques and tools
for supporting elasticity of memory, networking, storage, and processing in
cloud-based modern operating systems. In particular, the project will explore
the feasibility and performance of a new concept to achieve elastic memory by
stretching of processes/threads across cloud machines using the idea of elastic
page tables. Further research challenges expected to be addressed by the
proposal include the following: identifying and building the major components of
an elastic OS architecture; devising a way to unify the network address space
across multiple nodes so that network I/O can be treated as elastic; discovering
a practical adaptive online algorithm for page clustering and placement that
exploits application locality and parallelism; extending network elasticity to
on-chip networking; discovering methods to accommodate multi-threading in
elasticity; and developing a timely and accurate protocol for discovering
available elastic cloud resources. The project intends to test four different
types of standard applications on top of ElasticOS in order to better understand
how to tune the elasticity: a large in-memory database application; a compute-
intensive application; a network-intensive Web server application; and a
ubiquitous computing application. The PIs are highly qualified to pursue the
proposed research, and have well-known expertise in operating systems,
networking, mobile cloud computing, computer architecture, wireless sensor
networks, and distributed systems. Additional important broader impacts for
society resulting from this project are expected to include enhancing the
curriculum of advanced graduate systems courses and enabling undergraduate
students, underrepresented minorities and women to participate in the project
through programs such as REU and the Colorado Diversity Initiative.