* 1337362
* MRI: Acquisition of a Next-Generation Sequencer for Biological Research at a Hispanic Serving Institution in South Texas
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Kristine Lowe, The University of Texas Rio Grande Valley
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Sanford
* 08/31/2016
* USD 158,420.00

An award is made to the University of Texas Pan American, a Hispanic Serving
Institution in South Texas, to acquire a next-generation DNA sequencer to
advance and promote biological research. Next-generation sequencing refers to
DNA sequencing techniques and analyses that are faster and more robust than the
traditional Sanger Method for sequencing DNA. Next-generation sequencing allows
for thousands to billions of short sequencing reactions to occur simultaneously
and large amounts of sequence data to be generated. The research team will
include a diverse group of faculty (tenured and tenure-track) from complementary
biological disciplines that will incorporate next-generation sequencing into
their research to address major biological questions in microbiology, plant
science, zoology, genetics, physiology, ecology, and for educational purposes in
laboratory classes. Example projects include: (i) Genomics-based evolutionary
studies of microbial arsenic detoxification pathways; (ii) Comparative genomics
of plant pathogens; (iii) Plant systematic studies of Tropical and New World
morning glories; (iv) Transcriptome analyses of plant responses to environmental
stressors; (v) Speciation and phylogenetic studies of sand crabs; (vi)
Developmental genomics of insects; (vii) Species distribution studies of insect
that serves as vectors for Chagas Disease; and (viii) Classroom-based projects
in upper-division Biology courses. The breadth of projects, along with future
projects and collaborations, will advance and expand the department's and
university's research and education capabilities.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;
Researchers and research students will use the instrument directly; thus,
research and learning will be positively impacted due to the ability of users to
directly access the technology. Acquiring a next-generation sequencer will allow
researchers at UTPA, their Hispanic students, and collaborators at nearby
institutions to perform cutting-edge research that is currently not available to
them. A next-generation sequencer will allow faculty mentors to train new
student researchers and use the technology in upper-division Biology courses.
This has the potential to not only transform research and education for the
University of Texas Pan American, but transform research and education for the
entire South Texas region. The research team includes four women, one of whom is
Hispanic and one that has a disability. A next-generation sequencer will
increase the number of Hispanics, women, and disabled persons conducting
biological research in South Texas and in the USA.