* 1337947
* MRI: Acquisition of an Isotope Ratio Mass Spectrometer for Tracing Human-Environment Interactions
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Thure Cerling, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2017
* USD 629,942.00

An award is made to the University of Utah to purchase an isotope ratio mass
spectrometer in support of research on human-environment interactions. The new
instrument will be installed in and managed through the Stable Isotope Ratios
for Environmental Research (SIRFER) facility, a campus core facility associated
with the University?s Global Change and Sustainability Center. Faculty
affiliates from across campus will use the new instrument to make novel
measurements of the distribution of stable isotopes of hydrogen, carbon,
nitrogen, and oxygen in a wide range of environmental compounds. These data will
allow the researchers to reconstruct the history of human interactions with the
environment through the study of sedimentary archives and tree rings, understand
and quantify the cycling of carbon, water, and nitrogen within human-dominated
landscapes, and identify the indirect effects of human activity on the climate,
hydrology, ecology, and biogeochemistry of areas not subject to high-density
human habitation. Urbanization, ecological planning, and water and nutrient
issues in the western USA will be dominant foci for this work, which will
leverage ongoing collaborative research projects and infrastructure development
efforts at the University. As a part of the SIRFER facility, the new instrument
will be a cornerstone of a facility that is leading the integration of
traditional mass spectrometric methods for isotope ratio measurement with next-
generation laser-based techniques, and will provide calibration and validation
support for a large number of high-frequency laser systems used by the project
team for monitoring of environmental isotope ratios.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
new mass spectrometer will be used in undergraduate and graduate courses at the
University of Utah and provide opportunities for students in these courses to
explore new environmental systems and measurement techniques. It will support
broad-reaching graduate student and postdoctoral training efforts associated
with the Interuniversity Training in Continental-scale Ecology (ITCE) program,
which coordinates two graduate-level summer short courses each summer and
supports postdoctoral training and research in support of large-scale ecology
and Earth science. Research supported by this work involves extensive
collaboration with social scientists, engineers and planners, and these
collaborations will help leverage research results to improve the planning and
management of the coupled human-environment system.