* 1337486
* MRI Collaborative:   Acquisition of Expanded Distributed Temperature Sensing Instrumentation to Serve Community Demand and Stimulate Undergraduate Discovery
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Scott Tyler, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 08/31/2016
* USD 107,379.00

1337486 Tyler

This collaborative Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program grant supports
acquisition of three new fiber optic Raman high resolution temperature
profilers, or distributed temperature systems (DTS) at the University of Nevada
- Reno and Smith College, a non-Ph.D. granting institution.. The instruments
will build on capabilities at the Center for Transformative Environmental
Monitoring Programs (CTEMPs) and expand capabilities for research and education
at Smith College. New higher resolution capable DTS systems now offer the
ability to measure temperature with precisions of 0.1 degree C at centimeter
scale spatial resolution and temporal resolution of seconds over several
kilometers of a fiber optic strand which can be deployed in lakes, rivers, snow
pack, trenched in soil, run down boreholes or strung up trees or along civil
structures. The capability promises continued advances in understanding of
watershed hydrology, limnology, physical oceanography, cryosphere dynamics, soil
science and terrestrial ecology. The PIs plan integrated use of multiple DTS
systems to enable 2-D and 3-D imaging of environmental temperature fields for
specific studies of groundwater recharge of lakes in regions where the Marcellus
shale is being hydrofracked for shale gas production and for multi-borehole DTS
deployments to image groundwater movements.

***