* 1337158
* XPS: CLCCA: On the Hunt for Correctness and Performance Bugs in Large-scale Programs
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Michael Gribskov, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 08/31/2016
* USD 292,331.00

The scale of computing applications has been dramatically increasing over the
past several years. As applications in domains such as computational genomics,
data mining, and machine learning are let loose on ever-more-complex problems,
the scale of the inputs to these applications has shot up. And as the pursuit of
parallelism has led to increasing core counts for servers, and increasing
numbers of servers and racks for data centers, the scale of the systems that
these applications must run on has also dramatically risen. A critical problem
in developing large scale applications is detecting and debugging scaling
issues, which are problems with program behavior that emerge only as a program
scales up. Scaling issues show up as correctness bugs or performance
bottlenecks. Unfortunately, detecting bugs that arise at large scales is
difficult. Manually poring through logs or performance profiling individual
application processes is not practical. Moreover, the developer may not have
access to the inputs and systems necessary to run the application at large
scales. This research project aims to develop automated techniques to detect and
diagnose correctness and performance bugs for large-scale programs using program
behavior modeling, training at small scale runs, and extrapolating to large-
scale runs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve our objectives, we build statistical
models that incorporate scale. By relating program scale to program behavior, we
can predict how a program behaves at large scales, without ever seeing correct
behavior at that scale, and use those predictions to detect and diagnose bugs.
The project is structured around three thrusts, each using the computational
genomics applications for context. In the first, we build statistical models of
program behavior that incorporate scale. In the second, we build statistical
techniques for detecting when there is an error and then drilling down to
identify potential root causes in the software. In the third, we build a testing
tool which will allow us to uncover such scaling issues in an accelerated
manner. In aggregate, the project combines in innovative ways applications of
static analysis, dynamic instrumentation, modeling, and machine learning-based
data analysis. The project will use computational genomics applications, such as
Blast, Bowtie, Trinity/Butterfly, and Margin, to evaluate the approach.