* 1337531
* MRI: Acquisition of a Motion Capture System to Facilitate Multidisciplinary Research Efforts and Enhance Undergraduate Research Training
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2015
* Terri Lynch-Caris, Kettering University
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Culbertson
* 08/31/2015
* USD 114,039.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) grant supports the acquisition of a
motion capture system for the accurate spatial tracking of small markers that
researchers attach to humans, robots, or other moving objects. The
instrumentation's high-accuracy and fast capture rate allows dynamic models to
be applied to human movements and allows precise tracking of small, fast
motions, such as with the fingers. With this tracking capability, researchers
can make biomechanical and neuromechanical inferences about human interactions
with objects during real-world tasks and workplace jobs.

The instrument will be used by junior faculty in three departments and will
expand existing research capacity in the overlapping areas of ergonomics and
human factors, haptics, robotics, and computer science. The instrumentation will
also enhance research leading to the development and evaluation of autonomous
robotic vehicle localization, targeting, and navigation systems and marker-less
motion capture devices by providing a validated, standard benchmarking tool.
Finally, the instrumentation will be used to evaluate effects of equipment
design on climbing behavior and human responses to vertical balance
perturbations. This research will help to inform design guidelines and best use
practices for emerging computing technologies and workplace equipment to
increase user productivity, comfort, and safety. The instrumentation will also
increase research opportunities for undergraduate students, support new
laboratory classroom exercises and enrich STEM recruiting and outreach efforts.