* 1337393
* XPS: DSD: A2MA - Algorithms and Architectures for Multiresolution Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Robert van de Geijn, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 09/30/2017
* USD 749,801.00

The goal of this research project is to devise novel methodologies
and&lt;br/&gt;devices for problems in computational science and engineering
that&lt;br/&gt;require high-intensity of arithmetic operations (also known
as&lt;br/&gt;Floating-point Operations Per Second, or ``FLOPS''). Among the
many&lt;br/&gt;hurdles faced in research and development of such compute-
intensive&lt;br/&gt;technologies is achieving energy-efficient utilization of
the&lt;br/&gt;available computing resources. Similar to the miles/gallon metric
used&lt;br/&gt;in automotive design, one is interested in a metric that can be
used&lt;br/&gt;in the design of new computing technologies:
optimizing&lt;br/&gt;FLOPS/watt. This research will be on designing novel
algorithms and&lt;br/&gt;architectures that optimize this metric. These
algorithms and&lt;br/&gt;architectures will be customized to a particular class
of scientific&lt;br/&gt;computing problems: tree-based finite element methods
and N-body&lt;br/&gt;problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is possible to devise
algorithms that parallelize well and are &lt;br/&gt;energy efficient (i.e.,
produce high ``percentage-of-peak''&lt;br/&gt;measurements). Often, however,
such algorithms sacrifice work&lt;br/&gt;optimality. It is much more difficult
to design algorithms that do so&lt;br/&gt;while achieving both work optimality
and energy efficiency. This&lt;br/&gt;on-node utilization wall---a chronic
problem since the early&lt;br/&gt;nineties---not only remains unresolved but has
become more acute with&lt;br/&gt;the emergence of deeper memory hierarchies and
manycore and&lt;br/&gt;heterogeneous architectures. At the same time, there is a
large&lt;br/&gt;untapped potential by not only adapting algorithms to
architectural&lt;br/&gt;changes, but instead driving architecture design from
algorithm&lt;br/&gt;requirements. This research will identify the design space
for&lt;br/&gt;tree-based algorithms (under the constraints of work-optimality
and&lt;br/&gt;maximum concurrency), evaluate performance of state-of-the-art
codes,&lt;br/&gt;and explore custom algorithm/hardware platforms. A number of
broader&lt;br/&gt;impacts are anticipated from this project. The target
methodologies&lt;br/&gt;find applications in earth sciences, engineering,
cosmology, biology,&lt;br/&gt;and data analysis. Along with the research
activities, an educational&lt;br/&gt;and dissemination program will be designed
to communicate the results&lt;br/&gt;of this work to both students and
researchers, as well as a more&lt;br/&gt;general audience of computational and
application scientists.