* 1337866
* MRI Collaborative: Development of iRehab, an Intelligent Closed-Loop Instrument for Adaptive Rehabilitation
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Margrit Betke, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 09/30/2017
* USD 200,109.00

Proposal #: 13-38118 Collaborative Proposal #: 13-37866 PI(s): Makedon, Fillia S
collaboration with PI(s): Betke, Margrit Athitsos, Vassilis; Gatchel, Robert J;
Huang, Heng; Romero-Ortega, Mario I Institution: University of Texas-Arlington
collaboration with Institution: Boston Univeristy Title: MRI/Dev :Collab Dev. of
iRehab, an Intelligent Closed-loop Instrument for Adaptive Rehabilitation
Project Proposed: This project, developing of an instrument referred to as
iRehab, aims to enable personalized rehabilitation therapy for individuals
suffering from brain injury, motor disabilities, cognitive impairments, and/or
psychosocial symptoms. The instrument, a modular rehabilitation device, in its
simplest form consists of a computer, a camera, and adaptive software for
assessment and training of cognitive functions. In its final, most complex form,
the instrument will integrate data from a 4-degree-of-freedom robotic-arm with
gimbals and torque sensing, a Kinect sensor, multiple cameras, an eye-tracking
device, a touch screen, a microphone, and an fNIRS brain imaging sensor. The
instrument will be developed in two phases. In the first phase, the
investigators develop a Barrett robot arm. In the second phase, the instrument
will extend to a Kinect sensor, multiple cameras, an eye-tracking device, and
related low-cost components, along with the assessment software for assessing
motor function and cognitive, emotional, and personality functioning. iRehab
consists integrates multidisciplinary methodologies and sensors to assess and
assist the cognitive and physical rehabilitation of persons affected by various
impairments. This work highly interdisciplinary work follows a cyber-physical
approach. It provides new research opportunities across the fields of human-
centered computing, computer vision, assistive technology, robotics, machine
learning, and neuroimaging. This work advances research in human brain activity
mapping, personalized medicine, and big data. Broader Impacts: The proposed
instrument exhibits potential for large broader impact as it directly
contributes to future healthcare and human wellbeing improving accessibility to
affordable rehabilitation for a broad range of patients. The instrument is
likely to accelerate the recovery of a large spectrum of injuries and diseases
including those causing motor, neurological, and cognitive disorders. An
education plan includes course development, internships, workshops and
tutorials, and an on-line resource center. In addition to many educational
impacts, impact will be felt on the fundamental research in the areas addressed.