* 1337695
* MRI:   Acquisition of an LC-MS/MS to Enable Research and Training for Chemistry and Biology Students at SUNY Cortland
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Francis Rossi, SUNY College at Cortland
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 08/31/2017
* USD 270,807.00

With this award from the Chemistry Major Research Instrumentation Program,
Professor Jeffrey Werner from SUNY Cortland and colleagues Christa Chatfield,
Terrence Fitzgerald, Patricia Conklin and Francis Rossi will acquire a linear
ion trap mass spectrometer with integrated liquid chromatography separation
(LC/MS). The proposal is aimed at enhancing research and education at all
levels, especially in areas such as (a) use of proteomics time series analysis
to optimize open microbial communities in a bioreactor producing extended carbon
chain commodity chemicals; (b) identification of larval trail pheromones that
could be exploited to reduce insect-related crop damage; (c) elucidation of the
physiological mechanisms of environmental biofilm formation involving Legionella
pneumophila; and (d) determination of the role of VTC3 in the regulation of
ascorbic acid in plants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mass Spectrometry (MS) is one of
the key analytical methods used to identify and characterize small quantities of
chemical species embedded in complex matrices. In a typical experiment, the
components flow into a mass spectrometer where they are ionized into the parent
ion and its fragment ions and their masses are measured. This highly sensitive
technique allows detection and determination of the structure of molecules in a
complex mixture. An instrument with tandem capability provides additional
structural identification power through further fragmentation of ions produced
in the spectrometer. As a primarily undergraduate institution, SUNY Cortland's
faculty embraces undergraduate research experiences as one of the most important
outcomes of their research activities. The proposed instrument will directly
impact the research experiences of at least 28 students within the three-year
project period, and many more in years to come. The added synergistic benefit of
enhanced capabilities on campus will also increase competitiveness for external
funding, further facilitating and enhancing undergraduate research experiences.
Undergraduate researchers will travel to high-needs school districts to share
their experiences with high school students. Their authentic narratives of
scientific inquiry will inspire future scientists as to the leading-edge
research one can do as a college student. Ultimately, the goal of these high
school connections is to enhance the diversity of students entering science and
technology fields.