* 1337525
* MRI: Acquisition of an SEM with EDS elemental analysis and STEM detector for Research and Education at Hofstra University and Nassau Community College
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Stephen Beck, Hofstra University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2016
* USD 449,016.00

An award is made to Hofstra University for the purchase of an analytical
scanning electron microscope (SEM) with three vacuum modes (including extended
vacuum mode - ESEM), Energy Dispersive X-ray Spectrometer (EDS), and Scanning
Transmission Electron Microscope (STEM) detector. Faculty will use this new SEM
for research and training across disciplines at Hofstra University (including
researchers from the Division of Natural Sciences and the School of Engineering
and Applied Sciences) and by faculty from the Department of Biology at Nassau
Community College. In total, 14 Hofstra faculty members and their students among
five disciplines (Biology, Chemistry, Engineering, Geology, and Physics) and
Biology faculty from Nassau Community College will be the major users of the
equipment. The grant will also support the research endeavors of two Academic
Centers at Hofstra University: the Center for Climate Study and the Center for
Condensed Matter Research. Specifically, the equipment will allow this
interdisciplinary group of faculty and their students to carry out research
activities such as the following: 1) impacts of nutrients on the regulation of
physiology and metabolism in Drosophila, 2) improving crop yield in cotton
through the study of factors affecting the conversion of epidermal cells to
fibers, 3) exploration of chemical mechanisms involved in aluminum corrosion,
and 4) investigating the ultrastructure and functional morphology of polychaete
worms and parasitic isopods. All of these represent long-standing questions
within the fields of the researchers.

Acquisition of the new SEM will strengthen Hofstra's (a Primarily Undergraduate
Institution) ongoing efforts in basic research, thus supporting the University's
mission to foster excellence in scholarly research and teaching. In addition,
the acquired SEM would support the collaboration with faculty from Nassau
Community College (NCC, the largest single-campus community college in NY with
>40% of the students representing ethnic minorities). This new SEM will allow
the PIs to increase their recruitment of well-qualified students from the pool
of under-represented groups through established programs such as the Collegiate
Science and Technology Entry Program (designed to increase the number of
historically under-represented students in the sciences). Studies enabled by
this SEM will provide a wide range of societal benefits, such as a better
understanding of: fat storage in model organisms (with implications on human
biology), crop yield in cotton, aluminum corrosion, and the evolutionary history
of parasitic isopods (including those of commercially important hosts). Public
outreach from the research will include professional development workshops
(administered through the Institute for the Development of Education in the
Advanced Sciences at Hofstra), during which local college and high school
educators will be trained in the applications of SEM.