* 1337808
* MRI: Acquisition of a High Performance Liquid Chromatograph for the Establishment of a Sustainable Engineering Research Laboratory
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Samuel Morton, James Madison University
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 08/31/2016
* USD 153,475.00

1337808&lt;br/&gt;Morton&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central aim of this
proposal is the acquisition of analytical equipment that will allow for the
rapid establishment of a Sustainable Engineering Research Laboratory located in
the Department of Engineering at James Madison University (JMU). The specific
instrument requested, an advanced high performance liquid chromatography system,
has been selected based on the potential for greatest and most immediate impact
on existing as well as pending research. JMU is a primarily undergraduate
institution with an institutional goal of fostering outstanding undergraduate
research. This proposal will significantly advance this set of goals while
providing the initial investment in the longer goal of developing a research
laboratory to develop undergraduate researchers focused on solving the pair
challenges of energy availability and water quality, which is at the root of the
challenge to the global societal sustainability. While initially, faculty and
undergraduate students based out of the Department of Engineering will most
benefit and utilize the instrument requested in this proposal, faculty and
students from other disciplines, such as Chemistry, Biochemistry, Integrated
Science and Technology, and Geology and Environmental Science, will also utilize
this instrument.