* 1337281
* XPS: FP: Collaborative Research: Parallel Irregular Programs: From High-Level Specifications to Run-time Optimizations
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Keshav Pingali, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 08/31/2018
* USD 375,131.00

The high performance super-computers of today and the ordinary computers of
tomorrow have an ever-increasing number of cores. Utilizing these computers
efficiently will allow research advancements in every field of science, from
understanding the brain to understanding the fundamental particles to
understanding the cosmos. These new computers are increasingly complex and
difficult to program. At the same time, standard algorithms used in science and
engineering are evolving and are increasingly hard to map to these machines.
Advances in programming models, tools, and implementations which make
implementing complex algorithms simpler, while achieving high performance, are
essential to making high performance computing a standard tool of all
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Regular algorithms, usually expressed with
matrices, have driven high performance computing. Increasingly there is
considerable interest in using large-scale computers for irregular algorithms.
Irregular algorithms arise in manipulating graphs, sparse-matrices, trees,
adaptive meshes, etc and are increasingly a standard tool used by computational
scientists. Expressing such algorithms at a high-level has allowed high-
performance run-times to achieve performance comparable to the best hand-coded
implementations of these algorithms on shared-memory machines. A high level
description frees the programmer from the complexities of parallel programming.
The PIs are building run-times and compilers to allow the execution of complex,
irregular algorithms on distributed-memory, large-scale computers. A high-level
representation allows the system to exploit considerable knowledge about the
semantics of the algorithm to optimize communication, mask latency, and achieve
high-performance.