* 1337644
* MRI: Acquisition of a Magstim/Brainsight TMS System for Research and Training in Cognitive Neuroscience
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2013,12/31/2014
* Jeremy Gray, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2014
* USD 106,187.00

Cognitive neuroscience research seeks to understand the basic brain mechanisms
underlying cognitive and behavioral functions. While there are a variety of
available research tools, the majority of these techniques are correlational, in
that neural activity (or a proxy of neural activity) is measured while human
subjects perform a task. Data from these techniques do not allow causal
inference, which requires perturbation of the neural system. Transcranial
Magnetic Stimulation (TMS) is currently the leading choice for neural
perturbation in humans. With Major Research Instrumentation support from the
National Science Foundation, Dr. McAuley and colleagues will purchase a TMS
system to enhance research and training in cognitive neuroscience at Michigan
State University. TMS can be used to produce temporary disruptions in neural
activity or to stimulate the cortex in targeted brain regions. Recent
developments in this technology allow image-guided TMS delivery, commonly
referred to as neuronavigation. This method allows the TMS coil to be precisely
positioned over a specified brain structure based on a person's neuroanatomical
data obtained using magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) techniques. This capability
is important because, although the structure of the brain is roughly similar
across people, the exact anatomical location of neural structures can vary
considerably. Targets for disruption/stimulation can be identified by selecting
and highlighting the desired structure/locations with the brain. Image-guided
(neuronavigated) TMS is quickly becoming a widely-used and standard technology
in cognitive neuroscience research. The general value of this technology for
cognitive neuroscience is that it is a non-invasive tool that can be coupled
with functional and structural MRI data to make causal inferences about normal
and disordered brain function that are not possible through fMRI/MRI studies
alone. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The participating investigators are all active
researchers in the cognitive neurosciences. The new instrumentation will
transform Michigan State University's capability to conduct cutting-edge
cognitive neuroscience studies that help unravel the neural bases of cognitive
function in a diverse set of domains, including perception, attention, memory,
cognitive control, and decision making. The acquisition will also more broadly
contribute to university-wide neuroscience education and training initiatives at
the graduate and undergraduate levels. As part of a new and popular
undergraduate major in neuroscience, neuronavigated TMS will be included as one
of the methods taught in a required core laboratory course that exposes students
to a variety of different neuroscience methods. At the graduate level, the new
instrumentation will strengthen introductory and advanced neuroimaging courses
by providing new education and novel hands-on training and research
opportunities. Michigan State University is a also leader in undergraduate
research and training opportunities in STEM areas for women and underrepresented
minorities, and the training opportunities created by the new instrumentation
will interact synergistically with departmental, interdepartmental and
university-wide initiatives. Opportunities for summer research experiences for
high school students will be created through established contacts with science
teachers in area high schools.