* 1337177
* XPS:CLCCA: Optimizing Heterogeneous Platforms for Unstructured Parallelism
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Hyesoon Kim, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 08/31/2017
* USD 735,055.00

Major social and economic change is being driven by the emergence of "big data."
In all sectors of the economy businesses are increasingly relying on the ability
to extract useful intelligence from massive relational data sets. Emergent
applications are characterized by data intensive computation where massive
parallelism is increasingly unstructured, hierarchical, workload dependent, and
time varying. At the same time, energy and power considerations are driving
computer architecture towards massively parallel heterogeneous organizations
such as multithreaded CPUs tightly integrated with bulk synchronous parallel
(BSP) architectures such as general-purpose graphics processing units (GPUs).
This evolution driven by energy efficiency concerns has had a disruptive impact
on modern software stacks challenging our ability to extract the performance
necessary to deal with big data. We need to develop computing technologies that
can harness the throughput potential of energy efficient heterogeneous
architectures for emergent applications processing massive relational data sets.
Realizing the potential of massively-parallel heterogeneous architectures is
inhibited by the unstructured dynamic parallelism exhibited by applications in
these domains. This research develops a suite of coordinated algorithm,
compiler, and microarchitecture technologies that effectively exploits dynamic
parallelism. The suite of techniques enables the effective navigation of the
tradeoffs between parallelism, locality, and data movement to realize optimized
high performance implementations. First, the proposed program utilizes the
language of sparse linear algebra to formulate algorithms to expose massive
unstructured parallelism. Second, this formulation drives new compiler and run-
time system optimizations tailored to the computational characteristics of these
emergent applications and heterogeneous hardware. Third, at the
microarchitecture level we propose new memory hierarchy management techniques
tailored to exploiting dynamic parallelism. The integrated solutions (algorithm,
compiler/run-time, and microarchitecture) are demonstrated on commodity
platforms and delivered in the form of an open source software stack to support
and enable community wide research efforts. For U.S. businesses to exploit the
new capabilities of heterogeneous architectures and systems for emerging
applications, it is essential to both create new technology and employees with
the necessary skills to utilize these technologies. Technology transfer and
workforce impact will be promoted through the NSF Industry University
Cooperative Research Center on Experimental Research in Computer Systems (CERCS,
www.cercs.gatech.edu) at Georgia Tech with members such as Intel, IBM, HP, and
AMD as well as application oriented companies such as LogicBlox and
Intercontinental Commodity Exchange (ICE) and also Department of Energy National
laboratories such as Sandia and Oak Ridge. Similar impacts are expected through
the NVIDIA Center of Excellence at Georgia Tech.