* 1337594
* MRI: Acquisition of Single Crystal X-ray Diffractometer for Research and Teaching
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Eric Block, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Robert Kuczkowski
* 08/31/2016
* USD 233,800.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program, Professor
Evgeny Dikarev from SUNY Albany and colleagues Eric Block, Marina Petrukhina,
Rabi Musah and John Welch will acquire a single crystal diffractometer system
equipped with Cu microfocus source and complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor
(CMOS) detector. The proposal is aimed at enhancing research and education at
all levels, especially in areas such as (a) synthesis and structural
investigation of volatile heterometallic single-source precursors for the
preparation of energy-related oxide, fluoride, and silicate materials; (b) broad
investigation of unique bowl-shaped polyaromatic hydrocarbons that map onto the
surface of fullerenes; (c) studies of trifluoroselenomethionine and odorant
receptors for low molecular weight thiol/thioethers and selenoethers involving
Cu complexes; (d) development of new synthetic methods to access hypervalent
fluorinated sulfur-containing compounds; and (e) organosulfur plant-derived
natural products as well as other areas of the chemical
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An X-ray diffractometer allows accurate and
precise measurements of the full three-dimensional structure of a molecule,
including bond distances and angles, and provides accurate information about the
spatial arrangement of a molecule relative to neighboring molecules. The studies
described here will impact a number of areas, including organic and inorganic
chemistry, materials chemistry and natural products chemistry. This instrument
will be an integral part of teaching as well as research and research training
and will contribute to educate undergraduate students, graduate students and
postdoctoral fellows.