* 1337758
* MRI: Development of a Multi-Scale Thermal-Mechanical-Spectroscopic System for in-Situ Materials Characterization, Research, and Training
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2019
* Stephen Kuebler, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 08/31/2019
* USD 500,000.00

This Major Research Instrumentation award supports the University of Central
Florida (UCF) with the development of a Multi-Scale Thermal-Mechanical-
Spectroscopic System (TMS) for in-situ materials characterization, research, and
training. The instrument will support simultaneous thermal, mechanical, and
spectroscopic (TMS) measurements over multiple length scales, pressures,
mechanical loads, and temperatures. The instrument will enable accurate
assessment and prediction of material/devices behavior under real-world
operating conditions, studies of deformation micromechanics, monitoring
structural changes and predicting lifetime, to characterizing materials over
macro-/micro-length scales. The instrument will be ideal for capturing
previously inaccessible aspects of material behavior under realistic conditions.
This instrument development will result in a revolutionary tool with the
potential to present new research findings, while spanning a wide range of
applications in energy (e.g., turbomachinery), civil infrastructure (e.g.,
bridges), defense (e.g., high-performance aircrafts, armor). The project
presents opportunities for peer-to-peer learning and mentoring of postdocs, and
graduate and undergraduate students who will participate in building subsystems
and integrating them into the instrument. The exposure to instrument development
and integration with a state of the art equipment will enhance the education of
the students in practical applications of theoretical designs, provide them with
the experience of the design process for high-end instrumentation and expand
their research focus to consider in situ techniques to expand existing research
areas and lead to new fields of research. The developed system will be available
to users at UCF.&lt;br/&gt;****&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Knowledge of initial and
evolving mechanical properties of materials and parts is indispensable to detect
undesirable crack growth, phase transitions, texturing, microcracking or other
structural/geometrical instabilities that can lead to disastrous failure,
particularly when components are in operation. The development of an
instrumentation that supports simultaneous thermal-mechanical-spectroscopic
(TMS) measurements over multiple length scales, pressures, mechanical loads, and
temperatures will, for the first time, enable the capability to achieve such
knowledge, as materials are evaluated in-situ under near-operational conditions.
This award from the Major Research Instrumentation program supports the
University of Central Florida with the development of a TMS system. The
developed system for in-situ structural characterization and testing of
materials on the various length scales under complex loading conditions at room
or elevated temperatures in different environments will be available at the
University of Central Florida, Orlando. The project will engage students and
postdocs who will become the next generation of instrument developers.