* 1337044
* Elucidating Water-Ionic Liquid-Enzyme Mixtures Interactions for Enhanced Deconstruction of Cellulosic Biomass
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Christopher Maupin, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 07/31/2017
* USD 345,897.00

PI: Maupin, Christopher Proposal Number: 1337044 Institution: Colorado School of
Mines Title: Elucidating Water-Ionic Liquid-Enzyme Mixtures Interactions for
Enhanced Deconstruction of Cellulosic Biomass

Engineering enhanced systems for the deconstruction of cellulose is essential to
the cost-effective utilization of biomass for production of liquid fuels and
other value added chemicals. Unfortunately, the insolubility of the crystalline
cellulose substrate and resulting limitations incurred by heterogeneous
catalysis leads to high reaction times that are not suitable for large scale
industrial processes. Task specific ionic liquids (IL) are a promising ?green?
super solvent that enable the rapid dissolution of crystalline cellulosic
biomass while also retaining cellulase enzyme activity thereby providing a
promising route to a single step, homogeneous phase degradation of cellulosic
biomass. However, much remains in regards to understanding the underlying IL-
enzyme interactions affecting enzyme structure, activity, and stability. In this
combined computational and experimental project we propose a two pronged
approach to evaluate the interactions between three ILs on two cellulase
enzymes. The cellulase enzymes being studied have shown varying degrees of
activity in IL-H2O mixtures, allowing for the identification of specific enzyme
features necessary for functionality while the different IL-H2O mixtures enable
the identification of specific IL features that favorably affect enzyme
functionality. The identification of specific IL-enzyme interactions leading to
altered enzyme functionality and activity will be accomplished through the
following objectives: (1) MD simulations on IL-H2O-enzyme systems. These
simulations will reveal specific IL-enzyme interactions and their impact on
dynamic fluctuations and the overall structure of the enzyme, (2) Conduct
Thermodynamic Integration calculations on IL-H2O-enzyme and IL-H2O-cellulose
oligomer systems. These calculations probe the ability of the IL to enter the
active site of cellulose enzymes and illuminate the role of competing solvation
energies, (3) Conduct CpHMD simulations on IL-H2O-enzyme systems. These
simulations will reveal the impact of IL mixtures on the pKa of critical
residues in the active site, and (4) Conduct kinetic analysis of IL-H2O-enzyme
degradation of cellulose. These experiments will reveal the impact of IL-H2O
mixtures on the observed enzyme activity.

The computational and experimental studies will provide an increased molecular-
level understanding of the IL-enzyme interactions and the resulting effect on
structure, dynamical fluctuations, pKa values, and solvation will elucidate how
the solvent environment impacts the functionality of enzymes and other
macromolecule systems relevant to industrial processes. In addition, evaluation
of the enzyme and IL properties that facilitate structural stability and
activity will enable the use of rational design to create tailored enzymes and
ILs for a wide range of industries. Closely integrated with the research is the
education of the next generation of scientists and engineers across multiple
education levels. Engaging underrepresented groups in STEM fields is
accomplished through the Research Experience for Pre-Collegiate Students (REPS)
outreach program with Martin Luther King Jr. Early ollege, a Denver high school.
The research effort will be broadly disseminated through research articles,
regional and national meetings, in addition to the incorporation into
computational workshops at the regional AAAS Pacific Division meetings and Boise
State University, a primarily undergraduate institution.