* 1337240
* XPS: DSD: Polymorphic Hardware Specialization for Domain-Specific Algorithms and Data Structures
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2018
* Christopher Batten, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 08/31/2018
* USD 698,273.00

Serious physical design issues are breaking down traditional abstractions in
computer systems and motivating computer architects to turn to hardware
specialization. Hardware specialized for a single task will almost always be of
higher performance and more efficient, in terms of silicon area and energy
consumption, compared to a flexible hardware implementation that can handle many
different tasks. Resolving this tension between less efficient general
architectures and more efficient specialized architectures, particularly within
the context of mainstream computing platforms, is one of the grand challenges
facing the computer architecture community.

The project is based on an observation of how software engineers address
analogous challenges in the very applications targeted for specialization.
Software engineers seek to create specialized yet flexible code, and the
ubiquitous approach is to develop carefully crafted libraries of algorithms and
data structures that are polymorphic over the types of input, output, and stored
values. The key idea is to leverage the effort software engineers have already
invested and explore polymorphic hardware specialization in the form of
polymorphic algorithm-specific units and polymorphic data-structure-specific
units for template-based software libraries. The project is using a vertically
integrated approach to investigate polymorphic hardware specialization from a
variety of perspectives including computer architecture, hardware synthesis,
compiler optimization, and runtime systems. The techniques developed as part of
this project will be an important step towards addressing the physical design
issues, which threaten to disrupt the long-standing trend towards ever
increasing computing performance relied on by all aspects of modern society.