* 1337471
* MRI: Acquisition of an Advanced Materials X-ray Diffraction System
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Rama Bansil, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 08/31/2016
* USD 455,000.00

1337471 &lt;br/&gt;Ludwig&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This award
from the Major Research Instrumentation program supports Boston University for
the acquisition of an advanced materials x-ray diffraction (AMXRD) system
incorporating advanced x-ray optics, detector technology and mechanical design
to enable easy changes between a wide range of applications, including general
x-ray diffraction, high-resolution x-ray diffraction (HRXRD), grazing-incidence
diffraction and x-ray reflectivity (XRR), pole-figure analysis, grazing-
incidence and transmission small-angle x-ray scattering (GISAXS and SAXS
respectively). Researchers will utilize the various X-ray techniques to
investigate a broad range of science issues: to study of atomic structure,
including identification of crystal structure, lattice constants, and strain and
crystal orientation/texture; atomic structure of thin surface layers or films;
to probe the nano-scale structure of materials; to examine the structure of
surface films/layers and roughness, and to study the morphology of surfaces and
bulk materials on length scales of nanometers to tens of nanometers. The
instrument will reside in, and become a core component of, the multi-user
central characterization facility at the Boston University Materials Science and
Engineering Division in the Photonics Center. The AMXRD system will provide
critical infrastructure for education and for research in Photonic Materials
&amp; Novel Growth Processes, Macromolecular and Bio-Materials, Materials for
Energy &amp; Environment, and Correlated Electron Materials. In addition to
forming a central role in educating graduate and undergraduate students working
in individual research laboratories, the AMXRD system will become an important
component of existing and new courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The useful electrical, optical and mechanical properties of
materials depend crucially on their atomic and nano-scale structure. X-ray
diffraction is the key experimental technique able to quantitatively investigate
issues of atomic structure, including identification of crystal structure,
lattice constants, and strain, and crystal orientation. Though most often used
for structural studies of the bulk material, when performed using a grazing
incidence geometry, these techniques probe the atomic structure of thin surface
layers or films. While x-ray diffraction itself examines the crystalline
structure of materials, closely related techniques probe the nano-scale
structure of materials. These include x-ray reflectivity to examine the
structure of surface films/layers and roughness, and grazing-incidence and
transmission small-angle x-ray scattering to study the morphology of surfaces
and bulk materials on length scales of nanometers to tens of nanometers. The
advanced materials x-ray diffraction (AMXRD) system acquired here will
incorporate advanced x-ray optics, detector technology and mechanical design to
enable easy changes between a wide range of applications in materials
development and analysis. The instrument will reside in, and become a core
component of, the multi-user central characterization facility being developed
by the Boston University Materials Science and Engineering Division in the
Photonics Center. The AMXRD system will provide critical infrastructure for
education and for ongoing research in photonic materials, macromolecular and
bio-materials, materials for energy and the environment, and for correlated
electron materials. The AMXRD system will also have a profound impact on
education in materials-related areas (e.g. Materials Science and Engineering,
Physics and Chemistry) and will become an important component of existing and
new courses.