* 1337295
* MRI: Acquisition-Upgrade of a 400 MHz Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectrometer to Facilitate Faculty Research and Improve Student Research and Education
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2016
* Robert Hinkle, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2016
* USD 181,336.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program that is co-
funded by the Chemistry Research Instrumentation and Facilities (CRIF) Program,
Professor Christopher Abelt from College of William &amp; Mary and colleagues
Deborah Bebout, Elizabeth Harbron, Robert Hinkle and Jonathan Scheerer will
upgrade a 400 MHz NMR spectrometer with a new console, probe and autosampler.
The proposal is aimed at enhancing research and education at all levels,
especially in areas such as (a) stereochemical analyses of oxacyclic products
obtained during synthetic and mechanistic studies of oxocarbenium ions; (b)
synthetic, and biosynthetic studies of biologically active, polycyclic natural
products; (c) examination of host-guest complexes between fluorophores and
cyclodextrins; (d) studies of solution dynamics related to metal toxicities; (e)
fluorescence modulation in photochromic polymer systems; (f) search for
therapeutic tools with an expanded genetic code; and (g) examination of new
catalysts for solar hydrogen generation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nuclear Magnetic
Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is one of the most powerful tools available to
chemists for the elucidation of the structure of molecules. It is used to
identify unknown substances, to characterize specific arrangements of atoms
within molecules, and to study the dynamics of interactions between molecules in
solution. Access to state-of-the-art NMR spectrometers is essential to chemists
who are carrying out frontier research. The results from these NMR studies will
have an impact in synthetic organic/inorganic chemistry, materials chemistry and
biochemistry. This instrument will be an integral part of teaching as well as
research involving undergraduate and master students. Such training with state-
of-the-art NMR instrumentation will enhance the professional readiness of
graduates entering competitive doctoral programs and those seeking employment in
the chemical industry.