* 1337174
* XPS: CLCCA: Improving Parallel Program Reliability Through Novel Approaches to Precise Dynamic Data Race Detection
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Stephan Zdancewic, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Yuanyuan Yang
* 08/31/2018
* USD 700,000.00

The ubiquity of multi-core processors in everything from servers
to&lt;br/&gt;smartphones has demanded a similar prevalence of multi-
threaded&lt;br/&gt;programs to take advantage of multiple cores. Unfortunately,
writing&lt;br/&gt;multi-threaded code is still in the Wild West era of error-
prone manual&lt;br/&gt;synchronization, unchecked concurrency bugs, and
undefined semantics.&lt;br/&gt;One common symptom of an error in a multi-
threaded program is a data&lt;br/&gt;race. Data races arise when a program
performs concurrent updates to&lt;br/&gt;some location without synchronization.
Automatically detecting data&lt;br/&gt;races during program execution enforces
strong safety properties for&lt;br/&gt;multi-threaded programs. While techniques
for data race detection exist&lt;br/&gt;they slow program execution too much to
be viable for always-on&lt;br/&gt;enforcement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To make
always-on detection of data races practical, the project aims&lt;br/&gt;to
develop new algorithms, language extensions, runtime systems,
and&lt;br/&gt;hardware support to improve the efficiency of data race detection.
The&lt;br/&gt;research includes validation of these techniques via formal
proofs,&lt;br/&gt;experiments with multi-threaded benchmark suites, and detailed
hardware&lt;br/&gt;simulation. The researchers plan to openly distribute the
systems&lt;br/&gt;built for this project to facilitate examination by other
researchers&lt;br/&gt;and integrate the research results into the computer
architecture&lt;br/&gt;courses they teach. If successful, the proposed
technology will&lt;br/&gt;improve the safety and quality of the vast amounts of
multi-threaded&lt;br/&gt;code running on today's and tomorrow?s multi-core
devices.