* 1337443
* MRI: Acquisition of a Controlled Environment Plant Growth Chamber to Enhance Plant Growth Facilities at Ohio University
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Allan Showalter, Ohio University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2016
* USD 388,977.00

An award is made to Ohio University to purchase a state-of-the-art Plant Growth
Chamber to enhance and supplement the research, teaching/training, and outreach
missions of the plant biology research community at Ohio University. Six
research faculty in the Department of Environmental and Plant Biology (PBIO) and
two research faculty in the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry and their
students will use the new Conviron model MTPC216 multi-tier, walk-in plant
growth chamber to facilitate research, teaching/training, and outreach in plant
evolution and development, plant ecology, plant cell wall structure and
biosynthesis, and plant signal transduction. With this acquisition, the plant
growth facilities will be reorganized into a Comprehensive Plant Growth Research
Facility, bringing all plant growth facilities under a centralized management
plan to increase research productivity. Research supported by this acquisition
will enhance knowledge of plant evolution and development, plant cell wall
components for biomass and bioenergy production, and the impacts of land
management practices on soil microbial communities.

The PI and other faculty associated with this proposal believe strongly in
research activities for undergraduates and in providing opportunities for them
to travel to present their work. In the past, they have been very successful in
leveraging external funding to obtain additional stipends for undergraduate
researchers through university programs, and it is anticipated that the current
project will support research opportunities for several undergraduates through
faculty-mentored research and internships working in the Facility. With more
plant growth space, additional projects can be supported for undergraduate,
graduate and post doc training. The PI and other faculty are also heavily
involved in teaching and outreach, and their research is the focus of these
interactions. Ohio University is located in the foothills of the Appalachian
Mountains and draws 25% of its undergraduate population from the surrounding
Appalachian region of Ohio and West Virginia. Appalachian students are a largely
unrecognized and under-served minority group. Of the freshman class, 31% are
1st-generation college students and 27% are 1st-generation college students
receiving financial aid. These students are exposed to technology available in
the research laboratories through both the classroom and working individually in
research laboratories. Combined the PI and senior personnel teach ~35 courses
annually, reaching over 3000 students. They reach an additional 2000 people/year
through outreach activities and community service like "Kids on Campus," a
program for under-privileged children in Athens County, Ohio. The faculty will
be able to increase these activities and the quality of these activities with
the addition of this growth chamber.