* 1337292
* Research Starter Grant:   Metabolic Pathways in Bacterial Utilization of Hemicellulosic Sugars
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2014
* Ludmilla Aristilde, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Jill Zeilstra-Ryalls
* 03/31/2014
* USD 50,000.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;As part of the cycle of carbon on earth, plants
store carbon dioxide into their biomass as organic carbon, which can be
subsequently respired back into the atmosphere as carbon dioxide via microbial
degradation of plant detritus. Natural microbial respiration of plant biomass is
estimated to contribute eight to ten times greater carbon dioxide inputs than
human activities. Previous field observations have indicated a dependence of
decomposition of plant matter on the type of vegetation cover and that an
increase in temperatures can lead to increased decomposition rates. Thus, of
important interest is a fundamental understanding of the biological factors
controlling the decomposition rates of different plant matter components.
However, the biological pathways responsible for the respiration of plant matter
components are not well understood. The working hypothesis to be addressed by
this research is that the decomposition rates of plant matter are tightly linked
to the pathways underlying the catabolism of the different organic moieties in
plant matter. Using Pseudomona putida as a model aerobic bacterial organism, the
pathways by which hemicellulosic sugars are metabolized will be investigated.
The results from this study will contribute to our understanding of the
biochemical dynamics underlying the metabolism of plant matter, a necessary pre-
requisite to accurate predictions of the feedback response of the global carbon
cycle to climate change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;This
project will involve the training and participation of young scientists to
address global environmental issues at a fundamental level. Given the global
importance of this research with environmental implications, the obtained
results will be of interest to scientists across various biological and chemical
disciplines and to society at-large, and will be published in journals with
broad dissemination.