* 1337534
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Synergy H1m Monochromator-Based Multi-Mode Microplate Spectrophotometer for Research and Undergraduate Research Training
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Floyd Erickson, Salisbury University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Sanford
* 08/31/2016
* USD 48,915.00

This Major Research Instrumentation award to Salisbury University for the
acquisition of a BioTek Synergy H1m microplate spectrophotometer will facilitate
research, training, and teaching in the Departments of Biological Sciences and
Chemistry. The Synergy H1m microplate reader is a programmable, highly sensitive
instrument that rapidly measures UV-visible light absorbance, fluorescence, or
chemiluminescence at precisely specified wavelengths within a large number of
small samples. Acquisition of this flexible, low maintenance yet high
performance instrument will enable a wide range of multi-sample, temperature-
controlled, kinetic bioassays and analyses that are beyond existing technology
and capacity. The research projects of at least four Salisbury University
faculty in cell and molecular biology, physiology, and biochemistry that will
benefit from this instrument include those involving the study of gene-specific
effects on oxidative stress, regulation of deubiquitinase enzyme activity,
assigning biochemical functions to uncharacterized proteins with known
structures, and exploring the effect of rapid temperature fluctuations on
metabolic processes and cell membrane structure. This high capacity, versatile,
and sensitive instrument enhances current approaches to on-going research
questions, facilitates existing collaborations, and will inspire future research
projects.

In addition to the significant impact that the Synergy H1m microplate reader
will have on Salisbury University's research productivity, the instrument will
also facilitate the training of students who will become the next generation of
scientists and technicians. Salisbury University is a mid-sized, regionally
accredited, four-year comprehensive institution with a focus on excellence in
undergraduate education and a strong commitment to student research engagement.
The undergraduate research and Master of Science in Applied Biology students
working with faculty at Salisbury University, and their collaborator at the
neighboring University of Maryland, Eastern Shore, will become adept at the
instrument's use and subsequent data analysis. At Salisbury University, students
in both the Departments of Biological Sciences and Chemistry will gain exposure
to the instrument, its capacities, and the power of its applications through
incorporation into cell biology and biochemistry laboratory course curricula.
All students enrolled in biochemistry laboratory courses will benefit immensely
from the expanded possibilities in protein purification, enzyme kinetics, and
protein stability analyses facilitated by the H1m microplate reader. Exposure to
this advanced-technology instrument and the demonstration of its 'real-life'
applications in high throughput screening techniques will increase excitement
and nurture students' interest in fields related to biology and chemistry.