* 1337608
* MRI: Development of a New Low Energy High Mass Resolution Beamline for the 11MV Tandem Accelerator
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Michael Wiescher, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 08/31/2017
* USD 471,000.00

The Nuclear Science Laboratory (NSL) at the University of Notre Dame (ND)
operates a world-renowned scientific program in nuclear astrophysics, nuclear
structure and radioactive beam physics, as well as in nuclear physics
applications, radiation chemistry, and material analysis. A very successful
Accelerator Mass Spectrometry (AMS) program dedicated to nuclear astrophysics,
aimed at complementing the existing laboratory measurement and detection
techniques, and based on the FN accelerator was added in 2003. This MRI will
allow the lab to modify the low energy injection system of the tandem to provide
the high mass resolution necessary for improved isotopic selectivity. The
modified system will extend measurement capabilities and expand the broad
portfolio of available accelerated beams, making the NSL a unique and world-
leading facility for both the development of new highly sensitive detection
techniques and for the measurements of isotopic ratios not yet possible.

The MRI will provide the Notre Dame AMS facility with the capability of
measuring radioactive probes and developing innovative AMS detection techniques
that only two other facilities worldwide (Technische Universität München -
Munich) and Australian National University - Canberra) can also provide due to
the combination of available energies, detection techniques and scope of
scientific program. The radioactive probes allow us to better understand current
supernovae models and stellar nucleosynthesis, and provide evidence of injection
of freshly synthesized material into the proto solar system as well as by
possible nearby supernova events in the more recent past. In order to exploit
these long-lived probes new innovative detection techniques have been developed.

The new injection system will also greatly enhance our efforts in applied
techniques that have recently received considerable interest both locally and
nationally, resulting in new collaborations with the art world and the art
history community to provide state-of-the-art identification of artifacts. This
program introduces non-physics faculty to the benefit of new analytical methods
in fields as diverse as anthropology, archaeology and art history and attracts
their students into the NSL to take advantage of new research opportunities. The
improved AMS sensitivity also opens the door to a number of exciting programs to
use radioactive tracers to probe the history of early Earth as well as a number
of important paleoclimatic and geological records.