* 1337680
* MRI: Acquisition of a Confocal Microscope
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Howard Berg, Donald Danforth Plant Science Center
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2016
* USD 476,955.00

An award is made to the Donald Danforth Plant Science Center, St. Louis,
Missouri, to acquire a Leica SP-8 confocal laser scanning microscope that will
be housed in the institute's Integrated Microscopy Facility. Scientists at the
Center (a not-for-profit research institute) are engaged in research that
strives to enhance the nutritional content of plants, increase agricultural
production to create a sustainable food supply, reduce the use of pesticides and
fertilizer, and develop new and sustainable biofuels. The SP-8 will serve this
research by providing the most current technology for imaging cell biology
phenomena, providing a basis for understanding the role of molecular biology and
biochemistry in cell function. The instrument includes innovative, highly
sensitive detectors required for imaging dim signals in plant tissue that has
interfering signals from indigenous fluorescent molecules, and high speed
scanners that help preserve the viability of cells subjected to long-term time
lapse imaging and also permit imaging of high speed events. Additional features
of the SP-8 are its prism-selected detection windows and acousto-optical beam
splitter, which increase selectivity and sensitivity of detection. The
microscope will immediately have a profound impact on research projects from
twelve investigators. These projects include the investigation of factors
affecting infection of plants by viruses, understanding the role of circadian
clock proteins and of G-protein complexes in plant cells, analysis of the
distribution of photosynthetic enzymes in bundle sheath and mesophyll cells in
monocot crops of differing photosynthetic types, dynamic protein localization
studies in the green algae Chlamydomonas and Volvox, production of terpene-based
biofuels, analysis of transcription factor networks, lipid metabolism and
signaling in plant and algal cells, and the mechanism by which plant defensins
cause the death of invading fungal pathogens.

The Integrated Microscopy Facility is an integral participant in community
outreach and scientific training efforts that have made the Center a recognized
leader in science education in the St. Louis region. Several levels of activity
that will make use of the SP-8 for training, education and community outreach
are planned. NSF/REU funded undergraduate interns will participate in projects
that make use of the SP-8. High school students from under-served local
communities and students from community colleges will be involved in independent
research under the guidance of Dr. Terry Woodford- Thomas (Director of the
Danforth Center's Science Education and Outreach Program) who will incorporate
imaging-based promoter screening into a plant biotechnology project pipeline.
Programs targeting K-12 students and the lay public will work with the
microscopy facility to provide experiences in imaging living plant cells in 3D
and 4D. Projects aimed at professional development for high school teachers will
include generating a new gallery of 3D images and 4D time lapse movies (for flip
books) that will be packaged as a supplemental teaching guide, "Into the Cell",
for use in middle and high school science classrooms. These images will also be
put on display at the St. Louis Science Center (which receives over a million
visitors every year) and in other exhibits that have received popular public
acclaim. In summary, this project will benefit society by supporting research
that promotes sustainable agriculture, nutrition, biofuel development, and
reduction in environmentally deleterious use of pesticides and fertilizers. In
addition, the outreach activities derived from imaging plant cells with this
microscope will serve to enrich the scientific literacy of the public.