* 1337296
* MRI Consortium:   Acquisition of a Cyber-Enabled Single-Crystal X-Ray Diffractometer for Materials Research at PUIs
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Allen Hunter, Youngstown State University
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 08/31/2017
* USD 470,000.00

This Major Research Instrumentation Award supports Youngstown State University
with the acquisition of a high performance single crystal X-ray diffraction
system optimized for the structural characterization of the most challenging
samples. It is equipped with an advanced Cu micro-focus source, multilayer
optics, a complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor (CMOS) area detector and kappa
geometry goniostat, and a variable temperature system. The instrument will
dramatically improve the intensity and resolution of the diffraction data from
very small and weakly diffracting crystals, many with large unit cells. Cyber-
enabled methods will allow non-local users to mail samples and then design and
execute their own experiments with real-time support from expert personnel. It
will help broaden the research and educational opportunities for a remote user
base comprised mainly of students and faculty from Predominantly Undergraduate
Institutions. The new instrumentation will support a wide range of externally
funded materials science and engineering projects, especially: (1) structural
studies of supramolecular, inorganic, semiconductor, and metallic materials; (2)
integration of advanced electron microscopy tools (e.g., TEM/SEM, focused ion
beam, FIB, and electron backscatter diffraction, EBSD) with diffraction methods;
(3) cyber-tools development and crystallography education; and (4) collaborative
R&amp;D ventures with commercial partners. The new instrument will also enhance
education and training at Youngstown State, supporting the university's new
focus in Materials Science and Engineering at the undergraduate and graduate
level.&lt;br/&gt;******&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Continuing advances have made
single crystal X-ray diffraction, SCD, increasingly powerful, fast, inexpensive,
and easy to carry out for both experienced and novice users. This method allows
chemists and materials scientists to determine the precise, atomic-level
structures of materials including metals, semiconductors, hybrid inorganic-
organic compounds, and polypeptides. However, SCD requires access to the
requisite instrumentation and support services, neither of which is found at the
vast majority of Predominantly Undergraduate Institutions, PUIs. As such, this
award from the Major Instrumentation Program will fund an advanced single
crystal diffractometer to support a broad range of research in materials science
and engineering. Youngstown State University, a research-active PUI, will be the
base for the new instrumentation, which will also be accessible to a large user
group via cyber-enabled methods. The new diffractometer will allow increased
accessibility for remote users, increased capability for analysis of challenging
samples, and improved training and support for novice crystallographers. The
user base will be largely drawn from the nation's PUIs, which prepare the
majority of undergraduate and masters students who go on to complete Ph.D.
programs, staff our industries, and become the next generation of secondary
school and community college instructors. The new instrument will be integrated
into the well-established STaRBURSTT@YSU solid-state structure facility.