* 1337663
* MRI: Acquisition of Stable Hydrogen Maser Frequency Standards for Millimeter/Submillimeter VLBI Observations of a Black Hole Event Horizon
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2016
* Jonathan Weintroub, Smithsonian Institution Astrophysical Observatory
* Standard Grant
* James Neff
* 07/31/2016
* USD 410,564.00

Black holes are perhaps the most exotic and enigmatic objects in the universe.
Predicted by Einstein's theory of General Relativity and widely accepted as
products of certain examples of massive single-star and binary-star evolution,
the most dramatic cases are the "supermassive" black holes found in the centers
of essentially all galaxies. Here, accretion has amassed as much matter as
exists in 20 billion stars into extraordinarily tiny volumes. Our Galaxy hosts a
comparatively modest example, with some 4 million solar masses packed inside a
region no larger than Uranus' orbit around the Sun.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Until
now, the tiny sizes of black holes coupled with their vast distances have
permitted us to view only the gravitational effects of black holes on
surrounding stars and gas. However, Dr. S. Doeleman (Smithsonian Astrophysical
Observatory) and collaborators are employing the Very Large Baseline
Interferometry (VLBI) technique pioneered by radio astronomers to combine
signals from several telescopes scattered around the Earth with the goal of
imaging the radio emission from just outside a black hole's point of no return -
the so-called Schwarzschild radius where the last light emitted by matter
flowing into the hole can escape and reach an outside
observer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To effectively combine the signals from widely
separated telescopes, each signal must be time-stamped with an extremely precise
local reference signal. This proposal seeks funds to acquire ultra-stable
frequency references for global VLBI observations at mm-wavelengths aimed at
obtaining unprecedented views of the immediate environs of the supermassive
black hole at the center of our Milky Way, and possibly also of the much more
massive hole that lurks at the center of the nearby giant galaxy M87.
Fortunately, such time standards have been developed using hydrogen maser
oscillators for applications in geodesy and navigation, and therefore are
reasonably affordable and extremely reliable. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funding for
the acquisition of time standards for the global VLBI network is being provided
by NSF's Division of Astronomical Sciences through its participation in the
Major Research Instrumentation program.