* 1337159
* MRI: Acquisition of a 400-MHz NMR Spectrometer to Support Faculty-Student Research and Training at WIU and Partner Institutions
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2016
* Rose McConnell, Western Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2016
* USD 249,895.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program that is co-
funded by the Chemistry Research Instrumentation and Facilities (CRIF) Program,
Professor T.K. Vinod from Western Illinois University and colleagues Brian
Bellott, Jin Jin, Shaozhong Zhang and Rose McConnell will acquire a 400 MHz NMR
spectrometer. The project is aimed at enhancing research and education at all
levels, especially in areas such as (a) synthesis and reactions of water-soluble
hypervalent iodine reagents; (b) oxidative cleavage of alkenes using an in-situ
generated aryliodonium ion with oxone as terminal oxidant; (c) design and
development of green oxidation experiments for the classroom activities; (d)
synthesis and characterization of cathespsin inhibitors; (e) NMR based
equilibrium studies of 13C labeled leupeptin analogues; (f) synthesis of
organoselenium antioxidants; (g) quantitative detection of heavy metals using a
seleno or telluro fluorescent probe; (h) synthesis and study of tellurium and
silicon containing macrocycles; (i) steric and electronic contributions of
phosphines in catalytic systems; and (j) synthesis of
fulleridophiles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR)
spectroscopy is one of the most powerful tools available to chemists for the
elucidation of the structure of molecules. It is used to identify unknown
substances, to characterize specific arrangements of atoms within molecules, and
to study the dynamics of interactions between molecules in solution. Access to
state-of-the-art NMR spectrometers is essential to chemists who are carrying out
frontier research. The results from these NMR studies will have an impact in
synthetic organic/inorganic chemistry, materials chemistry and biochemistry.
This instrument will be an integral part of teaching as well as research not
only at Western Illinois University but also at collaborating institutions such
as Quincy University and Carl Sandburg College.