* 1337573
* MRI Development of a fast P3D-STED Microscope
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2019
* Diego Restrepo, University of Colorado at Denver-Downtown Campus
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2019
* USD 1,050,000.00

Title: MRI Development of a FAST P3D-STED Microscope&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An NSF
MRI Development Grant award is made to a collaborative team of physicists,
engineers, and neuroscientists at the University of Colorado Denver to further
develop the capabilities of Stimulated Emission Depletion (STED) microscopy. The
goal of the project is to develop a FAST P3D-STED microscope (fast acquisition,
photoactivation, 3-dimensional enhanced resolution STED microscope).
Historically, light microscopy has been limited in its resolution by the
Diffraction Barrier - a fundamental physical limit due to the property of
photons of spreading out when they pass by an edge, such as the aperture in a
microscope. In the past decade, several methods have emerged that can "break"
the diffraction barrier, causing a revolution in the field of biological imaging
and opening a major window of opportunity for studies that heretofore have been
impossible. STimulated Emission Depletion (STED) microscopy, invented by Stefan
Hell, is one such super-resolution technique, allowing fluorescence imaging at
resolutions of tens of nanometers. With continuing improvements in the
technology, STED is now able to be utilized with a wide range of fluorescent
dyes and genetically encoded fluorophores and has advantages for fast, live
cell, and in vivo imaging. The investigators will further push the current
capabilities of STED microscopy by developing a new STED microscope to allow
high speed, sub-diffraction limit imaging combined with photoactivation
capabilities. This microscope will allow researchers to not only observe small
objects with sub-diffraction resolution, but also enable control of dynamic
processes and observation in real time.&lt;br/&gt;The projects enabled by the
instrument include studies of the dynamic organization of protein complexes in
synapses upon control of neural plasticity, studies of the molecular-level
mechanisms of odor transduction by direct stimulation of the transduction
pathway, and methods for writing/reading bits at sub-diffraction dimensions in
high density data storage materials. The potential societal impacts of this
research include improved treatment of neurological disorders and advances in
information handling and storage. The FAST P3D STED microscope will be housed in
the Advanced Light Microscopy Core (ALMC) facility at the University of Colorado
Denver, a successful shared user facility that has personnel and resources to
train new users and operate and maintain the instrument. Researchers,
postdoctoral trainees, and students from a variety of science and engineering
departments at the University of Colorado Denver, University of Colorado Boulder
and other universities will be able to utilize the microscope for their
research. Outreach to new users will be accomplished through seminars put on by
the ALMC and research presentations at scientific meetings. The investigators
are particularly committed to promoting student training and advancing
participation of under-represented minorities in science as evidenced by their
involvement in the Building Research Achievement in Neuroscience (BRAiN)
program, a summer program designed to help meet the challenge to reduce the
Neuroscience research participation gap by preparing diverse undergraduates in
the Rocky Mountain and Southwest Region for successful entry to Neuroscience
Ph.D. programs. The capability of the STED microscope to see the inner workings
of cells at unprecedented resolution captures the imagination of these future
scientists.