* 1337952
* MRI: Development of a Miniature, High Temperature, Multiaxial Testing Equipment for Advanced Materials and Engineering Research
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2018
* K. Linga Murty, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Culbertson
* 07/31/2018
* USD 438,951.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) grant will enable the development of
novel equipment for mechanical testing of miniature tubular specimens under
realistic loading conditions by prescribing axial, torsional, and internal
pressure loading in a gaseous environment. The equipment will have the
capability to vary specimen temperature from ambient to 1000 degrees Celsius and
it will be designed to fit under an optical microscope and into scanning
electron microscopes for in-situ microstructural studies. The equipment
development will be guided by detailed thermo-mechanical analysis. Technologies
of actuation, sensing, heating, pressurization, digital image correlation,
gripping, and their controls will be investigated for effective integration in
developing the equipment. Micro-fabrication and failure life prediction
techniques require understanding of material properties and their evolutions,
which can only be determined accurately through miniature specimen testing under
realistic loading conditions. Miniature specimens can be machined from
components in service for testing to estimate remaining life.

This miniature equipment will be shared by a large group of inter and intra
university researchers for fundamental research on material design and
characterization, micro-forming, integrated computational materials engineering,
and failure life prediction for the energy, aerospace, automobile, electronics,
biomedical, sensor and infrastructure industries. Emerging research in materials
genome for manufacturing resilient components will benefit immensely from this
equipment. This equipment will impact design and development of new materials
and high-performance components. It will have the potential to reduce the long
10 to 20 year trial and error methods of designing new materials, and to predict
component reliability with much less uncertainty than today. Partnership with a
US testing equipment manufacturer will facilitate equipment development
processes and quick commercialization of the equipment to make it available to
other researchers. Through The Engineering Place and Women in Engineering
programs at NC State University, K-12 teachers and students will get hands-on
experience with the equipment.