* 1337017
* Sustainable Biofuels Production from Drought-tolerant Bioenergy Crops in Marginal Environment
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,01/31/2017
* John Cushman, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 01/31/2017
* USD 299,950.00

PI: Lin, Hongfei&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1337017&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
University of Nevada Reno&lt;br/&gt;Title: Sustainable Biofuels Production from
Drought-tolerant Bioenergy Crops in Marginal
Environment&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sustainable production of lignocellulosic
biofuels relies upon the sufficient supply of biomass feedstocks. Drought-
tolerant bioenergy crops growing on arid, marginal lands, such as Agave and
Opuntia, which store large amounts of water and carbohydrates, have enormous
potential as dedicated biofuel feedstocks because they do not compete with food
production and minimize the use of water and fertilizer resources. However, the
lack of water-use efficient and cost-effective bio-refining processes hinders
the deployment of biofuel production facilities in vast arid and semi-arid areas
that cover more than 40% of the world?s land surface.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will develop an integrated pathway to convert arid land plants into
advanced biofuels with high water-use efficiency. The key step is the catalytic
aqueous phase partial oxidation (APPO), a novel, environmentally benign biomass
deconstruction process that can selectively synthesize valued carboxylic acids
using water and lean air as the reaction media and metal oxides as non-toxic
catalysts. APPO is also a water-positive process because it utilizes wet biomass
as the feedstock, retaining water stored in raw biomass, and produces extra
water during the processing of biomass. The reclaimed water from the APPO
process can supplement water resources for cultivating bioenergy crops.
Moreover, the APPO products (e.g., levulinic acid) can be upgraded readily into
drop-in transportation fuel components consisting of mainly hydrocarbons. In
short, APPO is a highly promising, cost-effective biomass deconstruction process
with high water-use efficiency, which is critical for commercial production of
advanced biofuels in vast arid and semi-arid lands in the United States and
around the world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this proposal is to explore
the underlying physical and chemical mechanisms that control the biomass
deconstruction in the APPO process and to demonstrate the water sustainability
in the integrated biofuel production process by recycling water between the
conversion and cultivation of the bioenergy crops. To fulfill this goal, the PIs
will investigate the fundamentals of the APPO process by in-depth experimental
and theoretical studies and build a life cycle analysis (LCA) model to evaluate
water usage. The outcomes of this project will guide the design of highly
efficient and robust APPO catalysts for cost-effective production of advanced
biofuels, and will predict the feasibility of commercial biorefineries in water-
limited locations such as Nevada and the entire western United
States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will integrate research on chemical
engineering, agriculture, environment, and biofuels with educational and
outreach efforts to demonstrate the importance of science and engineering. The
results from this proposal will be disseminated across a wide audience through
the Nevada Renewable Energy Consortium (NVREC). The newest research outcomes
will be presented to groups across campus as well as the local community in the
Biofuels/Biomass Journal Club at UNR. The research results will also be
incorporated into the current graduate and undergraduate level courses in a
timely manner. Undergraduate and graduate students will be trained on this
project under the PIs? close mentoring. The outreach activities will include
oral and poster presentations targeted at students from selected local high
schools and the general public during the annual Ag Field Day hosted by UNR.