* 1337530
* MRI: Acquisition of growth chambers for global change biology research and research training at the University of Tennessee at Chattanooga
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Joey Shaw, University of Tennessee Chattanooga
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Sanford
* 08/31/2016
* USD 342,945.00

An award is made to the University of Tennessee at Chattanooga (UTC) to
strengthen its active faculty scholarship, experiential graduate and
undergraduate student research opportunities, and involvement in community
outreach through the acquisition of controlled-environment growth chambers. This
instrumentation will enhance existing research and teaching/training agendas
with shared focus on global change biology that require precise control of
atmospheric carbon dioxide, light intensity, photoperiod, relative humidity,
and/or temperature, which is currently not possible with existing resources at
UTC. Five faculty members of the Department of Biological and Environmental
Sciences will conduct research projects with their students to investigate the
potential impacts of climate change on species' range migrations, community
dynamics, evolutionary processes, and carbon cycling via experiments involving
plant, animal, and microbial systems. An additional faculty colleague from the
Department of Chemistry and her students will utilize the instrumentation to
isolate the effects of heavy metal accumulation in plants. The acquisition will
is new instrumentation also will allow faculty to develop new lines of research
and increase their research funding capacity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Student
enrollment in the Department of Biological and Environmental Sciences at UTC has
increased by more than 40% during the past five years and continues to steadily
increase. Within this growing department, the new instrumentation will increase
research productivity by enabling faculty to effectively integrate more research
into their sizeable teaching duties and conduct year-round campus-based
research. Close research training relationships will be fostered through student
participation in faculty-directed research activities. Research training also
will expand to the many students enrolled in upper-level courses at UTC that
include experiential learning through inquiry-based hypothesis- driven research.
Because more than 55% UTC students are women and nearly 20% represent racial or
ethnic minorities, participation of these students in research will inherently
be broadened by teaching applications of the chambers. The PI and co-PIs also
are committed to the active recruitment of students from underrepresented groups
to participate in their research activities. Beyond campus, the growth chambers
will be utilized in new learning modules based on faculty research activities to
be developed for local K-12 outreach organizations and schools, especially those
that affect underrepresented groups in STEM fields. Through the applicability of
faculty research and teaching/training activities to their interests, the growth
chambers also will enhance community and regional research collaborations with
the City of Chattanooga, Tennessee Army National Guard, Tennessee Division of
Forestry, Tennessee Department of Environment and Conservation, and United
States Fish and Wildlife Service.