* 1337754
* MRI:Acquiring a Next Generation Sequencing Instrument for Towson University
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2014
* Brian Masters, Towson University
* Standard Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 09/30/2014
* USD 133,525.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Acquiring a Next-Generation Sequencing Instrument for Towson
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;An award is made to
Towson University to acquire the instrumentation that will allow the application
of next-generation sequencing (NGS) technology to a large number of research
programs involving graduate and undergraduate students. The research programs
that will be supported are collaborative and range across biological sub-
disciplines. Three research programs are described to exemplify the types of
research programs that will be supported. Project one will use NGS for
comparative analyses of RNA sequence data to uncover shared molecular-genetic
mechanisms of wood evolution. In particular, the project seeks to explore
evolutionary-developmental mechanisms responsible for multiple, parallel
evolutionary origins of succulent woods, such as those found in the crop plants
turnip and rutabaga. Project two will use NGS to develop evolutionary
forecasting of pathogens. Evolutionary forecasting of pathogens calculates the
probability of emergence or predominance of particular strains in association
with certain diseases. The validity of the "high risk" designation for a strain
will be experimentally explored in vivo by using a highly plastic veterinary
pathogen (rather than a human pathogen) with an established experimental
infection system in a proof-of-concept study. The parasitic bacterial species
Mycoplasma synoviae relies on attachment to host cells to establish infection
using a single allele of a multigene family, vlhA. Exploration of unexpressed
copies of vlhA across strains by NGS is essential to the generation of
predictive models of strain virulence. Evolutionary forecasts of M. synoviae
strain virulence based on VlhA adhesins will then be validated in vivo. Project
three will use NGS to develop and analyze microsatellite loci in house wrens.
This will enable a test of the ?compatible alleles? hypothesis in the house wren
by examining the prediction made by that hypothesis that extra-pair males that
successfully father young will be less related genetically to females than are
within-pair males. The use of next-generation sequencing technology will allow
this prediction to be examined at a scale and depth not previously
possible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The acquisition of
instrumentation for next-generation sequencing will facilitate the following: 1)
increased faculty-student production of peer-reviewed, published, and fundable
research, 2) increased interdisciplinary research collaboration within and
beyond the institution, 3) increased student research opportunities using
cutting-edge technologies, 4) increased recruitment of high quality
undergraduate and graduate students and faculty members, 5) increased
opportunities for high-quality instruction on modern instrumentation in advanced
lab courses, 6) increased training opportunities for minorities and high school
teachers through established outreach programs. The ability to produce high
sequence volumes at low cost enabled by the award will enhance the research done
by the diverse Towson students and faculty, and the subsequent education of
generations of students in K-12 education.