* 1337400
* MRI:   Acquisition of a Flow Sorter Cytometer to Advance Marine Research and Education
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2014,06/30/2019
* Mark Brzezinski, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 06/30/2019
* USD 494,091.00

The PIs request funding to acquire a state-of-the-art cell-sorter flow
cytometer. The use of flow cytometry has become central to most research in
microbial oceanography, and critical in 'adaptive' sampling to assess shifts in
population composition and function. The requested instrument is a modular,
versatile, highspeed cell sorter that will enable the identification,
enumeration and sorting of cells with subtle differences in their optical
signatures. A novelty of the instrument is its unparalleled manual adjustment of
detectors required to identify and sort organisms with subtle differences in
their optical signatures, which is central in microbial oceanographic studies
dealing with diversity, ecosystem function, biogeochemical effects of shifts in
community composition, and evolution on marine microbial groups.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed flow
cytometry facility will not only significantly further marine science research
but will be available to engineering, medical, and anthropological colleagues.
It will be used in a new class for undergraduate and graduate marine science
students and in yearly workshops that will increase collaboration between UCSB
personnel and other researchers. The PI has a good track record of providing
access through media interviews and interactions with COSEE and school groups. A
major value of the facility will be the creation of a new undergraduate and
postgraduate course: 'Flow Cytometry Applications in Modern Microbial
Oceanography'.