* 1337077
* Engineering a better biofilm: Rational design of attachment surface chemistry and morphology to remove nutrients and microconstituents
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Andrew Schuler, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 08/31/2017
* USD 330,000.00

CBET 1337077&lt;br/&gt;Andrew Schuler&lt;br/&gt;University of New
Mexico&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The U.S. wastewater industry is struggling to solve
the critical problem of protecting sensitive receiving waters from
microconstituent chemicals, including pharmaceuticals, hormones and industrial
chemicals. These compounds are receiving increasing attention due to their
frequent detection and their disruption of ecosystems at very low
concentrations. Advanced physical-chemical treatment processes, such as reverse
osmosis, can be effective at removing many of these chemicals, but their energy
consumption and environmental consequences have been criticized, and they can be
cost-prohibitive to many communities. Biodegradation of these contaminants is
therefore attractive, but there are critical knowledge gaps in how such systems
can be designed for high levels of performance. Biofilm-based systems are seeing
increasing use in wastewater treatment systems, largely for nitrogen removal,
where attached microbial communities are grown on plastic surfaces that are
submerged in wastewater. This project will evaluate the hypothesis that biofilm
properties, such as microbial populations, absorbance characteristics, and
biodegradation rates of microconstituents with specific chemical properties can
be "engineered" by targeted design of attachment media chemical and physical
characteristics. Preliminary results suggest such properties can be used to
produce biofilms with enriched communities of ammonia-oxidizing bacteria
(nitrifiers), and also to increase rates of hormone removal. This project will
include evaluation of microbial attachment of specific bacteria of interest
(e.g., ammonia and nitrite oxidizers) to chemically well-defined surfaces (self-
assembled monolayers), modeling of these interactions, and evaluation of mixed
cultures on these surfaces. These results will be used to develop reactor
systems in which the additional parameters of surface roughness and shear are
evaluated, with surface chemistry, to determine effects on functional behaviors,
including removal of target microconstituents and cometabolic activity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will address the critical need for
sustainable microconstituent removal from wastewater, while providing cost and
energy savings. The project will provide new, fundamental insights to how
surfaces can be designed to influence biofilm development, populations, and
functional performance, which should produce important new design strategies for
process engineers that utilize biofilm-based systems. These results should be of
great use to communities seeking cost-effective technologies to reduce
discharges of pharmaceuticals, hormones, and industrial chemicals to sensitive
receiving waters.