* 1337737
* MRI:   Development of UHV SPM-TERS in situ Characterization Interfaced with UHV Sputtering-Atomic Layer Deposition System
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Cindy Berrie, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 08/31/2017
* USD 178,043.00

This Major Research Instrumentation award supports instrument development at the
University of Kansas Center for Research Inc. The instrument is an ultra-high-
vacuum scanning probe microscopy-tip enhanced Raman spectroscopy
characterization chamber integrated with an existing UHV sputtering-atomic layer
deposition (ALD). The objective is to provide unique, state-of-the-art research
infrastructure that would allow in situ fabrication and characterization of
structural, chemical and physical properties at surfaces and interfaces with
nanometer resolution and surface dynamics up to femtosecond temporal resolution.
This instrument will directly benefit research in quantum device physics,
nanomaterials, energy, and biomaterials. It will significantly advance
fundamental knowledge in the pursuit of answers to the following major challenge
in basic science: How do we design and perfect atom- and energy-efficient
syntheses of revolutionary new forms of matter with tailored properties? The
instrument will enable research designed to lead to the development of novel
nanomaterials for quantum devices and solar energy harvesting and storage. The
unique capability of this instrument will allow researchers, for the first time,
to investigate correlation between the structural, physical and chemical
properties of the Josephson tunnel junctions, which are the heart of
superconducting qubits-building blocks of quantum computers. Quantum computation
enabled by high-performance superconducting qubits has the potential to
revolutionize information processing. The solar energy research enabled will
lead to methods for increasing solar energy capture efficiency in artificial or
hybrid systems for long-term electricity production for large-scale and cost-
effective renewable fuel production. Further, novel low cost and high
performance nano-structured photovoltaic devices for solar energy conversion
will be developed. In addition, ALD grown materials will be explored for
improved energy storage devices, such as supercapacitors and batteries.

***** This Major Research Instrumentation award supports instrument development
at the University of Kansas Center for Research Inc. The instrument is a novel
ultra-high-vacuum scanning probe microscopy-tip enhanced Raman spectroscopy (UHV
SPM-TERS) characterization chamber integrated with an existing UHV sputtering-
atomic layer deposition system. This integrated UHV growth-characterization
system will enable in situ topographic, electrical, and chemical
characterization, structural, electronic and optical properties of materials.
Researchers will acquire fundamental understanding essential to developing novel
functional materials for quantum devices and energy applications. In addition,
the instrument will also support researchers in sensors, catalysis, and
bioengineering. The anticipated outcomes/breakthroughs enabled by the
instrumentation will lead to the development of novel and viable quantum-
information and energy-related technologies with national and global impact.
Existing education and outreach activities at the University of Kansas and the
collaborating institutions will be leveraged by the instrumentation.
Specifically, these activities will produce a unique and diverse future
workforce in science and engineering, particularly in the quantum information
and energy fields. Existing partnerships with minority-serving institutions,
such as Haskell Indian Nations University, will promote diversity in recruiting
and effective training.