* 1337599
* MRI:   Development of a Multi-function Airborne Raman Lidar for Atmospheric Process Studies
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Perry Wechsler, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 08/31/2017
* USD 1,203,980.00

This award is for development of a Multi-function Airborne Raman Lidar (MARL).
The project will extend mature ground-based Raman lidar technology to airborne
weather research applications. The major intellectual challenge is to design the
system so as to provide high quality measurements in the technically challenging
airborne environment, which will require reducing system power, size and weight
and increasing tolerance to vibration. The state-of-the-art mechanical/optical
design and analysis, which has previously been tested for both NSF-sponsored
Univ. of Wyoming King Air (UWKA) and NASA-sponsored airborne systems, will be
used to integrate laser, electro-optical, and other sensors to produce a
reliable airborne system. One important design feature is planned capability for
dual-wavelength water vapor Raman measurements over a large range of solar
atmospheric conditions. MARL will provide simultaneous measurements of
temperature, water vapor mixing ratio, aerosol and/or cloud extinction
coefficient and depolarization ratio, and cloud water content profiles with high
horizontal and vertical resolutions when operated aboard either the UWKA or
NSF/NCAR C-130 research aircraft platforms. MARL will fill several
instrumentation gaps identified by previous NSF-sponsored Lower Atmospheric
Observing Facilities (LAOF) workshops and will transform our capability to
observe the atmosphere at horizontal resolutions ranging from ~100m to ~1 km.
The intellectual merit also rests in scientific contributions from planned
deployments of this instrument, including improved understanding of small-scale
interactions between clouds and their environments, air-sea and land-atmosphere
interactions, boundary layer structure and processes under cloudy conditions or
over heterogeneous surfaces, mesoscale atmospheric environments and dynamics
(especially those related to convective initiation), and both transport and
dispersion of aerosols and/or pollutants in the near-surface boundary layer.
Several field projects are planned to use MARL to address important atmospheric
processes, all with the goal to improve our ability to improve weather, climate
and air quality forecasts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are broader impacts from
enhancing community measurement infrastructure. Once MARL has been completed and
successfully demonstrated, it will be available to external users on the UWKA
and NSF/NCAR C-130. The synergy of MARL with other LAOF instruments will allow
NSF-supported researchers to address science questions that are limited by
current observational capabilities, thereby opening numerous opportunities for
new discoveries in atmospheric science. There are important societal broader
impacts from the scientific measurements possible with MARL. Fine scale
measurements of water vapor and temperature by MARL will significantly advance
our understanding of processes controlling mesoscale dynamics and associated
cloud and precipitation development toward better prediction of high impact
weather events. Other process studies will improve cloud and ABL
parameterizations for better climate and air quality prediction. Furthermore,
exceptional opportunities for graduate and undergraduate education and training
will arise from this project. While one graduate student is included
specifically, all graduate students in the research group will participate to
some extent in instrument development and testing. The lidar system will be
incorporated into the Atmospheric Instrumentation course offered at the
University of Wyoming to provide students with hands-on experience using state-
of-the-art atmospheric remote sensing capabilities. The availability of the
instrumentation to the wider atmospheric science community will greatly increase
the number and diversity of students utilizing this equipment.