* 1337707
* MRI: Acquisition of a Field-Emission Scanning Electron Microscope with Elemental Analysis Capability for Enhancing Materials Research at the University of South Dakota
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Ranjit Koodali, University of South Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 08/31/2017
* USD 297,862.00

With this award from the Chemistry Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program
that is cofunded by the Chemistry Research Instrumentation Program, Professor
Chaoyang Jiang from University of South Dakota and colleagues Dongming Mei, Paul
May and Ranjit Koodali will acquire a high-resolution field emission scanning
electron microscope (FE-SEM) with an energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS)
attachment for elemental analysis and mapping. The proposal is aimed at
enhancing research and education at all levels, especially in areas such as (a)
plasmonic enhancement of near-infrared-to-visible luminescence; (b) thin films
by laser assisted chemical vapor deposition; (c) cubic mesoporous materials with
varied morphologies; (d) cuprous oxide nanoparticles; (e) fluorinated polymeric
materials for air-stable and moisture-resistant flexible optoelectronics; (f)
metal-semiconductor hybrid nanocrystals for solar fuels catalysis; (g)
dissociation density characterization and wafer processing of ultrapure
germanium single crystals; (h) research on the pigments in paintings on
historical music instruments; and (i) materials characterization for earth
science research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A scanning electron microscope (SEM) is
one of the basic tools available for the characterization of materials. A beam
of electrons scans the surface of a sample resulting in a microimage of the
sample composition. The electron microscope can provide higher resolution and
magnification than a microscope using light to probe the material.
Characteristic X-rays are produced from interaction with atoms in the sample
that when dispersed provide information on the elemental composition (EDS). This
instrumentation will provide microscopy training and research opportunities to
graduate and undergraduate students across many fields including chemistry,
earth sciences and environmental science fields preparing them for the demands
of the 21st century workforce in science and technology. The instrumentation
will impact research and research training of researchers and students not only
at the University of South Dakota but also at neighboring institutions and
tribal colleges such as Barrett Eichler, Augustana College; Carl Fictorie, Dordt
College (Sioux City, Iowa); and Subodh Singh and Sinte Gleska University.