* 1338919
* 2013 Biological Mechanisms in Evolution:  Basic Biology, Cancer, Infectious Disease &amp; Medicine, June 2 - 7, 2013 at Stonehill College in Easton, MA
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2013,11/30/2013
* Nancy Gray, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 11/30/2013
* USD 20,000.00

The Gordon Research Conference on Biological Mechanisms in Evolution: in Basic
Biology, Cancer, Infectious Disease and Medicine, 2-7 June 2013 at Stonehill
College, Easton, MA will bring current understanding of biological mechanisms,
including molecular mechanisms of genome plasticity, mutagenesis, protein- and
RNA-based inheritance, epigenetics, stress, stress responses, stochasticity, and
phenotypic variation and plasticity, to bear on understanding of evolution, and
many basic-science problems driven by evolution. The fields of evolutionary
biology and mechanistic molecular genetics, genomics and molecular biology,
focusing on the contributions of the latter to our understanding of evolution
will be united. The modern synthesis of the early twentieth century, which gave
birth to current evolutionary biology, predated the molecular biology
revolution. Traditional evolutionary biology has not always kept pace with
changes to the basic assumptions of genetic inheritance and discoveries of non-
genetic inheritance that have come from studies on molecular mechanisms.
Similarly, molecular biology has often ignored the critical roles of evolution
in important basic-biological problems. This meeting is aimed at the growing
body of investigators attempting to bring molecular biological mechanisms to
bear on understanding of evolution. The goals are to catalyze integrated,
mechanistic views of mechanisms of evolution operating today and their
consequences in medicine and basic biology. Although molecular biology is only
recently beginning to penetrate the arena of evolutionary biology, integration
of these disciplines is crucial for deeper understanding of evolution and
biology in general. This meeting will give a home and community to researchers
doing this. The GRC program will include invited and contributed oral and poster
presentations by both younger and more established researchers, focusing on the
best emerging science in the field. The GRC will provide participants a state-
of-the-art view of a revolution in our understanding of the mechanisms of
evolution brought about by understanding the fundamental biological mechanisms
that drive it. The GRC will promote international and national collaboration
between physicists and biologists, aimed at understanding fundamental molecular
and biological mechanisms, and bringing this understanding to bear on evolution
in disease and basic biology. It will also provide networking opportunities,
inspiration and connections for young scientists, mentoring, and perspectives on
cutting-edge new research for younger participants at a critical stage in their
careers. The NSF funds will be used to defray the costs of a diverse group of
graduate students, postdocs, new investigators and women and minority
participants particularly.