* 1338717
* Advancing U.S. National and International Interests in the Field of Mechanics through the U.S. National Committee on Theoretical and Applied Mechanics (USNC/TAM)
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2015
* Ana Ferreras, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* kara peters
* 09/30/2015
* USD 99,713.00

The present award supports the activities of the U.S. National Committee on
Technical and Applied Mechanics in 2014. This committee represents the U.S.
community of researchers and scientists with interest in mechanics. It thereby
represents 15 professional societies. The committee has both international as
well as domestic agendas. With this award the committee will fulfills the member
country obligations to the International Union for Theoretical and Applied
Mechanics (IUTAM) through paying membership dues, and sending a U.S. to the
Union's General Assembly to represent U.S. interests. Furthermore, this awards
supports the domestic efforts of the committee by enabling adminsitrative
support as well as the annual meeting of the national
committee.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through the work of the U.S. National Committee
on Technical and Applied Mechanics the U.S. research community is represented in
general matters of the International Union on Technical and Applied Mechanics,
its leadership structure, the organization of the International Congress of
Technical and Applied Mechanics, and the organization and award of IUTAM
technical symposia, and of IUTAM summer schools. These events serve as important
catalysts in research. The committee also facilitates informal international
cooperation and discussion on the subject matter of the committee. Domestically,
the committee represents and engages with the mechanics community. With this
award the annual meeting of the committee is enabled. The committee oversees the
organization of the U.S. Congress on Theoretical and Applied Mechanics, and has
initiated the AMERIMECH symposium series. Ultimately, the work of the committee
in its role of leadership internationally and nationally, leads to a
contribution to scientific diplomacy in the subject area of technical and
applied mechanics.