* 1338917
* I/UCRC: Phase III: Center for Lasers and Plasmas for Advanced Manufacturing (LPAM)
* ENG,EEC
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2023
* Mool Gupta, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 07/31/2023
* USD 344,778.00

The proposal requests Phase III funding for the University of Virginia (UVA) to
remain as an active lead site in the Center for Lasers and Plasmas for Advanced
Manufacturing (LPAM).&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The primary focus of the center's
research is in laser and plasma applications for advanced manufacturing. With
the advances in laser and plasma technology such as availability of high power
diode, solid state and fiber lasers, and atmospheric plasma sources, there is
continued growth of laser and plasma applications for industrial manufacturing.
Lasers allow non-contact material processing to provide high precision, faster
throughput and applicability to variety of materials such as metals, ceramics,
polymers and composites. Some of the centers research activities have been in
the areas of laser removal of oxides, laser micromachining of titanium, laser
micro-texturing, optical imaging sensors for laser welding, micromachining of
aluminum alloys, atmospheric plasma treatment of polymeric surfaces etc. Lasers
and plasma sources continue to play an important role in various industrial
sectors such as energy (specifically solar energy), automobile, aerospace,
microelectronics, biomedical and general manufacturing. The center will continue
to support industry research through innovation, participation of graduate and
undergraduate students, leveraging the existing facilities and through multi-
university partnerships. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The performance of industry
research by lead center and various sites, allows the U.S. industry to be more
competitive in advanced manufacturing and hence the LPAM center provides a great
economic benefit to the society. The LPAM center develops new manufacturing
processes and process monitoring tools, as well as provides fundamental
understanding of technical issues related to current processes for the benefit
of the center industrial members. The LPAM center also provides education and
training to graduate and undergraduate student in research areas of interest to
industry to meet their future workforce needs. The LPAM center creates a unique
opportunity for students to be able to collaborate with industrial researchers
and engineers. The LPAM center provides opportunities for team building and
carrying out research in collaboration with students at participating
universities and industrial members. The center has also involved undergraduate
students through Research Experience for Undergraduates program and has provided
a valuable experience at early stage of student's career.