* 1338876
* Planning Grant:  I/UCRC for a New Site within the Center for Pharmaceutical Development
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2014
* Christopher Roberts, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Raffaella Montelli
* 09/30/2014
* USD 14,590.00

The proposal requests funding for the University of Delaware (UDEL) to join the
Center for Pharmaceutical Development (CPD). Georgia Tech at CPD is the lead
institution, while the University of Kentucky Is a 'Partner' site.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed I/UCRC Site at the University of Delaware
will bring world-class expertise to an existing Center for Pharmaceutical
Development (CPD) in technical areas that are central to biopharmaceutical
development innovation. These areas are currently absent or represent only a
small portion of the expertise within the CPD, and will enable the CPD to build
upon its strengths focused on development of small-molecule pharmaceuticals,
industrial enzymes, and related biotechnology products; making the expanded CPD
an even more robust and high-impact I/UCRC. The faculty in the proposed Site for
the CPD are world-recognized leaders, and will provide new strengths to the
current CPD that complements the existing expertise in solid-state
pharmaceutical stability and delivery, and development of industrial enzymes and
related biotechnology products. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed, expanded CPD
will be the most far-reaching industry-university consortium to date that is
focused on pharmaceutical product development, rather than discovery research or
clinical development. The project areas it will address have the potential to
greatly improve the efficiency and economics of drug development research and
engineering, as well as the fundamental understanding and education of engineers
and scientists in the industry. This can benefit the U.S. broadly in terms of
domestic job creation, as well as improved time to market, cost to patients, and
reduced risk for investors for the development and testing of new therapeutic
proteins (focus of UD Site) and innovator pharmaceuticals more generally (focus
of CPD overall). The PIs will involve students from underrepresented groups in
science and engineering, including through research internships that are funded
internally or through complementary federal funding.