* 1338632
* Supporting the Conference Series: NSF/CBMS Regional Research Conferences in the Mathematical Sciences
* MPS,DMS
* 12/15/2013,11/30/2018
* James Maxwell, American Mathematical Society
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 11/30/2018
* USD 295,111.00

The NSF/CBMS series of Regional Research Conferences in the Mathematical
Sciences is an ongoing project administered by the Conference Board of the
Mathematical Sciences (CBMS) and supported continuously by NSF for the past 41
years. Each conference features a distinguished lecturer who delivers a sequence
of ten lectures on a topic of important current research in one sharply focused
area of the mathematical sciences. This award to the American Mathematical
Society, with subcontract to CBMS, supports CBMS in its efforts to publicize
conferences and administer the resulting publications, fostering greater
dissemination of material related to cutting edge-topics and increasing the
impact of the conferences in the community. The individual conferences are
supported on separate NSF awards to host institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
purpose of the NSF/CBMS conference series is to promote research in areas of the
mathematical sciences which have recently seen significant new results and which
hold promise for continued significant development. A conference achieves that
purpose by having the principal lecturer, who is both a major researcher in the
area of the conference and a good expositor, deliver 10 lectures over a five day
period to the participants. The lectures typically cover the recent development
of the field and chart the possible new directions and open problems. Thus the
format of the conferences is primarily educational, but at the research level.
Approximately one-half of the participants at these conferences are graduate
students and postdocs and the conferences give them a good perspective on both
the current research and the interesting open problems in an important area of
the mathematical sciences. The lecturer promises to prepare a substantial
expository monograph based upon his or her lectures. The resulting monograph
reaches a broader audience and provides an introduction to readers who wish to
begin research in the field. Moreover, the conferences are typically held at
institutions that are not yet among the top research institutions, but which are
interested in enhancing their local research activity.