* 1338936
* Planning Grant:  I/UCRC for Semantic Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2015
* Phillip Sheu, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Thyagarajan Nandagopal
* 07/31/2015
* USD 15,624.00

Semantic Computing (SC) is an emerging field that addresses computing
technologies which allow users to search, create, manipulate and connect
computational resources. The research efforts will be anchored by the University
of California-Irvine as the lead institution, partnered with the University of
California-Los Angeles and the University of California-San Diego.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Semantic Computing includes the computing technologies
(e.g., artificial intelligence, natural language, software engineering, data and
knowledge engineering, computer systems, signal processing, etc.), and their
interactions, that may be used to extract or process computational content and
descriptions. The proposed I/UCRC will focus on providing technologies that lead
to a Semantic Problem Solving (SPS) network where distributed resources can be
easily connected based on semantics for the purpose of problem solving. While
some areas of Semantic Computing have appeared as isolated pieces in individual
disciplines, Semantic Computing glues these pieces together into an integrated
theme with synergetic interactions. It addresses not only the analysis and
transformation of signals (e.g., pixels, words) into useful information, but
also how such information can be accessed and used to synthesize new signals.
The three proposed campuses have complementary areas of strength and have
emphasized different aspects of Semantic Computing systems. All participating
faculty are prominent researchers in one or more areas related to Semantic
Computing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technologies developed by the proposed
I/UCRC may support new inter-connectivity that has not been realized by the
Internet today. It therefore may facilitate the transition of the Internet into
Web 3.0 and stimulate new business models for a better economy that everyone can
benefit. The technologies developed by the proposed I/UCRC will be delivered to
the public via the Internet, and the PIs expect to create broader impacts in
areas other than the five selected. The five areas are chosen as they
characterize different aspects of problem solving, e.g., creativity (IT,
entertainment), learning (education) and decision making (health, finance),
which are applicable to many other areas such as manufacturing, science,
engineering, and the humanities.