* 1338453
* Arthur M. Sackler Colloquium: The Science of Science Communication II
* EDU,DRL
* 06/15/2013,05/31/2014
* Barbara Kline Pope, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Ellen McCallie
* 05/31/2014
* USD 50,000.00

The National Academy of Sciences is proposing a three-day Sackler Colloquium on
the Science of Science Communication to be held in September 2013. This
conference, which will build upon the themes of the colloquium held in 2012,
will bring together communication researchers, scientists, and science
communication practitioners to foster interdisciplinary discussion and promote
the understanding and use of research in confronting science communication
challenges of national import. Prominent communication researchers will cover
subjects such as "Belief and Attitude Formation about Science Topics,"
"Communicating Uncertainty," "Influences of Social Networks", and "Narratives in
Science Communication" during the first two days of the conference. Concurrent
workshops on four topics of national interest will comprise Day Three.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The meeting will be held at the National Academy of
Sciences, and will be webcast live as well as archived. The proceedings of Days
1 and 2 will be published in a special issue of the Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences. In addition, written summaries of the research results and
communication recommendations from the workshop on Day 3 will be distributed
free on the National Academies website to highlight the importance of the role
of research in effective science communication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Goals of
the colloquium are to generate an appreciation of the power of social science
research to guide more effective communication of STEM (Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics) to help identify the gaps in communication
research, and to promote sustained STEM communication programs. The colloquium
will highlight the importance of the role of research in effective science
communication, and strengthen understanding, appreciation, and collaboration
between disciplines. It will also further strengthen the bridge between
communication research and practice with the goal of improving the science of
science communication.