* 1338643
* Stability and Dynamics of Traveling Waves, and Boundary Layer Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 01/02/2013,05/31/2014
* Toan Nguyen, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 05/31/2014
* USD 49,287.00

The principal investigator will study mathematical problems regarding the
existence, stability and instability, asymptotic analysis, and long-time
dynamics of structural solutions of systems of partial differential equations.
The study is divided into two independent projects. The first project concerns
the stability properties of one-dimensional sources of reaction-diffusion
systems that are temporally- and spatially-periodic traveling waves with
defects. Pointwise Green function and Evans function techniques are exploited to
investigate nonlinear stability and long-time dynamics of sources. The second
project regards the vanishing viscosity limit problem of the incompressible
Navier-Stokes equations in the presence of impermeable boundaries. Topics that
will be addressed include the well-posedness of the Prandtl boundary-layer
equation, the validity of asymptotic boundary-layer expansions, and fluid-
structure interactions. The primary goal of these projects is to provide a
mathematically rigorous investigation into these structural solutions and
boundary-layer phenomena in fluid dynamics.

The mathematical research projects that will be undertaken are motivated by many
scientific disciplines including oceanography, aerodynamics, fluid dynamics, and
the dynamics of biological and chemical reactions. The objects of this study,
namely traveling waves, boundary layers, and coherent structures, their
stability properties and their dynamics are of fundamental importance in
biology, engineering, and physics. The primary goal of this research is to
provide mathematical understanding of the stability properties of these
structural solutions and to develop analytical methods that can be of practical
use in biology, engineering, physics, and manufacturing. Among many others, one
particular practical use of the study of boundary layers is to provide
fundamental principles that help engineers to calculate the friction drag of a
ship, an airfoil, or the body of an airplane, and to help determining an
efficient shape of the body in order to minimize the friction drag and to reduce
turbulence. Another objective of this research is to study the effect of
viscosity in fluid motion, and to mathematically justify phenomena related to
boundary layers that have been observed in experiments. Results of this research
will be disseminated through presentations at national and international
conferences, seminars and publications in scientific journals.