* 1338705
* Collaborative Research:  EarthCube End-User Workshop: Deep Seafloor Processes and Dynamics
* GEO,OCE
* 04/15/2013,03/31/2014
* Karyn Rogers, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 03/31/2014
* USD 12,874.00

The seafloor serves and the primary conduit for mass and heat transfer between
the sub-seafloor and the overlying ocean water column, with both operating on
vastly different time and mass scales. Dynamics at this interface drive global
biogeochemical and geochemical elemental cycles, control global ocean chemistry,
and shape the atmosphere and climate systems. Deep sea ecosystems also host some
of the most diverse and extreme ecosystems including those inhabiting
hydrothermal vents, cold seeps, mid-ocean ridges, ridge flanks, and plate
margins. Without data from a wide variety of disciplines, such as geology,
petrology, geophysics, hydrogeology, and micro/macro/evolutionary biology, it is
not possible to realistically model these important systems and understand the
complex interactions between their various physical, chemical, and biological
components. Instrumental to understanding processes and dynamics of the deep sea
requires integration of the disparate datasets and models that represent and
predict the behavior of the components of this complex, important system. The
goal of this workshop is to surface requirements in the field of deep sea
processes for a major new NSF data and knowledge management initiative (i.e.,
EarthCube) that is dedicated to revolutionizing geoscience by providing easy
access to, discovery of, and visualization of data from across the geo- and
environmental sciences. This workshop will bring together ~55 oceanographers
from across the relevant disciplines. It will also include cyber/computer
science experts. Together workshop participants will collectively define future
science goals in this important scientific area and focus on identifying the
most critical, widespread cyberinfrastructure and data management issues and
problems presently holding back scientific advances in deep sea science in order
to guide the development of NSF EarthCube cyberinfrastructure. The workshop will
also focus on strategies that help scientists and data that they need to cross
sub-discipline barriers to enable more interdisciplinary research to take place.
Workshop participants will address topics such as science drivers in deep sea
process research in the next 15 years, data and data management needs and
problems, and software and visualization needs to help model and understand
data. Broader impacts of the work include support of an organization in an
EPSCoR state, support of two PIs whose gender is under-represented in the
sciences and engineering, and engagement of early career scientists. A virtual
component of the workshop will be held to help broaden participation beyond
those present on-site.