* 1338970
* An Analysis of Innovation and Performance in U.S. Biofuel Firms: Implications for the Biofuel Technological Innovation System
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2013,12/31/2018
* Sharmistha Bagchi-Sen, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 12/31/2018
* USD 160,000.00

The project focuses on an analysis of the evolution of the biofuel technological
innovation system within the United States, with emphasis on both first- and
second-generation biofuels. The biofuel industry, characterized by new and
incremental process innovation, differs from other manufacturing because it is
resource-based, it is localized, it is driven by policy and alliances, and it
has high levels of uncertainty in the incubation and commercialization of new
feedstock-based production. These conditions facilitate risk-balancing
organizational networks that result in the formation of a geographically
embedded technological innovation system. The development of second-generation
biofuels using cellulosic technologies has introduced new process-development
possibilities, which cannot be accomplished within the boundaries of a single
firm or a region. This project will examine firm-level adjustments as biofuel
production expands from kernel-based to second-generation (cellulosic)
technologies. The investigators will analyze firm performance and the role of
the producer within the U.S. biomass-based biofuel technological innovation
system. They will focus on analysis of answers to two specific sets of
questions: (1) What internal and external factors determine innovation and
business performance in biofuel firms, and to what extent do biofuel firms
depend on local policy and partners to improve performance? (2) How do
adjustments in firm-level processes affect system-wide functions, and how do
firms shape and reshape the overall environment of biofuel innovation and
production? Data will be gathered from surveys and archived documents, with both
quantitative and qualitative methods used to understand factors affecting the
evolution of this industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will advance basic
understanding of localized renewable energy production. It will develop a
conceptual and analytical framework transferable to other energy industries,
industries with non-assembled products, or any emerging geographically embedded
technological innovation system. It will advance studies of innovation and firm
performance, which occupy a central place in economic geography. While most
studies have focused focus on product innovation and manufacturing, this project
will focus on a resource-based industry and process innovation. Resource
industries have critical and distinct roles to play in the debate over economy
and environment. Process-oriented technological change is vital to firm
performance and industrial advancement. The project will contribute toward
economic geography theorizing by moving beyond industrial demography and case
studies through its analysis of many firms and the effect of their actions on
the larger industry. The project also will have policy implications, which will
emerge from the analysis of firm adjustments to changes in their external
environment.