* 1338687
* Collaborative Research: Ethics Education in Life Cycle Design, Engineering, and Management
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2018
* Ronald Sandler, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* John Parker
* 08/31/2018
* USD 247,724.00

In addition to being taught that engineering practice requires assuming
liability for the direct performance of one's designs; students must also be
trained to consider the ethical dimensions of their indirect obligations and
liabilities. The indirect effects of a product, project, or policy can be
characterized and quantified using life cycle assessment (LCA), which is a
formal modeling method that utilizes a comprehensive "cradle-to-grave" approach
to evaluate environmental and social impacts. LCA is in wide use by designers,
scientists and engineers, and businesses, primarily for use in product design
and management, and is also employed in policy spheres to quantify the systemic
impacts of large-scale engineering and technology decisions. While the use of
LCA is widespread, the modeling structure and the interpretation of results
involve ethical and value judgments that must be navigated carefully both by the
analyst and by the receiver of the results. This EESE project centers on the
integration of ethical training into life cycle courses and the development of
life cycle-based educational materials for general ethics training in
engineering and science. Hypothetical and real-world cases are being developed
that address a range of life cycle-oriented ethical challenges, with relevance
for multiple disciplines. Instructional materials and video footage presenting
each case, as well as shorter versions for younger audiences, are also being
created and hosted at the Northeastern Ethics Institute as an additional
teaching resource. Case studies are being submitted to ethics, engineering,
science, policy, and business case study clearinghouses as well as additional
dissemination through structured tutorials at national and international
conferences. One of these case studies is being converted into a three-hour
workshop format at the University of Notre Dame and offered subsequently at one
of its HBCU partner institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to
achieve broad impacts inside and outside of the classroom. Most importantly,
this project directly affects the professional development of students who will
carry the insights, perspectives, and behaviors instilled by this ethics
training into the workforce, to the ultimate benefit of society. The cases
developed address fundamental ethical principles and macroethical issues; they
will therefore be of value for ethics education in the engineering classroom
even at universities without existing courses in LCA or science policy,
including those who have adopted a workshop approach to graduate-level ethics
education. Under-represented groups are being included both as participants on
the project team and in several case-based ethics workshops. While the full
cases are being designed for university students, shorter versions for secondary
school students raise awareness of life cycle issues and environmental ethics
early in formal STEM education. Ultimately, this project advances ethics
education for a diverse range of students in a way that reflects 21st century
progress toward sustainable engineering and technology.