* 1338735
* Engineering Ethics as an Expert Guided and Socially Situated Activity
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Nicholas Gans, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Elliot Douglas
* 08/31/2017
* USD 299,969.00

This Ethics Education in Science and Engineering award supports a study of
ethical decision making in research teams of engineering students, with the aim
of improving ethics education for engineering students and ultimately ethical
practice among professional engineers. The study focuses on the group dynamics
of ethical decision making in project teams and research labs to determine
whether the presence of an "ethics expert" acts as an effective resource to
improve ethical decision making. Answering this question requires a
multidisciplinary approach involving theoretical work in both practical ethics
and situated learning as well as qualitative observational research that
includes experimental studies of ethical decision making in group projects. The
project includes developing a normative philosophical framework for situational,
collaborative ethical reflection and problem solving, and applying that
framework to ethics training for engineering. Graduate and undergraduate
students in engineering are observed in ethical decision making in situ and
participate in activities where they consult with "ethics experts" -- students
in a special ethics course about ethical and social issues in technology --
about concerns arising in their research projects. Experimental studies compare
the behavior and results produced by teams that do and do not interact with the
"ethics experts." &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merits of this research
include contributions to the fields of philosophical ethics, moral psychology,
pedagogical theory, and science and engineering education. Specifically, this
project generates new ideas in ethics about the possibility and role of experts
and expertise and the way that responsibility and ethical decision making can be
constructed in group situations. This study also investigates a new range of
phenomena for moral psychology, which has primarily focused on ethical decision
making by individuals rather than on the dynamics of group reflection, decision
making, and the social distribution of moral responsibility. The proposal
expands the situated learning approach to cases of ethical training and the
options for ethics pedagogy, which will generate results that will be the basis
of new materials for ethics training in science and engineering education.
Results will be widely disseminated via journal publications and open forums on
the web. This research will have broader impacts on the current practices of
engineering ethics education that emphasize abstract principles, individual
responsibility, and case studies of extreme situations. Engineers trained
according to this program are expected to more readily use the resources
available to them in their professional environments, such as an ethics office
or ombudsperson, and to function effectively in team decision making about
ethical issues. The researchers plan follow up this project by developing
curricular resources to expand this type of training to other programs and
institutions.