* 1338130
* MRI: Development of an Advanced Positron Beam System for Annihilation Spectroscopies of Surfaces, Interfaces and Nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Suresh Sharma, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 08/31/2017
* USD 640,608.00

1338130 &lt;br/&gt;Weiss&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Major Research Instrumentation Award to the
University of Texas at Arlington supports the development of a next generation
high flux variable energy spin-polarized positron beam instrument for materials
research. When completed the system will be the first in the world capable of
performing time of flight Positron Annihilation induced Auger Electron
Spectroscopy (PAES) and gamma-gamma spectroscopy utilizing a spin polarized
positron beam. The spectra of Auger electrons and gamma rays emitted as a result
of the annihilation of low energy positrons implanted into the sample will be
used to obtain unique information about the chemical composition and structure
of materials. The instrument will have a high degree of selectivity for surfaces
and sensitivity to open volume defects due to the trapping of positrons prior to
annihilation. The positrons will be obtained using a 22Na source and a high
efficiency Ne moderator system designed to preserve the polarization of the
positrons. This will enable spin dependent measurements and will be particularly
useful for the study of the origin of the unusual magnetic properties associated
with otherwise non-magnetic materials that show large magnetic moments
associated with defects. The unique information provided by the advanced
positron beam system regarding the elemental content, defect type and defect
concentration of surfaces and nano-structures holds the potential to enable
breakthrough discoveries in areas including nano-magnetism, high energy product
magnetic materials, photo-catalysis, nano-particle photoluminescence, and
tribology. This project will provide training opportunities for undergraduate,
graduate, and post-doctoral researchers in the development and application of
advanced instruments for the characterization of materials.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This award from the Major Research
Instrumentation program supports the University of Texas at Arlington with the
development of a next generation instrument for the characterization of
materials utilizing a beam of low energy positrons (anti-matter electrons). When
completed the instrument will be the first in the world to combine spin
polarization with a time of flight Positron Annihilation induced Auger Electron
Spectroscopy (PAES) and gamma-gamma spectroscopy. Positrons emitted from a
radioactive source will be implanted at a selected depth below the surface. An
analysis of the distribution of energies of the gamma-rays and electrons emitted
when the positrons annihilate will provide unique information regarding the
elemental content and physical structure of surfaces and near surface voids and
missing atom defects. The unique information provided by the advanced beam
system will enable new discoveries in areas including the development of nano-
particle based supermagnets, the development of new catalysts that can absorb
light and promote the splitting of water to make hydrogen for fuel, and for the
study of friction caused by submicroscopic carbon soot. This project will
provide training opportunities for undergraduate, graduate, and post-doctoral
researchers in the design, construction, and application of advanced instruments
for the characterization of materials.