* 1338470
* A Method for Leveraging Public Information Sources for Social Science Research
* SBE,SMA
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2015
* Thomas Carsey, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2015
* USD 238,419.00

In recent years, scholars have made great strides using computer-assisted
methods to collect and analyze large volumes of machine-readable information
from open sources such as online news feeds and the new social media to aid in
these efforts. The result has been the production and analysis of massive
amounts of data at unprecedented scales and speeds. Individual scholars and
research teams have experimented with multiple approaches to collecting and
analyzing such data. This experimentation has promoted innovation and
exploration, but it has also produced an array of data sets and methodologies
that are not well integrated or coordinated. The result is that scholars and
policy makers alike are learning less from these data than they could. This
project seeks to overcome that obstacle by developing the community and capacity
needed to establish common best practices and foster greater integration and
coordination regarding the collection, dissemination, and analysis of data. As
part of this development process researchers will focus on extracting
information from public documents such as news reports. The scope includes
events which involve disagreement ranging from nonviolent political protest to
terrorism and interstate war - issues which have long been a subject of inquiry
in the social sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will accomplish this
through a series of workshops that will bring together national leaders in the
areas of inter-state and intra-state conflict, data management, quantitative
methods, and computer science to develop a coordinated strategy for moving
forward. In conjunction with these workshops, the project will develop a
prototype system of software tools designed to collect and archive such data, as
well as conducting extensive educational outreach and training programs in the
use of the data and tool sets. The entire project will be supervised an advisory
board of specialists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will advance the capacity
for learning about the early warning signs of contentious political events, what
leads to their escalation or de-escalation, and the resulting consequences of
such events. The project will also advance understanding of massive near-real-
time data collection for the analysis of conflicts as well as the tools needed
to manage, share, and analyze such data sets more generally. More broadly, this
project will provide access to a vast new open data resource for researchers
from academia, government, industry, and the non-profit sector. It will provide
training opportunities for using the data, and also provide the foundation for
data-oriented education programs designed for students ranging from middle
school through graduate school that can help students learn about the causes and
consequences of inter-state and intra-state conflict. Finally, the project will
help policy makers make better decisions, which could potentially reduce the
frequency and/or scale of political conflicts, and ultimately help to save
lives.