* 1338539
* BCC Information-Energy Nexus Research Network
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2015
* Daniel Kammen, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Heng Xu
* 08/31/2015
* USD 300,971.00

CONTEXT Energy investment and management decisions are increasingly facilitated
and driven by information technology; these decisions have important impacts on
the environmental, economic, and social characteristics of global energy systems
--a collection of social-physical systems that weave together electric grids,
fossil fuel production and utilization, regulation, development, markets, and
diverse users and managers. Researchers from multiple disciplines are finding
new ways of understanding and transforming energy systems as information
technology and clean energy converge at an information-energy nexus.

INTELLECTUAL MERIT This project will facilitate a new research community and
build research infrastructure focused on understanding and shaping information-
energy nexus research with a focus on electric power systems' critical role in
human development and environmental performance.

The research community will bring together researchers who work in the
developing and developed world. It will support a multidisciplinary and growing
community of experts in energy and power systems analysis, engineering, social
science approaches to energy development and public policy. The core community
will be formed by colleagues at the University of California, Berkeley and
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory with partners that include energy
practitioners working in low-income communities in the US and in rural Kenya.

The research infrastructure will focus on data collection and sensor design
efforts that enable the exchange of perspectives. It will result in three sets
of innovations that lead to research findings at the information-energy nexus:
1) new data sources and tools for household and firm energy analysis that
leverage ubiquitous information technology, 2) improved data structures for
linking interdisciplinary energy development datasets and models in time, space,
and across other factors, and 3) targeted data analysis tools for addressing the
critical issues of privacy, ownership, and the value of emerging energy
datasets.

BROADER IMPACTS Environmental and Social Impacts: Investments in infrastructure
and modern loads are enabling factors for increasing the efficiency of the
energy system, a key benefit for society and the most important broader impact
of this work. Affordable and sustainable provision of energy services is the
goal in both the US and Africa. Beyond environmental benefits, superefficient
appliances and modern electricity infrastructure hold the promise to deliver
more reliable and widely accessible energy services to global end-users,
including the global poor.

Technological Impacts: This research will contribute broadly to understanding
new architectures for organizing social-technical systems and specifically to
innovation in clean energy technology and policy. Both data collection and data
sharing challenges currently hinder these efforts.

Educational Impacts: The concepts in this research will be incorporated into
undergraduate education in engineering and public policy, and in environmental
studies, and will be shared with a diverse international network of educators
and scholars working on issues of energy access.