* 1338518
* CAREER:  Physical Modulation of Dissolved Oxygen in Chesapeake Bay
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2013,04/30/2016
* Malcolm Scully, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 04/30/2016
* USD 400,689.00

Physical processes play a dominant role in controlling the inter-annual
variability of summertime hypoxia in Chesapeake Bay. The classical model for the
development of hypoxia in the Bay assumes a simple one-dimensional balance in
which biological oxygen demand exceeds the vertical supply of dissolved oxygen
through the pycnocline by turbulent mixing. The PI's recent work suggests a new
model for the modulation of hypoxia in which dissolved oxygen is supplied to the
sub-pycnocline waters not through direct vertical mixing, but rather through the
interactions of lateral circulation and mixing near the boundaries. It is
hypothesized that wind-driven lateral circulation is the dominant mechanism that
supplies dissolved oxygen to regions susceptible to hypoxia, and that the
effectiveness of this mechanism is sensitive to both wind direction as well as
estuarine bathymetry. This is supported by both numerical simulations and
historical data, but comprehensive field measurements are required to adequately
test this hypothesis. The overall research objective of this project is to
develop a comprehensive understanding of how physical forcing, including winds,
tides and density stratification, modulates dissolved oxygen in Chesapeake Bay.
This objective will be achieved through a comprehensive examination of the
interactions between circulation, density stratification and estuarine
bathymetry and how these interactions ultimately govern when and where the
turbulent scalar (salinity, temperature, and oxygen) flux occurs. The public
awareness and local importance of hypoxia in Chesapeake Bay make it an ideal
socio-scientific issue for a comprehensive context-based education plan for
students and the general public in the greater Hampton Roads area. The
educational activities in this project will promote an interdisciplinary
examination of hypoxia in Chesapeake Bay that highlights the interactions
between biological and physical processes and stresses the role of science in
shaping public policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Understanding
how circulation interacts with density stratification to control when and where
turbulent scalar flux occurs is a fundamental problem in coastal and estuarine
oceanography. It significantly impacts a wide range of physical and
biogeochemical processes and exerts a first order control on hypoxia. Hypoxia is
one of the most pressing water quality issues facing coastal and estuarine
waters, yet there are few if any detailed studies that resolve the turbulent
mixing processes that modulate dissolved oxygen. The measurements collected here
will represent the most comprehensive examination of turbulent mixing in
Chesapeake Bay, including unprecedented measurements of the direct turbulent
flux of oxygen.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The scientific goals of
this study are of fundamental importance to assessing efforts to restore water
quality in Chesapeake Bay. The results from this research will help regulatory
agencies and policymakers better design and assess restoration efforts in this
economically and ecologically important estuary. The educational activities of
this proposal are designed to promote scientific literacy about the issue of
hypoxia by targeting both the general public and students across a wide range of
educational levels. The development of the Summer Hypoxia/Anoxia Research
Program (SHARP) will provide unique research opportunities for undergraduate
students, specifically targeting underrepresented minorities through a
partnership with Hampton University. The integration of hypoxia into the
Chesapeake Interactive Modeling Program (CHIMP) will provide a powerful tool for
educating the public about one of the most important water quality issues in
Chesapeake Bay. This new tool will be made available to the extensive group of
educators already using the original version of CHIMP, and it will be used to
educate middle school students involved in the Mentoring Young Scientist Program
and the general public through a display at the Virginia Aquarium.