* 1338213
* US-Thailand Planning visits: Influence of climate on groundwater interactions with Mekong River: Implications for arsenic concentrations in alluvial aquifers
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2013,12/31/2014
* Alan Fryar, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 12/31/2014
* USD 25,521.00

Across South and Southeast Asia, aquifers along rivers draining the Himalayas
are heavily utilized for dry-season irrigation and domestic water supply.
Previous work has documented elevated arsenic (As) concentrations in the deltaic
aquifers of these rivers, including the Ganges-Brahmaputra, the Red, and the
Mekong. Few studies have been conducted in the alluvial aquifers upgradient of
the deltaic aquifers, but those few have documented locally elevated As
concentrations. The monsoonal climate of the region imposes shifts in hydraulic
gradients between the river and adjacent aquifers. These gradient shifts have
the potential to influence the behavior of trace elements in groundwater due to
changes in flow magnitude and direction, as well as in redox conditions. This
project initiates an international collaboration with investigators at Khon Kaen
University, Thailand to collect preliminary hydrologic and geochemical data from
an alluvial aquifer along the Mekong River in northeast Thailand. Wells and the
river will be sampled during the dry season (November) and the monsoon season
(May-June) and samples analyzed for field parameters, major ions, selected trace
elements, dissolved organic carbon and stable isotopes. Equipment will be
installed in selected wells for continuous monitoring. This data will enable
tracking of flow between the alluvial aquifer and the Mekong. The group will
develop a conceptual model of alluvial aquifer-river interactions, which will
form the basis of a proposal to the NSF Hydrologic Sciences program for a
longer-term and more spatially intensive study. Results will be shared with
local residents, educators and government agencies in Thailand, and with
researchers through CUAHSI?s Hydrologic Information Systems (HIS), and will
provide a baseline for the aquifer prior to dam construction projects proposed
on the Mekong. The conceptual model will offer a template for other alluvial
aquifers in the region, such as the Irrawaddy valley of Myanmar, where dams are
being built or planned.

Non-technical abstract: Elevated arsenic (As) in groundwater across South and
Southeast Asia is a critical public health problem. The behavior of As and other
trace elements in groundwater is tied to hydrologic and geochemical processes,
which are in turn influenced by climate. Another possible forcing is the
construction of dams, which dramatically changes the connections between the
river and the adjacent aquifers. Our goal is to collect a preliminary dataset on
the geochemistry of groundwater in an aquifer adjacent to the Mekong River in
northeast Thailand during two hydrologic seasons: the dry season (November) and
the monsoon season (May-June). The results will be used to develop a conceptual
model of how climate influences aquifer-river interactions, and if those
interactions affect As concentrations in the aquifer. These data will provide a
?baseline? of water quality in the aquifer prior to construction of proposed
dams on the Lower Mekong.