* 1338634
* I-Corps:  Data-Enabled Forecasting Tools for Big Data
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2013,11/30/2013
* A Surjalal Sharma, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 11/30/2013
* USD 50,000.00

This research explores the ability of data-derived modeling to extract, without
a priori assumptions, the inherent features of a system from its time series
data. Although the essential elements of this approach to modeling were
developed for geospace phenomena, it is applicable to many natural as well as
social phenomena. With the increasing importance of Big Data the fundamental
nature of data-derived techniques provide a new approach to the modeling of
systems from their time series data. Often such systems are not readily modeled
using first principles and data-derived modeling can be the only viable
approach. As in the case of geospace the dynamical models can lead to data-
enabled forecasting tools. Another aspect of the research is the ability to
quantify the variability of the system using a new fluctuation analysis, which
yields improved fluctuation exponents such as the well-known Hurst index. The
modeling of dynamical behavior, prediction, forecasting and characterization of
is an integral part of the emerging data-enabled
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The data-enabled forecasting tools
process large data sets to extract the essential features, predict the trends
and quantify the forecasting ability. A broader impact of these tools is in
addressing the need of many social and commercial systems for forecasts of
future trends. In financial markets, the tool could yield forecasts for stock
and other instruments, quantify the reliability of the forecasts, and predict
changes in the short-term trends. In natural hazards, these techniques can be
used to predict extreme events such as hurricanes, floods, earthquakes, and
tsunamis from the time series data. The forecasting tools are independent of
pre-determined models or parameters, and thus can provide reliable analyses of
extreme events in commercial (financial markets, insurance) and social (disaster
planning and management) sectors. A key need of Big Data is reliable analytic
tools and the proposed data-enabled tools will address this need.