* 1338000
* MRI: Acquisition of a 500 MHz Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectrometer for Research and Education
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2016
* Eric Masson, Ohio University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2016
* USD 440,790.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program that is co-
funded by the Chemistry Research Instrumentation and Facilities (CRIF) Program,
Professor Tadeusz Malinski from Ohio University and colleagues Eric Masson,
Stephen Bergmeier, Michael Jensen and Jennifer Hines will acquire a 500 MHz NMR
spectrometer (11.7 Tesla magnet, 54 mm bore, with active shielding.) The new
spectrometer would have gradient shimming, 4-radiofrequency channel, a variable
temperature unit, and three probes: an inverse triple resonance microprobe for
the observation of 1H while decoupling 13C and 15N nuclei and a multinuclear
broadband Fluorine Observe SmartProbe. The project is aimed at enhancing
research and education at all levels, especially in areas such as (a) study of
highly complex macromolecules from natural products and from synthetic
preparations; (b) synthesis of medicinally relevant natural and unnatural
products; (c) study of recognition properties and applications of the
Cucurbituril family of macrocycles using supramolecular chemistry; (d)
identification of highly substituted polypyridine-metal complexes that have a
large number of overlapping aromatic protons in spectra collected at lower field
strength; (e) use of paramagnetic NMR techniques; (f) development of RNA-
targeted ligands; and (g) nitric oxide (NO) signaling
pathways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is
one of the most powerful tools available to chemists for the elucidation of the
structure of molecules. It is used to identify unknown substances, to
characterize specific arrangements of atoms within molecules, and to study the
dynamics of interactions between molecules in solution. Access to state-of-the-
art NMR spectrometers is essential to chemists who are carrying out frontier
research. The results from these NMR studies will have an impact in synthetic
organic/inorganic chemistry, materials chemistry and biochemistry. This
instrument will be an integral part of teaching as well as research and will
impact a large number of students including some from the Appalachian Ohio
region and also industrial partnerships. Collaborations will expose students
from the University of Rio Grande and Shawnee State to the scientific
capabilities of NMR instrumentation.