* 1338652
* Citizen-Scientists as Agents of Change: Training the Trainer in the Ethics of Science and Technology
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2019
* Melinda Gormley, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 08/31/2019
* USD 299,995.00

This award by the Ethics Education in Science and Engineering program in the
Division of Social and Economic Sciences is for building upon existing research
ethics training opportunities at the University of Notre Dame. This project is
fully funded by the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities in the Mathematical
and Physical Sciences Directorate. A select group of fifteen students per year
will have the opportunity for advanced training in the ethics of science and
technology with a focus on 'big picture' or 'macro-ethics' issues. Their
training starts with an intensive, one-week citizen-scientist ethics boot camp,
and is reinforced for the remainder of the academic year with mandatory, follow-
on, in-service projects. The students who participate in this train-the-trainer
program will take what they learn back into their laboratories, classrooms,
professional associations, and on into their own later careers, and through
their actions they will serve as models. The virtue ethics tradition is the
theoretical basis informing the program and will be taught during the one-week
citizen-scientist ethics boot camp and revisited when necessary at bi-monthly
brown bag sessions. Building upon the notion of virtue as habit that is central
to the virtue ethics tradition, and upon the core idea that ethical learning and
ethical decision making are based upon modeling the actions of exemplary moral
agents, the program puts more emphasis on the practice of individuals as change
agents than on the principles of ethics. This project is expected to produce
science and engineering graduate students who will be models of the ethically
engaged citizen-scientist. Pedagogy and morality come together within this
framework as aspects of a common task of training new scholars, scientists, and
engineers in whose lives habits of ethical engagement become an integral part of
their work as scientists and engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching
goal of this project is to create Agents of Change who will serve as trainers
themselves. The graduate students will convey what they have learned to others
through in-service projects that engage their colleagues, students, and
professional, local, and national communities. They will also have ample
opportunities to disseminate their learning both on- and off-campus through
already established campus programs as well. The Reilly Center 'with help from
the Graduate School's Professional Development team, colleagues in the
Department of Psychology, and the Center for Social Research' will conduct
thorough assessments of the students within the program. Surveys will measure
each student's learning while they participate in the program as well as collect
feedback from participants on the program's perceived value. This project aims
to produce a new generation of student researchers and thought leaders by
creating scientists and engineers who, through habit, consider the ethical
aspects of their work. These 'agents of change' will become models of ethics
engagement for their own future students and professional peers. It is an old
saw that one never learns something as well as when one teaches it to others.
There is a kernel of truth in that notion, as any teacher knows, and it is an
important part of this project. The graduate students who participate in this
program will not only receive training in the ethics of science and engineering
but they will also learn how to train others.