* 1338389
* Research Starter Grant: Biogeochemical and grain-arsenic impacts of rice-residue incorporation into rice paddy soil
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2014
* Angelia Seyfferth, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Carter Kimsey
* 08/31/2014
* USD 47,035.00

The contamination of rice grains by arsenic is a global problem. Since arsenic
is a poison, rice consumption may pose a threat to human health. This project
aims to decrease the arsenic concentration in rice grains and thus protect human
health from rice consumption by amending soil with soluble silicon (Si).
Increased dissolved silicon can decrease root-uptake and grain-levels of arsenic
due to competition for plant-uptake of arsenite (the dominant form in rice paddy
soil solution) by dissolved silicon because arsenite and silicon share an uptake
pathway in rice. While the total amount of silicon in soils is high, the soluble
(and thus plant-available) silicon is much lower, particularly in older (more
weathered) soils where most rice is grown and where silicon accumulating plants
(such as rice) mine silicon out of soil and are removed. Return of silicon to
soil from rice residues with a high Si content may decrease arsenic uptake/grain
storage, increase yields, and thus protect human health. Since fresh plant
material may promote greenhouse gas production, this project will test the
effect of rice husk ash (which is high in silicon) on decreasing arsenic uptake
and concentration in rice grains. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If proven effective,
this management practice could be adopted worldwide, including small-holder
farms in the developing world, with minimal cost or change to current management
strategies. This project will allow for the purchase of a closed-vessel
microwave digestion unit which will aid the Principal Investigator, Dr.
Seyfferth, in establishing her research group and allowing her and her group to
conduct basic science for years to come. Finally, Dr. Seyfferth has a proven
record of involving members of underrepresented groups in science, which will
continue throughout this project and in future projects.