* 1338842
* FESD Type I Proposal:  Continent-island arc fluctuations: Linking deep Earth dynamics to long-term climate
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2013,06/30/2020
* Jade Star Lackey, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Candace Major
* 06/30/2020
* USD 4,210,000.00

The over-arching theme of this study is to better understand what drives long-
term climate change, specifically oscillations between greenhouse and icehouse
states over timescales of 100 My. These climatic oscillations, integrated over
Earth?s history, profoundly influenced the evolution of life and the surface of
the Earth. To first order, variations in the CO2 budget of the ocean-atmosphere-
biosphere system drive climatic variation over timescales greater than 10 My:
because of the greenhouse effect of CO2 in the atmosphere, Earth?s surface
temperature warms when atmospheric CO2 is high and cools when CO2 levels are
low, all other variables (like albedo) being equal. The C content of the Earth?s
exogenic system, over long timescales, is controlled by volcanic inputs from the
Earth?s interior and outputs from the exogenic system via sediment burial and
subduction. Long-term climate variability is thus intimately linked to whole
Earth carbon cycling, that is, the cycling of C between the endogenic and
exogenic systems. Exactly how and why these inputs and outputs have changed
through time is the question.&lt;br/&gt; This study will focus on the most
recent greenhouse-icehouse transition. This begins with the Cretaceous to early
Cenozoic (150-60 My) greenhouse interval when dinosaurs roamed the Earth,
atmospheric CO2 pressure was possibly 4-8 times higher than today, polar ice
caps were absent, and much of Earth?s economically viable hydrocarbon source
rocks were generated. In contrast, the mid-Cenozoic (~55 My to present) was
characterized by cooler surface temperatures, polar ice sheets, lower
atmospheric CO2, and the proliferation of mammals. We will evaluate a number of
hypotheses for elevated CO2 during the Cretaceous. These include enhanced
carbonate subduction and subsequent output of CO2 through arc volcanoes,
enhanced oceanic crust production, and an increase in the frequency of episodic
flood basalts. In particular, we will also explore a new hypothesis that CO2
inputs into the exogenic system are strongly influenced by secular changes in
the nature of subduction zone volcanoes. During periods of enhanced continental
arc activity, carbonate sediments stored on the continents over Earth?s history,
are magmatically liberated, whereas during periods dominated by island arc
activity the CO2 inputs return to baseline levels because of the smaller volumes
of carbonates in the oceanic upper plate. The transition from Cretaceous
greenhouse to mid-Cenozoic icehouse conditions may have coincided with a decline
in the number of continental arc volcanoes, suggesting that there may also be a
mechanism driving long term oscillations between the nature of subduction zones.
The goal of this study is to evaluate the relative importance of all these
potential sources of CO2 so that a more complete model of the whole Earth carbon
cycle can be developed. We are specifically interested in how deep Earth
dynamics modulates these sources of CO2. To test these hypotheses and place
bounds on each of these processes, we have assembled an interdisciplinary team
to quantify the stability of carbonates in the shallow crust and in the deep
parts of subduction zones, map out how the distribution of arc volcanoes and the
extent of magmatic decarbonation has changed through time, quantify global
volcanic inputs of CO2, and develop a model for long-term climate evolution
coupled to the cycling of C between the deep Earth and the exogenic system.