* 1338489
* Minnesota Linking Information for Kids: Creating Capacity for Data Intensive Research
* SBE,SMA
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2016
* Traci LaLiberte, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* John Cherniavsky
* 09/30/2016
* USD 489,119.00

The PIs of this project from the University of Minnesota are expanding the
capacity for conducting data-intensive interdisciplinary research to advance
knowledge and understanding of child well-being across multiple data systems
including education, child welfare, health, mental health and juvenile justice.
The project is integrating six additional datasets into the current Minnesota
Linking information for Kids (Minn-LInK) cross-system data project. The project
is building a community of researchers from diverse disciplinary communities to
expand data linkage, develop infrastructure for efficient utilization of
integrated data, and organize an interdisciplinary communication network. The
project makes a more comprehensive set of data available to researchers, expands
codebooks for new and existing data, and develops ready-to-use datasets and
tools for efficient utilization. A Fellowship program to train graduate students
and develop future researchers coordinates the efforts of university faculty and
state agency staff.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The construction of the Minn-LInK
Fellows has the potential to integrate the university into the work of the
state, regional and local agencies. The collaborative training experiences for
the graduate students who will be a part of the Fellows program brings together
the research and disciplinary knowledge of the faculty with the agencies'
experiences, understanding of the datasets, and knowledge of the policy and
practical issues that are faced by the state. The collaborative community in
this proposal starts from the perspective of early childhood education rather
than from a K-12 or postsecondary perspective. The research infrastructure that
is developed by this project expands the capacity of researchers throughout the
state of Minnesota to better use the longitudinal integrated data to more fully
understand the influence of student performances in STEM on multiple malleable
factors in education.