* 1338097
* MRI: Acquisition of an Advanced FT-IR System for Multi-Disciplinary Research and Training at Oklahoma State University
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2019
* Wei Yin, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2019
* USD 541,725.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award supports the acquisition of an
integrated Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) system with diverse functions at
the Stillwater Campus of Oklahoma State University (OSU). The main FTIR
spectrometer is equipped with state-of-the-art optics and electronics resulting
in unprecedented accuracy of FTIR data collection. Integration of an array of
components, including tunable nanosecond laser, cryogenic system, infrared
microscope, focal plane array detector, and temperature controlled attenuated
total reflection cell, makes this instrument a rare and one of the most powerful
and versatile FTIR systems for biological research. This multi-functional
advanced FT-IR system will significantly impact and enable a broad range of
research projects, including but not limited to: develop infrared structural
biology for structure-function studies of proteins, investigate principles in
receptor activation in biological signaling, explore catalytic mechanism of
photosynthetic water oxidation for bio-energy, probe structural dynamics of
IL-18:IL-18BP complex formation for autoimmune responses, and analyze polymer
nanocoatings for biomedical applications. This system will also be used to
characterize biopharmaceuticals for vaccine formulations, and investigate
cellular responses in endothelial cells that line the interior surface of blood
vessels upon sheer stress for bioengineering of artificial
heart.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This instrument will be housed in the Henry Bellmon
Research Center, a recently completed state-of-the- art building dedicated fully
to cutting edge multidisciplinary research. The advanced FT-IR system will be
used to catalyze the developments and applications of the emerging field of
infrared structural biology of proteins that will significantly impact a wide
range of research in life sciences, including basic research, bio-energy, and
biomedical research. This powerful and versatile instrument will significantly
enhance the research not only by a large number of OSU researchers, but also
external users, including from California and New York. An annual workshop on
Infrared Structural Biology and a new course on "Infrared Biology: FT-IR
Spectroscopy and Imaging" will be initiated and offered to train postdocs,
graduate and undergraduate students, including many under-represented
minorities. To increase the participation and research experience of under-
represented minorities, we have established partnerships with Langston
University (85% minority students in a historically black college), Northeastern
State University (40% minority students with high percentage of native
Americans), and two minority programs in Oklahoma State University-Stillwater
campus;the Oklahoma Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (OK- LSAMP)
and the Native Americans in Biological Sciences (NABS) Center. Building on the
existing strength of the PI, a leader in promoting women in physics, and 6 women
and 2 minority team members, continued efforts will be made to encourage,
mentor, and train women and minority scientists at the postdoctoral, graduate
and undergraduate levels.