* 1338195
* MRI:   Acquisition of a Dionex Accelerated Solvent Extractor for Biogeochemistry, Toxicology, and Marine Science Research at Hawaii Pacific University
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2013,02/28/2017
* Kristi West, Hawaii Pacific University
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 02/28/2017
* USD 54,925.00

This award funds the acquisition of a Dionex Accelerated Solvent Extraction
(ASE) system to enhance faculty and student research opportunities and to
improve teaching infrastructure at HPU. The ASE system will be used in a variety
of active research projects funded by NSF and other agencies which require
frequent use of ASE equipment for extraction of lipids, environmental
contaminants, and natural metabolic products. The instrument will be used for a
number of diverse projects including (a) carbon isotope fractionation in lipid
biosynthesis by piezophilic bacteria isolated from the deeply buried Shimokita
Coalbed (1498.48 and 2406.84 meter below the seafloor) in the northwest Pacific;
(b) assessing historical changes in Kawai`nui marsh ecosystem; (c) measuring
stress-induced hormones in wild dolphins as an indicator of negative
environmental impacts on dolphin populations (d) the development of natural
product chemical libraries; and (e) measuring organic contaminants in tissues of
marine vertebrates. HPU is currently in transition from a predominantly
undergraduate, non-Ph.D. granting teaching institution into a comprehensive
university with a strong research program, and such state-of-the-art
instrumentation will help facilitate this transition. Postdoctoral research
associates and M.S. graduate and undergraduate students will be trained on the
use of the instrument. Hawaii Pacific University (HPU) is a minority serving
undergraduate research institution on the Island of Oahu in a state with few
centers of higher learning in Hawaii compared with the continental United
States. The HPU student population includes significant representation by local
native Hawaiians as well as Pacific Islanders that come to Hawaii for a college
education. Hence the funding of this instrumentation will have broad impacts on
a diverse student population in research and education in fields such as
Biology, Biochemistry, Marine Biology and Oceanography.