* 1338040
* MRI:   Acquisition of a Stable Carbon Isotope Analyzer at Montana Tech
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Christopher Gammons,  Montana Technological University
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 08/31/2016
* USD 183,615.00

This NSF award supports the acquisition of a Carbon Stable Isotope Analyzer by
Montana Tech, which will allow the investigators to continue and expand their
research and monitoring efforts in the area of biogeochemical processes
affecting rivers, lakes, groundwater and geothermal waters as well as carbon
bearing rocks and minerals. The use of environmental isotopes, in general,
provides a tool to help researchers interpret and understand processes in
natural systems. Carbon stable isotopes, in particular, provide a unique way to
"fingerprint" sources of carbon in various environmental compartments (e.g.,
photosynthetic pathway of plants, biologic vs. geologic vs. atmospheric
sources), and can also be used to help quantify rates of processes that
influence ecosystem changes over a range of scales (e.g., aerobic and anaerobic
respiration, photosynthesis, etc). The range of topics that will be investigated
using this instrument is extensive and includes tracking effects of climate
change through carbon isotope composition changes on watershed scales;
quantifying changes in the processing of carbon through surface and groundwater
systems; investigating the sources of dissolved organic carbon (DOC) in drinking
water; determining the origins of carbonate minerals in rocks or mineralized
veins; determining biotic vs. abiotic sources of methane in natural gas
reservoirs; and water-rock interactions associated with CO2 sequestration. This
equipment will: 1) expand the investigative capabilities of Montana Tech, the
Montana Bureau of Mines and Geology (MBMG) and collaborating researchers across
the Montana University System (MUS); 2) facilitate pure and applied research in
the general area of aquatic and terrestrial environmental science at a campus
that is a non-PhD-granting RUI institution in an EPSCoR state; 3) provide a
relatively easy-to-use educational tool that will be integrated into new and
existing courses at Montana Tech; 4) provide research opportunities and
technical training for multiple graduate and undergraduate students on the
theory and application of stable isotope analysis; 5) promote collaboration with
the MBMG to better evaluate biogeochemical processes in groundwater and surface
water in Montana; and 6) promote interdisciplinary collaboration between Montana
Tech and researchers at other units of the MUS, an important objective of the
recent Montana NSF-EPSCoR award.