* 1338378
* CNIC:US-UAE Planning Visit: Development of Research Collaborations on Spatio-temporal Modeling and Analysis of Mobile Sensor Data in Evaluating Environmental Exposures
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2014
* Wan Bae, University of Wisconsin-Stout
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 09/30/2014
* USD 34,598.00

1338378&lt;br/&gt;Bae&lt;br/&gt;This project will support a team headed by Dr.
Wan Bae, University of Wisconsin-Stout, Menomonie, WI for a two week visit to
the United Arab Emirates (UAE) for the establishment of new international
research collaborations between researchers in the two countries. This visit
will enable the PI and Dr. Cheng Liu and two undergraduate students from the
UWI-Stout, Dr. Petr Vojtchovsky from the University of Denver, and Dr. Shashi
Shekhar from the University of Minnesota, to meet with Dr. Shayma Alkobaisi, Dr.
Ahmed Al Faresi, Dr. Mohammad Masud, Dr. Fatma Maskari and their students from
the United Arab Emirates University, and Dr. Ibrahim Kamel from the University
of Sharjah to develop a research framework for modeling and analysis of
individual exposure to various environmental conditions. The research will focus
on developing data models and computing algorithms for effectively mapping
individuals? environmental exposure to their health conditions, and implementing
Map/Reduce methods for efficiently processing iterative computations of the
proposed models and algorithms. As a result, the research team will submit a
subsequent grant proposal targeted for the NSF Smart Health and Wellbeing (SHB)
program.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Relations between negative health effects
like asthma and lung cancer and elevated levels of the environmental factors,
such as air pollution, tobacco smoke and humidity, have been detected in several
large scale exposure studies. Evaluating environmental exposures often requires
the ability to track, monitor, store, and analyze individual moving trajectories
along with several environmental conditions the individual is exposed to in
order to identify relationships among these data. Challenges arise due to
spatio-temporal uncertainty, data size, and iterative computations of commonly
used data modeling algorithms such as the Back propagation neural network
algorithm. The main objectives of this research are: (1) to develop novel data
models to map individuals environmental exposures to health levels, (2) to
design a new technique for implementing the proposed models on the Map/Reduce
paradigm of the Hadoop system, (3) to develop data analysis algorithms to
characterize behaviors in learned models and interpret the data for estimating
their effects on human health, (4) to build an evaluation system for Asthma
patients as a case study. The research team, consisting of mathematicians,
computer and information scientists, engineers and medical expertise, is capable
of carrying out the planned tasks.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The project will
support two U.S. undergraduate students to be actively involved in scientific
research. Their involvement is designed to integrate research and education
through various activities. Gaining experience with inter-cultural collaboration
is one of the mutual benefits to both the U.S. and UAE students. The also
promotes diversity with the involvement by students from the U.S. who may be
first-generation college students and UAE national students. The U.S. and UAE
researchers will build new relationships that are the basis for future
collaborations in research and education. Further, this project will broaden the
understanding of the impact of the environment on public health and the
importance of individual-based health care for patients, doctors, and healthcare
providers.