* 1338193
* MRI:   Acquisition of a hyperspectral imaging system to support scientific research, applied studies, and education in the state of Alaska
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Anupma Prakash, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Neil R. Swanberg
* 08/31/2016
* USD 427,770.00

This project will establish an Alaska in-state capability for hyper-spectral
(HS) imaging by acquiring a state-of-the-art, yet cost-effective, visible to
shortwave infrared HS imaging system that will be deployed for airborne and
ground-based&lt;br/&gt;remote sensing. The project will integrate, commission,
and deploy the system over selected Alaskan study sites and will build the
necessary maintenance and operations infrastructure to support the provision of
high quality HS data products for Alaskan science&lt;br/&gt;and applications.
This will support basic and applied research, research training, and
educational&lt;br/&gt;activities. The imaging system will be key for both repeat
monitoring and rapid response deployments that could lead to important
scientific insight, as well as a number of more pragmatic benefits such as
wildfire response and assessment, mineral resource exploration, and mapping of
contaminated sediments.&lt;br/&gt;Beside specific courses that will make use of
the new imaging system, there will be a number of graduate students and post-
docs that will be trained using this facility.The project also proposes STEM and
K-12 outreach activities. The images acquired through this MRI will be broadly
distributed, as carefully detailed in the management plan, and favoring
interdisciplinary research on the effects of climate change on high-latitude
environments.