* 1338411
* BCC: Developing a comprehensive regional approach to data set integration to support data-intensive research in education in Silicon Valley
* SBE,SMA
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Douglas Bonett, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* John Cherniavsky
* 08/31/2016
* USD 356,542.00

The PIs of this proposal are developing a collaborative community to support
data-intensive research in education regionally in the Silicon Valley,
California. A team of researchers in education, the social sciences and
engineering from the University of California, Santa Cruz have engaged in a
partnership with researchers from the National Laboratory for Educational
Transformation, a private non-profit organization. The collaborative team is
structuring a network of other regional agencies to expand capacity around four
challenges: cultural, legal and regulatory issues that prevent sharing data
across institutions, analytical approaches, technical infrastructure issues to
integrate and manage the data set, and ethical issues including data security
and privacy. Regional stakeholders from public agencies and the private sector
are coming together with the researchers in five meetings over the course of the
year to expand the scope of research that can be addressed with the multiple
datasets that are being integrated.

As the states develop more sophisticated longitudinal data systems, the need to
increased collaboration and interoperability becomes more important. This
project develops a model of such collaboration from a regional perspective to
expand on data available from the state longitudinal data systems and to
incorporate local data from a number of agencies. This collaboration also
addresses more than just the coordination of data and identification of research
agendas with an additional emphasis on analytical approaches. The work in this
project expands the efforts on the part of the Directorate for Education and
Human Resources to strengthen the relationship between STEM education
researchers and the state, regional, and local longitudinal data system. The
project connects to multiple national efforts that support the use of data in
education with the work of the Regional Education Laboratories. It also connects
to other state and national efforts.