* 1338155
* MRI: Development of Apt, A Testbed Instrument with Adaptable Profiles for Network and Computational Science
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Julio Facelli, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 09/30/2017
* USD 2,400,000.00

Proposal #: 1338155&lt;br/&gt;PI(s): Ricci, Robert; Corbato, Steven C; Eide,
Eric N; Facelli, Julio C; Van Der Merwe, Jacobus&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
University of Utah &lt;br/&gt;Title: MRI/Dev: Apt, a Testbed Instrument with
Adaptable Profiles for Network and Computational Science&lt;br/&gt;Project
Proposed:&lt;br/&gt;This project, developing a novel adaptable instrument (Apt),
aims at attaining a novel control framework to manage a cluster of compute
nodes, storage servers, and a flexible interconnect fabric. Adaptability
constitutes the key feature enabling the creation of diverse instruments for
computer science research. The work is geared towards representing a new
generation of testbed instruments that engage a broader community of users by
empowering them to customize it to their needs. The instrument is expected to
leverage and drive the trends in cloud computing, thus making the development of
adaptable instrument environments easier, cheaper, and less risky. At the same
time, it offers properties not available on commercial clouds, including the
proposed levels of resource fidelity and transparency required of a scientific
instrument. The project also develops the control and management system for
creating and using profiles, and for supporting concurrent experiments and
allocating resources among them in a dynamic manner. The fundamental building
blocks of Apt identified include: &lt;br/&gt;- Resource provisioning,
scheduling, and conditioning; &lt;br/&gt;- Operational state tracking;
experiment management, archive, and replay; and &lt;br/&gt;- User management.
&lt;br/&gt;This work contributes to make these elements reusable in a way that
enables the proposed to be shared by profiles supporting a wide range of
research domains. The domains currently targeted include, but are not limited
to, sustainable energy control systems, biomolecular science, privacy and
security, and data-intensive computation.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
&lt;br/&gt;The instrument is expected to be a national resource for computer
science and other computing-based fields, Internet-accessible and to contribute
to the nation?s cyberinfrastructure. The broad and diverse targeted research
communities include strong empirical and experimental components. The proposed
instrument is highly suitable for training and education.