* 1338014
* MRI/RUI: Acquisition of a Combination Raman and FTIR for Research, Education, and Training
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2015
* Samuel Lofland, Rowan University
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 08/31/2015
* USD 280,000.00

1338014&lt;br/&gt;Tabbetha Dobbins&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;This award from the Major Research Instrumentation program
will support researchers at Rowan University with the acquisition of a combined
Raman and FTIR spectroscopy instrument and collaborators at Rutgers University
in Camden will access the instrument. Rowan is rapidly growing as a research and
research training university in southern New Jersey. Research is ongoing in
biomedical science, chemistry, energy, environmental, and pharmaceutical
science. Acquisition of the state-of-the-art instrumentation, which combines
imaging and vibrational spectroscopy to enable collection of both Raman and FTIR
signals at the sub-micron levels, will directly impact the faculty research
projects. These projects include: (i) determining phonon density of states for
nanostructured and doped metal hydrides for fuel cell and battery applications;
(ii) measuring lattice dynamics and phonon, magnon and electro-magnon
interactions in the rhombohedrally distorted perovskite structures; (iii)
evaluating the structures of protic ionic liquid solutions to better understand
proton-solvation mechanisms; (iv) generating asymmetric optical sidebands which
can be red-shifted or blue-shifted relative to the carrier seed light depending
on configuration; (v) measuring dynamic structural transitions in protein and
polymer materials at various temperatures to form tunable biomaterials such as
films, gels, particles, fibers, or composites which can be widely used for
tissue regeneration medicine, controlled drug delivery, biosensors, and
biophotonics; and (vi) understanding the full composition, and therefore
physiological effects, of a new street drug, called "wet" by measuring its
vibrational spectroscopic signature. Researchers at the partner institutions are
actively working on nanomaterial and nanodevice development, novel chemicals for
energy research, and design of advanced measurement devices for which optical
property measurement is necessary. This acquisition will support the growth in
experimental research opportunities and capabilities at Rowan University and to
enhance collaboration with Rutgers University located only 20 minutes away in
nearby Camden.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;With this
instrument acquisition award from the Major Research Instrumentation program
researchers at Rowan University and collaborators at Rutgers University in
Camden will now have expanded capabilities for studying molecules with light
using a new system combining two powerful techniques. This combined instrument
allows scientists to study how molecules vibrate. By learning about the
vibrational frequencies, scientists can gain physical and chemical insights into
materials regarding their identities, bond types, dopant atom positioning and
bond strength. This instrument makes it possible to advance research and
training at Rowan University and collaborating institutions in areas of
materials science, physics, chemistry, biology, and biomedical science and
engineering. Educational opportunities will also be available by including Raman
and FTIR in the teaching of biophysics, cell biology, genetics, bioinformatics
and forensic science courses; as well as in laboratory courses for senior-level
students working in a research format. The faculty, students, and post-doctoral
researchers impacted by this instrumental acquisition include: 14 faculty
investigators, 24 undergraduate and 16 graduate research students and 216
students per year in courses offered in Physics, Chemistry, Biology, Forensic
Science, and Electrical and Computer Engineering.