* 1338354
* The Influence of Coastal-Trapped Waves on the Inner Continental Shelf:  Temperature and Circulation Patterns
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2013,03/31/2015
* Melanie Fewings, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 03/31/2015
* USD 112,654.00

Previous studies show that substantial fluctuations in sea level, along-shelf
velocity, and water temperature along the West Coast of North America are due to
coastal-trapped waves. These waves propagate poleward, have periods of days to
weeks, are mainly driven by wind fluctuations, and are a mechanism by which
winds in one location influence the coastal ocean in other locations far away.
Remote wind fluctuations in Baja California have been observed to cause
transport of warm and cold water masses onshore in the Southern California
Bight, with implications for nutrient supply to kelp forests, larval transport,
strength of internal tidal temperature fluctuations, and trapping or flushing of
coastal pollution and harmful algal blooms. Coastal-trapped waves are also
suggested to affect the frequency and strength of internal tidal bores all along
the West Coast.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will test the hypothesis that in
the Santa Barbara Channel and around the Northern Channel Islands, along-shelf
pressure gradients arriving as coastal-trapped waves generated by wind
fluctuations in Baja California are a dominant source of variability in
circulation and temperature. It will answer the questions 1) What effect do wind
fluctuations in Baja California have on coastal pressure, velocity, temperature,
and stratification? 2) How does Point Conception affect the propagation of
fluctuations in coastal pressure, velocity, and temperature? and 3) Are internal
tides and bores affected by thermocline shoaling due to coastal-trapped waves?
This process-oriented study will utilize existing observations from i) mooring
deployments covering 18 years, and ii) satellite winds and coastal temperature
and sea-level data extending from Baja California to San Francisco, California.
It will include comparisons of observed sea-level gradients to remote winds in
Baja California, and of observed velocity and temperature signals near the coast
to proven dynamical models of flow driven by a pressure gradient. These will
help determine whether regional fluctuations in thermocline depth due to the
passage of coastal-trapped waves enhance or inhibit internal-tidal temperature
fluctuations, and lead to a dynamical understanding of the effects of remote
winds in Baja California on the coastal ocean.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER
IMPACTS&lt;br/&gt;Coastal-trapped waves occur worldwide, but their effect on
water temperature near the shore and cross-shelf and along-shelf circulation is
not well-described. The Santa Barbara Channel and Northern Channel Islands
support important fisheries and kelp forest ecosystems and contain several
Marine Protected Areas under ecosystem-based management. The influence of winds
in Baja California via the coastal-trapped wave mechanism is probably important
for delivery of biogenic particles, nutrients, and larvae to productive kelp
forest ecosystems in the region. Therefore this study will benefit management
and planning of marine protected areas as well as other interdisciplinary
research such as at the NSF-supported Santa Barbara Coastal Long-Term Ecological
Research project. It will also help maintain diversity in the sciences by
supporting a female PI who is a new investigator.