* 1338118
* MRI Collaborative: Development of iRehab, an Intelligent Closed-Loop Instrument for Adaptive Rehabilitation
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2018
* Fillia Makedon, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 09/30/2018
* USD 879,890.00

Proposal #: 13-38118 Collaborative Proposal #: 13-37866&lt;br/&gt;PI(s):
Makedon, Fillia S PI(s): Betke, Margrit&lt;br/&gt;Athitsos, Vassilis; Gatchel,
Robert J; Huang, Heng; Romero-Ortega, Mario I&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University
of Texas-Arlington INstitution: Boston Univeristy &lt;br/&gt;Title: MRI/Dev
:Collab Dev. of iRehab, an Intelligent Closed-loop Instrument for Adaptive
Rehabilitation&lt;br/&gt;Project Proposed:&lt;br/&gt;This project, developing of
an instrument referred to as iRehab, aims to enable personalized rehabilitation
therapy for individuals suffering from brain injury, motor disabilities,
cognitive impairments, and/or psychosocial symptoms. The instrument, a modular
rehabilitation device, in its simplest form consists of a computer, a camera,
and adaptive software for assessment and training of cognitive functions. In its
final, most complex form, the instrument will integrate data from a 4-degree-of-
freedom robotic-arm with gimbals and torque sensing, a Kinect sensor, multiple
cameras, an eye-tracking device, a touch screen, a microphone, and an fNIRS
brain imaging sensor. &lt;br/&gt;The instrument will be developed in two phases.
In the first phase, the investigators develop a Barrett robot arm. In the second
phase, the instrument will extend to a Kinect sensor, multiple cameras, an eye-
tracking device, and related low-cost components, along with the assessment
software for assessing motor function and cognitive, emotional, and personality
functioning. &lt;br/&gt;iRehab consists integrates multidisciplinary
methodologies and sensors to assess and assist the cognitive and physical
rehabilitation of persons affected by various impairments. This work highly
interdisciplinary work follows a cyber-physical approach. It provides new
research opportunities across the fields of human-centered computing, computer
vision, assistive technology, robotics, machine learning, and neuroimaging. This
work advances research in human brain activity mapping, personalized medicine,
and big data.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;The proposed instrument
exhibits potential for large broader impact as it directly contributes to future
healthcare and human wellbeing improving accessibility to affordable
rehabilitation for a broad range of patients. The instrument is likely to
accelerate the recovery of a large spectrum of injuries and diseases including
those causing motor, neurological, and cognitive disorders. An education plan
includes course development, internships, workshops and tutorials, and an on-
line resource center. In addition to many educational impacts, impact will be
felt on the fundamental research in the areas addressed.