* 1338583
* Facility Support: Multi-User Facility Support for U-Th-Pb Geochronology and Complementary Isotope Geochemistry and SEM imaging at the Arizona LaserChron Center
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2014,01/31/2017
* George Gehrels, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 01/31/2017
* USD 908,225.00

Recent developments in geochronologic methods and instrumentation are
revolutionizing many different aspects of Earth Science research. Some of the
most exciting advances are being driven by Laser-Ablation ICP Mass Spectrometry
(LA-ICPMS), which generates U-Th-Pb ages and complementary geochemical
information rapidly and with micron-scale spatial resolution.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Arizona LaserChron Center (ALC) is a multi-user
facility that utilizes LA-ICPMS to determine U-Th-Pb ages, Hf isotope ratios,
and trace element abundances from a variety of minerals that occur in
sedimentary, igneous, and metamorphic rocks. We also utilize a dedicated
Scanning Electron Microscope that generates the high-resolution and high-
magnification images necessary for state-of-the-art micro-analysis. Primary
goals of the ALC are to (1) generate robust geochronologic and geochemical data
in support of many different NSF-funded projects, (2) use every aspect of
facility operation as an opportunity to train faculty and student researchers in
geochronologic theory and methodology, and (3) drive the development of new
techniques and applications that take advantage of the high efficiency and fine
spatial resolution of LA-ICPMS. Research at the ALC is conducted in a highly
collaborative mode, with ALC scientists providing assistance with all aspects of
a project (from initial design of the study to final publication of results) and
faculty members and students from other institutions visiting the lab to
generate their own data and learn the theory and methodology of U-Th-Pb
geochronology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funding from this award will enable the ALC
to facilitate the acquisition of geochronologic information in support of a
large number of NSF-funded projects, drive the development of numerous new
analytical techniques and applications, and provide a broad array of educational
opportunities such as teaching short courses at annual meetings, developing
materials that can be used in Earth Science courses, creating new tools for
displaying and interpreting geochronologic data, and driving the development of
a global database "Geochron" that hosts U-Th-Pb geochronologic information.
Research conducted at the ALC will continue to generate important new knowledge
about the growth of continents, processes of mountain building, generation and
dispersal of sediment, formation of mineral and hydrocarbon resources, history
of evolutionary changes, and genetic linkages between climate and tectonics.