* 1338606
* A University Consortium for Interdisciplinary Water Science
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2014,01/31/2020
* Albert Valocchi, Consortium of Universities for the Advancement of Hydrologic Sci
* Cooperative Agreement
* Laura Lautz
* 01/31/2020
* USD 11,314,936.00

The Consortium of Universities for the Advancement of Hydrologic Science, Inc.
(CUAHSI) will build on its existing Water Data Center (WDC) facility to provide
a range of services to the multidisciplinary water science community.
Specifically, CUAHSI will offer training in instrumentation and host specialty
conferences in field instrumentation and hydroinformatics. CUAHSI will continue
its successful activities from the past, including Pathfinder graduate student
travel grants, Research Cyberseminars, Let's Talk about Water outreach events,
and the Biennial Water Science Symposia. A new initiative is the development of
a community governance process and community modeling resources designed to
enable the water science community to more readily contribute its knowledge of
continental water processes to Earth Systems models. This will be a
collaborative effort with NCAR to develop a water-oriented branch of the
Community Land Model (CLM), that would be supported by the Water Data Center,
and empower the community toward improving the model realism in large-scale
water storages and fluxes in climate and Earth system simulations. Strategic
planning activities are incorporated into the core governance of CUAHSI.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because water connects the biotic and abiotic components
of the Earth system and is a critical economic and ecological resource, CUAHSI
services impact multiple disciplines and serve society at large. The WDC will
enable new synthetic research, and better sharing and dissemination of research
data and results that can be utilized in applied and policy research. The
advancement of standards for water data ensures free and better exchange of
information between academics, federal agencies and the private sector. CUAHSI
Hydrologic Information System is being used by multiple governments around the
world (the Dominican Republic and the Republic of Italy). The WDC will also
target outreach activities to the Native American community through tribal
colleges and tribal government. Water management is a major issue at many
reservations and water science provides an attractive career path for Native
Americans with jobs available at all degree levels. Training and outreach
activities will provide important training and research opportunities for
graduate students to explore meaningful and important interdisciplinary
questions. Advancement of water science depends on such investments in part
because of the many traditional disciplines that are required for an
understanding of water in the Earth system. CUAHSI seeks to overcome
fragmentation in water science research by supporting interdisciplinary science.
The services included in this project have been selected to provide maximum
benefit to the community as well as to serve as a foundation for the advancement
of the science.