* 1338044
* MRI: Acquisition of a High Resolution Computed Tomography System for Research and Education
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2015
* Daniel Wescott, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2015
* USD 705,383.00

Micro-computed tomography (µCT) is state-of-the-art high resolution imaging
technology that is increasingly employed in the study of bones, fossils, and
archaeological artifacts. It allows researchers to nondestructively explore the
three-dimensional external and internal structure of bone, fossilized remains,
and irreplaceable archaeological artifacts. With Major Research Instrumentation
support, Texas State University, an Emerging Research and Hispanic serving
institution in Central Texas, will purchase a µCT system that will be housed in
the Forensic Anthropology Center at Texas State (FACTS). The system will help
support the missions of the university and FACTS by promoting scientific
discovery as well as providing teaching, training, and learning opportunities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;FACTS is a scientific research, educational training, and
service center within the Department of Anthropology. FACTS faculty conduct
research and train students in skeletal biology, and provide service to law
enforcement by analyzing skeletal remains in a medicolegal context. FACTS also
houses a rapidly growing documented human skeletal collection. The combination
of a large documented human skeletal collection in the same laboratory with a
µCT system will allow faculty and students to conduct scientific investigations
into how habitual physical activities, age, and body weight affect the
microstructure of bones and to develop methods for determining whether trauma to
a skeleton occurred at the time of or after death. This research will greatly
advance scientific knowledge of bone functional adaptation and trauma. The µCT
system will also provide a method of conducting virtual autopsies on skeletal
remains. FACTS faculty will be able to accurately analyze and document injuries
in skeletal remains and build virtual three-dimensional reconstructions of the
implement used to cause sharp and blunt force trauma, which will greatly benefit
legal investigations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The µCT system will be a shared
instrument used by intramural and extramural researchers for a variety of
collaborative interdisciplinary scientific investigations. The Center for
Archaeological Studies will use the µCT system to aid in the documentation,
interpretation, and conservation of artifacts from ancient human occupation
sites and shipwrecks. The Paleobotany Laboratory will analyze and identify
fossilized plants that can be used to reconstruct past climates instrumental in
understanding climate change. In addition, the µCT images will provide a method
for building virtual museums and sharing detailed information about bone
microstructure, prehistoric artifacts, and rare fossils with researchers around
the globe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The µCT system will also be used to promote
learning, and students will be involved in research using the µCT system. This
will create greater excitement for scientific discovery and help with retention.
Teachers can enhance learning in the classroom by facilitating the viewing of
structures such the vascular system of plants and the microstructure of bone
that are difficult for students to conceptualize. Students trained in advanced
imaging methods will have unique skills and research opportunities that will
significantly affect their career options, and can be applied to problems in a
variety of fields. This knowledge will be especially valuable for the large
portion of female, rural, and Hispanic students at Texas State University that
often seek employment outside of academia in applied fields. In general, the
shared instrument will serve to increase faculty and student scholarship,
attract outside researchers, promote collaboration, help attract and retain
diverse and exceptional faculty and students, and enhance teaching and learning.