* 1338928
* Planning Grant:  I/UCRC for Excellence in Logistics and Distribution
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2015
* Ratna Babu Chinnam, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Raffaella Montelli
* 07/31/2015
* USD 12,999.00

Wayne State University (WSU) seeks to join the Center for Excellence In
Logistics and Distribution (CELDi) that is currently comprised of the University
of Arkansas (lead), the University of Missouri at Columbia, Virginia Tech, the
University of California at Berkeley, Clemson University, Oklahoma State and
Arizona State University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this
effort is the innovative applied logistics research solutions for addressing
emerging challenges in the automotive, healthcare and defense industries. These
projects will provide scientific answers to fundamental problems in the
sustainability of logistics operations and their interface with product design
decisions impacting automotive and defense industries. Further, the Center
projects will lead to the development of novel real-time prediction and
optimization models and methodologies for logistics systems in manufacturing and
healthcare systems. The Industrial and Systems Engineering (ISE) department and
other affiliated WSU faculty are experts in logistics, product development, and
healthcare systems engineering with a track record of quality scholarship and
numerous past and current NSF, DoT, DoD, and VA projects. Further, faculty has a
long history of collaboration and success in conducting interdisciplinary
applied research with industry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of the
proposed Center on the industry is immediate due to the nature of I/UCRC. In
addition, the project results will be disseminated to industry through
publications and presentations at practitioner oriented conferences for broader
distribution and impact. The proposed site will transform its ISE curriculum by
enhancing applications taught in classes as well as industry guest lectures.
Given rich ethnic, racial, and gender diversity of the WSU undergraduate and
graduate student body, the Center will help attract and retain women and
underrepresented minorities by providing applied research experience and
opportunities to participate in integrated science, technology and engineering
solutions at member companies. The proposed Center site will engage and enable
these students to improve their skills by participating in interdisciplinary
applied research projects with industry during academic year and summer
internships. The proposed site's projects will be included within WSUs outreach
efforts to community colleges and K-12.