* 1338350
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Settlement Ecology on California's Channel Islands
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2015
* Douglas Kennett, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2015
* USD 29,800.00

Under the guidance of Dr. Douglas Kennett, Christopher Jazwa will develop and
test a model of past human settlement patterns on California's Northern Channel
Islands. The Northern Channel Islands are a series of four islands and
associated islets off the coast of Santa Barbara, California, that were occupied
continuously from 13,000 years ago until the last inhabitants were brought to
mainland missions by the Spanish in the 1820s. This project will use
environmental variables to predict the optimal locations for permanent
settlement sites on the islands. Through a program of surveying for new
archaeological sites, targeted excavation of sites in high-, middle-, and low-
ranked locations, extensive radiocarbon dating to establish a chronology for
occupation, and oxygen isotopic analyses of California mussel shells to
reconstruct season of occupation for sites, this project will test how people
responded to population increase and changing environmental conditions through
settlement expansion.

This has direct applications for population structure in the current United
States. By understanding how people in the past adapted to overcrowding and
environmental degradation by modifying their environment, developing new
technologies, or seeking new locations to settle, one can better understand the
options available today and learn from decisions that were made in the past.
California's Northern Channel Islands provide an effective laboratory to study
this because they are spatially bounded, have a limited and relatively well-
understood set of resources, are well-preserved as part of Channel Islands
National Park, have a long history of archaeological research, and have a long
time depth of human history.

For this project, Kennett and Jazwa will model the settlement decisions in
response to changing environmental and demographic conditions using the Ideal
Free Distribution (IFD), a model borrowed and adapted from population ecology.
The IFD is an effective model for understanding human settlement because it can
incorporate different groups of environmental variables and it is testable with
archaeological data. This project will be a valuable contribution to the
archaeological literature because it will be the first to explicitly test the
model using data collected in the field. Kennett and Jazwa will use a variety of
data sets to do this. Survey for sites will establish a better understanding of
the distribution of populations across the landscape and excavation will be used
to understand changes over time. These changes will be anchored chronologically
with extensive radiocarbon dating. Seasonality studies will be used to determine
whether settlements were occupied year-round or were part of larger settlement
systems. The results of this study will be published in peer-reviewed journals
and shared at professional conferences in the form of presented papers and
posters. This project will also be an important part of Jazwa's professional
development and will result in his Ph.D. dissertation. Laboratory processing of
excavated materials will be done with the assistance of undergraduate students
at Pennsylvania State University, aiding in their education and development as
archaeologists. Finally, survey and data collection from this project will be
done in part to satisfy the goals of Channel Islands National Park to inventory
our nation's valuable cultural resources.