* 1338427
* Predictability and Prediction of Climate from Days to Decades
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2014,05/31/2021
* James Kinter, George Mason University
* Continuing Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 05/31/2021
* USD 5,699,932.00

This award provides continued funding for the Center for Ocean-Land-Atmosphere
Studies (COLA). COLA is a climate science research center established to
explore, establish and quantify the variability and predictability of Earth's
climate variations on seasonal to decadal time scales, and to harvest this
predictability for societally beneficial predictions. The Center is jointly
funded by NSF, NOAA and NASA.

Work supported through this award includes activities devoted to 1) basic
research on predictability on intraseasonal, seasonal, interannual, and decadal
timescales; 2) evaluation of the predictability, skill, and fidelity of US
national climate models; and 3) contributions to the development of next
generation seamless prediction systems. Research performed under item 1 includes
testing of land data assimilation schemes in multiple models, performing
hindcasts of El Nino/Southern Oscillation (ENSO) events investigate inter-event
diversity of ENSO, performing dynamical prediction experiments for the Indian
monsoon, and determining the dependence of drought probability on surface
boundary conditions including land cover change. Work under item 2 focuses on
the use of optimal spatial structures derived from information theoretic
analysis, which represent the most predictable modes, or modes for which
predictability differs the most between two models. This activity is intended to
support climate prediction efforts at US national centers and contribute to
COLA's research-to-operations effort. Work under item 3 involves collaborators
at the NOAA National Centers for Environmental Prediction (NCEP) and includes
the development of optimal methods of initializing high-resolution coupled
models including version 2 of the Coupled Forecast System (CFSv2), a model used
operationally at NCEP.

The work has broader impacts due to its focus on research leading to improved
climate prediction, given the substantial societal consequences of climate
variability and change. In addition, COLA benefits the US climate research
enterprise through community integration, education, seminars, workshops, and
software and information services. COLA also serves an important function in
transferring the results of basic climate science research on predictability and
prediction into operational use.