* 1338739
* EESE: Graduate Virtue Ethics Education in Science and Engineering
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Angela Wilson, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2017
* USD 299,558.00

There is widespread agreement that scientists and engineers should receive
training in ethics. But there is no consensus on how best to incorporate ethics
into science and engineering education. Little is known about how to achieve and
how to assess the desired outcome of helping scientists and engineers to make
good ethical decisions. This research and education project addresses a major
gap in ethics education: connecting ethics education to ethical decision making.
The PI will develop an alternative, gaming approach that seeks to recast the
ethics education of scientists and engineers as less a matter of memorizing
rules through content delivery systems and more a matter of practicing virtuous
behavior in life-like gaming environments. The PI's approach builds on the
growing literature on pedagogical uses of games, as well as his own prototype
research ethics games developed with prior NSF support. Rather than instructing
students in "the right thing to do" then testing whether they know "the right
thing to do", games immerse students in situations in which they must decide
what to do. The gaming environment serves as a training ground for developing
practical ethical skills and forming habits of character. Games are more true to
the ambiguous, dynamic, and complex situations faced by scientists and engineers
than any pre-packaged, static, and unidirectional content. In this project, the
PI will test the hypothesis that an ethics game can improve ethical decision
making. This will entail finalizing three prototype research ethics games,
facilitating game play with diverse graduate student populations from multiple
institutions, improving the games through an iterative process, assessing game
playability and impacts on ethical decision making using a well-validated
evaluation tool, and disseminating the games and final research
results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project advances knowledge
of the least understood area of ethics education: how to assess the connection
between ethics education and ethical decision making. By using virtue ethics
theory and taking an interactive gaming approach, this project has the potential
to transform ethics education for a new generation of scientists and engineers.
Assessments will address not only user participation in and satisfaction with
the games developed, but also their improvement in developing the skills needed
for ethical decision making in real-world contexts. Project results will be
disseminated broadly; the games will be made available to the partner
institutions and adapted for inclusion in UNT's RCR training program for
graduate students.