* 1338946
* Neurocognitive Mechanisms of Second Language Learning: Role of Learning Context and Cognitive Functions
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Ping Li, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 08/31/2016
* USD 59,023.00

Both folk wisdom and educational practices point to the benefits of study-abroad
experiences for the learning of a new language. But why is language learning so
much more effective when conducted in the target language environment, as
compared with learning in a classroom? The proposed catalytic research project
addresses this question with a neurocognitive approach by comparing two groups
of learners: American students who are immersed in the second language
environments (study-abroad students in Milan, Italy), and American students
studying Italian in a classroom setting (in State College, Pennsylvania). This
initial comparison will provide the basis for uncovering the role of learning
context (immersion or no immersion). The investigators will use functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to examine the effect of learning context on
how second language material is represented and processed, as compared with that
of native language and language-ambiguous materials (e.g., words that could
occur in both languages, such as homographs). Furthermore, the investigators
will examine the impact of the learner?s individual differences in specific
cognitive capacities on the successfulness of second language learning, and how
such differences interact with the context of learning. These capacities, we
hypothesize, include different levels of inhibitory control and working memory
abilities, because the learners always need to inhibit the native language while
speaking the second language and to keep track of the language being spoken. We
also hypothesize that the immersion experience provides a context for more
effective inhibition of their native language, thereby promoting direct mapping
of new words to existing concepts for learners, especially for those with weaker
control abilities. Such interactions between cognitive capacities and learning
context are hypothesized to show in differential neural networks underlying
bilingual performance in several key brain regions including the left
prefrontal, anterior cingulate, and middle temporal cortical areas.

As our world becomes increasingly globalized, there is need for more effective
cross-cultural communications via the use of multiple languages. It is thus
important to understand the cognitive and neural bases of what makes second
language learning successful. The proposed catalytic work provides an ideal
forum for new, previously unexplored, international collaborations in the
context of bilingual communities (Milan, Italy and State College, USA). It will
lead to new theories and data in a rapidly developing field, the cognitive
neuroscience of bilingualism that crosses the boundaries of psychology,
linguistics, and neuroscience. The project also reflects our attempt to
understand the bilingual mind and brain in a socially relevant context, such as
the continuing social pressures faced by immigrants struggling with their second
language. Increased knowledge in this domain could also have pedagogical
implications for more effective foreign language teaching, for example, by
providing classroom training that targets the direct connections between words
and concepts (rather than second language learning through one?s native
language). This project will provide further catalyst for research leading to
large-scale collaborations between the investigators? institutions in the USA
and Italy for longitudinal studies of second language learning in children and
adults.