* 1338102
* MRI: Acquisition of a Cloud Computing Infrastructure for Research and Education
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Chia-Chu Chiang, University of Arkansas Little Rock
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2017
* USD 108,125.00

Proposal #: 13-38102&lt;br/&gt;PI(s): Yu, Shucheng&lt;br/&gt; Chiang, Chia-Chu;
Xie, Mengjun; Yoshigoe, Kenji&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Arkansas-
Little Rock&lt;br/&gt;Title: MRI/Acq.: Cloud Computing Infrastructure for
Research and Education &lt;br/&gt;Project Proposed:&lt;br/&gt;This project,
acquiring private cloud instrumentation, aims to conduct six research projects
spanning areas of social networks, secure cloud data system, cryptography,
biomedical computing, and data stream analysis. The instrumentation will enable
the following projects:&lt;br/&gt;- Analysis of Sybil Attacks in Large-Scale
Social Networks,&lt;br/&gt;- Secure Data Access Control for Cloud Storage
Systems,&lt;br/&gt;- Study of Cache Pollution Attacks in Named-Data
Networking,&lt;br/&gt;- Development of a Cloud-Based Graph Theoretical Analysis
Framework for Human Brain Connectomes,&lt;br/&gt;- Parallel Processing of Fully
Homomorphic Encryption, and&lt;br/&gt;- Performance Real-Time Stream Analysis on
the Cloud.&lt;br/&gt;This private cloud, serving three universities (U AR-Little
Rock (UALR), U AR-Pine Bluff (UAPB), and &lt;br/&gt;U Central AR (UAC)), will be
the first in the state dedicated to research and teaching.&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;The instrumentation enriches the research and educational
activities within the universities and overall state. Hence, new courses can be
developed and implemented. Moreover, the cloud infrastructure provides unique
opportunities for minority students that will then have access to cutting-edge
high-performance ubiquitous computing resources. The computing infrastructure
creates many education and training opportunities for the students through the
process of its installation, operation, and maintenance. A Summer Undergraduate
Program of Entrepreneurship and Research (SUPER) program and the ACM club at the
university will offer training within and beyond the institution. Also, an
undergraduate summer research program on cloud computing will be established to
expand the opportunities throughout this EPSCoR jurisdiction.