* 1338609
* EAGER: Tissue Organization Contribution to Cardiac Force Output
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2015
* Anna Grosberg, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Carol Lucas
* 07/31/2015
* USD 211,492.00

PI: Grosberg&lt;br/&gt;Proposal ID:
1338609&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Overview:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The heart's proper
function depends on muscle fibers organized on multiple length scales. There is
a lack of understanding of all the mechanisms by which fiber organization
remodeling leads to changes in cardiac function. This adversely impacts our
ability to create predictive in vitro tools to measure cardiac function. One of
the latest platforms for measuring tissue stress in vitro, "heart on a chip",
has been used to characterize contractility and structure of isotropic and
anisotropic cardiac tissues. We found that the current models are not able to
explain the drastic loss of functionality with the loss of cellular
organization. However, the "heart on a chip" technology provides the platform
for experiments to explore the relationship between tissue function and
structure. This project seeks to create a computational tool that will quantify
the direct contribution of muscle tissue organization to the maximal developed
force.&lt;br/&gt;The tool will be based on a more accurate model that accounts
for the dipole nature of the sarcomeres, which are the force producing units in
the cardiac muscle (Aim 1). The "heart on a chip" platform will be used to
characterize tissues that will be designed to have a local anisotropic
organization and a global isotropic organization (Aim 2). These newly engineered
tissues will allow us to experimentally decouple the direct and indirect
contributions of organization to changes in force output. Combining the modeling
and experimental components, a comprehensive tool will be developed for
quantifying the direct contribution of organization to force development in
cardiac tissues (Aim 3). Beyond the scope of this grant, this tool will be used
to quantify the differences between stem-cell derived and primary cardiac
tissue's force production capabilities. It will also be the basic platform for
expending our model into three-dimensions to compare clinical data with
inherently two-dimensional in vitro experiments.&lt;br/&gt;BME Theme: Cellular
biomechanics&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectually, the results of this project will
provide an insight into the relationship between structure and function of
muscle tissues. The quantitative tool proposed here will be useful in the future
for quantitatively characterizing the down-stream effects of different gene-
expression profiles on contractility. For example, stem-cell derived and native
cardiac tissues that have different structures will be compared. The novel
engineered tissues developed in this grant will also be useful in the future in
studying global vs. local organization effects on cardiac tissue function, which
can provide insight into clinical heart failure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will impact both the pharmaceutical
industry and medicine by providing a tool to understand the effect of myofibril
organization on cardiac function. To ensure broad scientific impact, it is
planned to publish the findings in scientific journals and to provide public
access to the computational tool developed through this work. The findings from
this project will be incorporated into a graduate elective course (taught by the
PI), and a team of undergraduate (2-3 students/year) will be involved in the
research. The PI has also designed an outreach module for students from high-
schools with under-represented populations. In summary this project has
educational and outreach components and the potential to impact society as a
whole by contributing to the understanding of heart function and disease.