* 1338056
* MRI:   Acquisition of a GPU Cluster for Computational Science in Mississippi
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Gregory Tschumper, University of Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 08/31/2017
* USD 300,000.00

With this award from the Chemistry Major Research Instrumentation Program,
Professor Gregory Tschumper from the University of Mississippi and colleagues
Brian Hopkins and Robert Doerksen will acquire a GPU-based high performance
computing (HPC) cluster for use in computational science. The cluster would be
operated by the Mississippi Center for Supercomputing Research (MCSR) on the
University of Mississippi campus. The proposal is aimed at enhancing research
and education at all levels, especially in areas such as (a) molecular
properties of non-covalent clusters; (b) computational studies of biomolecules;
(c) interactions of nanoparticles with biological systems and small molecules;
(d) morphology-structure-property correlations in organic electronic materials
and (e) molecular modeling and dynamics of carboxylesterases and their
substrates.

Computer systems and clusters of computers are used by chemists and biochemists
to investigate reactions and the properties of chemicals and materials using
theoretical models and programs. The computer calculations are used, often along
with experimental data, to model and better understand many types of complex
chemical and biological phenomena. They are also used to predict results and
guide experiments. This resource will be used in research and in course work by
undergraduate students and faculty at eight institutions training them in
computational chemistry methodology with a modern computer system.