* 1338994
* Collaborative Research: Facility Support to Renew Operation of the National Center for Airborne Laser Mapping (NCALM)
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2019
* William Dietrich, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 07/31/2019
* USD 1,055,582.00

1338994 Dietrich

This grant provides five years of operational support for the National Center
for Airborne Laser Swath Mapping (NCALM). NCALM is a collaborative Facility with
two nodes. The acquisition node and initial flight line trajectory calculations
and ALSM data calibration functions are now located and performed at the
University of Houston (UH) and the data processing, archival and distribution
node is at the University of California at Berkeley (UC-B). Also known as
airborne Light Detection and Ranging (LIDAR), ALSM allows for the measurement of
surface topographic features with decimeter-level accuracies and meter to sub-
meter spatial resolution. High resolution, georeferenced, digital elevation
models (DEMs) processed from raw ALSM data (point clouds) offer unprecedented
observations of a multitude of geomorphic features at the scales at which
fundamental shaping processes operate. Examples include, fault scarps, hill
slopes, river channels, barrier beaches and sand dunes, mountain and continental
glaciers, volcanic edifices and vegetative canopy structure. DEMs developed from
ALSM can be used to model and advance understanding of the dynamics of surface
landforms and the underlying processes responsible. The technique also has a
wide range of applications in civil engineering and hazards assessments and for
archaeological investigations of past civilizations modification of landscapes,
especially in tropical environs where such structures are invisible via airborne
photogrammetry. ALSM systems fire laser pulses (typically Nd:YAG at milliJoule
powers) at high frequency from an aircraft whose position and orientation are
accounted for via on board and ground GPS control and an aircraft IMU. The ALSM
system measures the round trip travel time for individual pulses to reflect off
encountered surfaces and return to a detector. The intensity of returns is also
recorded on the UH GEMINI system. Raw ALSM travel time data is combined with
ground Global Positioning System (GPS) receiver phase data and aircraft GPS and
IMU data to generate xyz georeferenced coordinates of each laser return from the
surface or ?point clouds.? The GEMINI system?s high frequency laser postings
allows for penetration of dense vegetative canopies and, with developed post
processing routines, can yield maps of both the upper surface of vegetative
canopy and the bare Earth surface that is obstructed from a bird?s eye view.
NCALM is dedicated to meeting three goals: 1) providing research-quality LiDAR
data to the scientific community, 2) advancing the state of the art in airborne
laser mapping, and 3) training and educating graduate students to meet the
rapidly growing needs of academia, government, and the private sector.

***