* 1338810
* FESD Type I: The Dynamics of Earth System Oxygenation
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2020
* Ariel Anbar, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 08/31/2020
* USD 4,845,000.00

Oxygen, in the form of the molecule O2, is abundant in the Earth's atmosphere
and oceans, where it is vital for all multi-cellular life, including humans.
However, O2 was nearly absent from the atmosphere and oceans during the first
half of Earth's history. In the past decade, we solidified our understanding of
when the prolonged and complex transition to the modern, O2-rich environment
began. However, the cause of this so-called "Great Oxidation Event" (GOE) and
later changes in O2 remains one of the major mysteries in Earth System Science.
Solving it is of more than academic interest because it will help us understand
how the Earth supports life, and provide insights and perspective on some of the
environmental challenges posed by human activity. This project will tackle this
challenge by combining new data and calculations that reach from the Earth's
core to the top of the atmosphere to develop a comprehensive model of the
geochemical cycle of O2 that can explain the GOE.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
specific research program is motivated by an emerging consensus that biological
O2 production began long before the GOE. If so, then the GOE was most likely
triggered by a change in O2 consumption. Various lines of reasoning point to
changes in the flux of O2-reactive material from the Earth's mantle, perhaps
driven by the gradual but inexorable cooling of the planet's interior. However,
the specific changes and their causes are unclear and debated. The project team
will refine and test a number of hypotheses proposed in the past decade. To do
so it necessarily integrates: models of atmospheric chemistry; records of
Earth's surface O2 history developed from inorganic and organic geochemical
proxies; laboratory calibrations of these proxies; geochemical analyses of
samples from the lithosphere and mantle; seismic reconstructions of Earth's
interior structure; geodynamic models of mantle mixing and evolution;
thermodynamic calculations; and findings from mineral physics experiments.
Researchers in these disciplinary communities rarely collaborate. Therefore, the
work will be scientifically transformative.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
team aims to extend this transformation beyond its members and even beyond the
geosciences. In addition to the typical training and dissemination activities,
we will foster communication and integration across disciplinary boundaries by:
conducting open, online "workshops without walls" on the O2 puzzle; perform
scholarly research into our collaborative research challenges and practices to
identify and disseminate best practices for transdisciplinary team science; and
develop, deploy, and assess a teacher professional development (PD) program
centered on how scientists communicate across diverse disciplinary divides to
answer complex questions. These broader activities, together with the science
research program, will advance a holistic vision of the Earth System that, while
of broad societal importance, is often discussed but rarely realized.