* 1338710
* I-Corps:  Leveraging Low-Polluting Foundry Core Binders toward Commercialization
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2013,10/31/2013
* Fred Cannon, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 10/31/2013
* USD 50,000.00

This I-Corps activity will further develop low-emitting core binder systems
toward foundry use. Conventional cores employ petroleum-based phenolic
urethanes, which emit considerable volatile organic compound (VOC) pollution,
whereas these novel binders release approximately 70-80% fewer VOCs. Work will
address practical applications of how to quickly process these cores. The team
will adapt these binder systems to the foundry's core-making machines. While
preparing prototype cores with low-VOC binders, the team will appraise what are
the effects when varying parameters that foundry personnel control - such as
binder proportions, moisture, blow pressure, curing temperature, curing gas
(air, steam, CO2), and cycle time. The variations of these practical parameters
will be linked to fundamentals derived in prior NSF work: at what temperature do
the functionalities of carboxyls and amino acids lose their binding strength;
what blow pressures overcome the stickiness of moist sand grains; what core-
making machine configurations are best-suited for these low-VOC binders.

The I-Corp Team will offer transformative beneficial impact to society as the
work transitions these low-polluting binders toward commercial acceptance. This
has the potential create a healthier and more pleasant working environment for
hard-working foundry personnel. With widespread use, these binders may have the
ability to diminish outdoor pollution and increase sustainable use of first-
generation biomaterials that are otherwise discarded.