* 1338105
* MRI: Acquisition of a 4G/LTE Wireless Communications Test Set
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Fuqin Xiong, Cleveland State University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 09/30/2017
* USD 284,699.00

Proposal #: 13-38105&lt;br/&gt;PI(s): Zhu, Ye; Kaufman, Miron; Wang, Haodong;
Xiong, Fuqin; Yu, Chansu&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Cleveland State University
&lt;br/&gt;Title: MRI/Acq.: A 4G/LTE Wireless Communication Test
Set&lt;br/&gt;Project Proposed:&lt;br/&gt;This project, acquiring an E6621A PXT
4G/LTE wireless communication test set, aims to enable studies on:&lt;br/&gt;-
Security and privacy of 4G communications,&lt;br/&gt;- Fast indoor positioning
in large-scale, chaotic venues,&lt;br/&gt;- Efficient modulation and coding for
4G mobile communications,&lt;br/&gt;- Characterization of noise in wireless
channels with statistical physics approaches, and&lt;br/&gt;- Security of
medical communication systems.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed system would also enable
research on complex topics that require multidisciplinary approaches,
including&lt;br/&gt;- Hybrid approaches to detect security attacks and privacy
leakage in 4G networks,&lt;br/&gt;- Cross layer design for 4G networks,
and&lt;br/&gt;- Modulation support for indoor positioning
systems.&lt;br/&gt;Since the versatile and highly integrated system supports
conducting both physical layer research through features such as RF parametric
measurement and MIMO operation, and network and upper layer conducts research
through features such as protocol logging and analysis and message editor, this
instrumentation should facilitate these projects. Moreover, the research
supported by the acquisition would impact a wide range of scientific and
engineering fields such as digital communications, networking, distributed
computing, mobile computing, network security and privacy, information systems,
and physics.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;This acquisition would enable
the development of new labs, projects, and lectures in seven courses and would
provide students with hands-on experiences. The instrument would also provide
valuable research experiences to undergraduates (through senior design projects,
summer undergraduate research, and independent study research projects) and
graduate Masters and Ph.D. students in electrical engineering, computer
engineering, computer and information science, and physics. The university has
also been actively involving minority, women, and disadvantaged background
students in research. Thus, the instrument will contribute in the well-
established outreach programs such as NSF-funded CSUTeach program (0934842)
which is designed to improve the quality of high school science and math
teachers, and the Fenn Academy, a consortium between the Fenn College of
Engineering and a group of high schools and local corporations (established to
attract students to engineering fields through high-quality pre-engineering
programs). The instrument would also lend support to some local companies.