* 1338982
* SIGGRAPH Pioneers Mentoring
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2014
* Marc Barr, Association Computing Machinery
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 06/30/2014
* USD 5,100.00

This funding supports student involvement and attendance at the 2013 ACM
SIGGRAPH Conference. SIGGRAPH is the premier computer graphics conference in the
world, attracting over 15,000 attendees and filling over 100,000 feet of
exhibition space. Although many attendees come for the exhibition and advanced
technology demonstrations, the SIGGRAPH Conference has long been the premier
place to publish technical papers in computer graphics. The papers are published
as a special issue of the ACM Transactions on Graphics. The SIGGRAPH Pioneers
(20+ years of work in the field) started a mentoring program in 2003 to add more
students to the technology pipeline. While small in number, the impact has been
high as the students do not merely attend the conference, but rather are
mentored by longstanding members of the community. Because each Pioneer is
assigned no more than two students, the Pioneer guides the students to talks,
courses, etc. that were not immediately on the students radar. The Pioneer
mentors perform this service without compensation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit and broader impact of the proposed activity lies in the
educational opportunities provided the student by the mentoring process. The
program also focuses on underrepresented groups (e.g., women, Hispanics, and
African-American) who would have no opportunity to hear about SIGGRAPH, let
alone attend, without the mentoring program. The students are exposed to the
latest research and hardware covering the use of computer graphics for numerous
topics that benefit society ranging from engineering design to simulation and
entertainment. Written student feedback has, in the past, been extremely
favorable.