* 1338176
* EAGER: Illuminating Learning by Splitting: A Learning Analytics Approach to Fraction Game Data Analysis
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2015
* Nicole Forsgren Velasquez, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Karen King
* 12/31/2015
* USD 300,000.00

Mathematical literacy is a critical need in our increasingly technological
society. Fractions have been identified as a key area of understanding, both for
success in Algebra and for access to higher-level mathematics. The project uses
learning analytics and educational data mining methods to examine how elementary
students learn in Refraction, an online game designed to teach fractions using
the splitting model. The project uses the data from a pre- and posttest of
fraction understanding and log data from 3000 third-grade students' gameplay to
examine the following questions:&lt;br/&gt;1) Is splitting an effective way to
learn fractions?&lt;br/&gt;2) How do students learn by splitting?&lt;br/&gt;3)
Are there common pathways students follow as they learn by
splitting?&lt;br/&gt;4) Are there optimal pathways for diverse
learners?&lt;br/&gt;Splitting is a well-known theory of fraction learning and
has significant expert buy in. However, few of the research questions above can
be advanced past the field's present level of understanding with either current
qualitative or quantitative methods. By using data mining methods such as
cluster analysis, association rule mining, and predictive analysis, the project
provides numerous insights about student learning through splitting, including:
classification of learning profiles exhibited in unstructured learning
environments, common mistakes and sense-making patterns, the value or cost of
exploration in learning, and the best path through learning for different
students (such as those who score low on a pre-test).&lt;br/&gt;The project
staff shares the methods and results through traditional and novel outlets for
maximum impact on the field and on policy. In addition to conferences and
journal publications, the principal investigator is working in several contexts
in which this work is an exemplar of new ways the field can develop
understanding of learning. In addition, many of these contexts have connections
to efforts such as the Chief State School Officers' Shared Learning
Collaborative, leading to a high probability that the findings and products can
quickly impact large numbers of schools across the country.