* 1338154
* MRI Acquisition: An integrated platform for combined multi-scale mechanical and chemical analysis to inform functional materials design
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2015
* Richard Noble, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 08/31/2015
* USD 434,112.00

1338154&lt;br/&gt;Ferguson&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed system facilitates
multimodal analysis of a single ROI on one modular platform by integrating an
Atomic Force Microscope, an Ultra Nanoindentation Tester (max depth = 100 ìm;
load = 50 mN), a Nanoindentation Tester (1000 ìm; 500 mN), and an optical
microscope through which 2-D Raman microscopy (514 or 785 nm lasers) is
performed. A high precision translation stage moves samples between modules.
This proposed instrument will facilitate combined mechanical analysis, across
multiple small length-scales, with determination of chemical composition at a
single ROI. AFM and nanoindentation are well-established techniques for
assessing stiff, conventional engineering materials. Yet most commercially
available nanoindenters fail to accurately test materials that are hydrated,
soft, or subjected to thermal changes. The CSM Instruments platform adeptly
overcomes limitations of existing indenter systems by using one independent
probe to find a sample's surface and continuously monitor thermal drift while a
second probe indents the sample - critical for soft or fluid-like surfaces.
Integration with a Raman microscope will facilitate combined analysis of
mechanical behavior and materials chemistry in one exact ROI. Acquisition of
this system at CU Boulder will inform design of cutting-edge materials in an
unparalleled fashion and enhance our activities in world-class materials
research.