* 1338167
* MRI: Acquisition of a High Resolution Liquid Chromatograph Coupled to a High Resolution and High Mass Accuracy Ion Trap Time of Flight Mass Spectrometer
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,02/29/2016
* Lisa Kunza, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 02/29/2016
* USD 390,014.00

1338167&lt;br/&gt;Christopher&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is for
acquisition of a Shimadzu Nexera High Resolution Liquid Chromatograph Coupled to
a Shimadzu Quadrupole Ion Trap Time-Of-Flight Mass Spectrometer (LCMS-IT-TOF?).
This state of the art equipment is a critical asset for advanced research that
will maximize the integration of research and education and accelerate progress
in the areas of Energy and Environment and Materials and Manufacturing -two of
the top priorities for research and development at SDSM&amp;T. The instrument
will fill a critical gap in research infrastructure and capabilities at
SDSM&amp;T as there is currently no such instrument on campus. Similar LC/MS
systems are available at the South Dakota State University in Brookings and
University of South Dakota in Vermillion, which are both approximately 400 miles
away from Rapid City. The proposed equipment will serve a large number of
departments and individual users across campus and will be a critical asset for
accurate molecular mass measurements, reaction monitoring, identification and
quantitation of impurities and target compounds in complex chemical and
biological systems, rapid screening of small and large molecules, proteomics
research for amino acid sequencing, structural analysis and quantitation of
enzymes, etc. The LC/MS system will be used for research in a number of
disciplines on campus such as chemistry, chemical engineering,
bio/geo/chemistry, bioprocessing, microbiology, molecular and applied biology,
ecosystems, environmental sciences and engineering, and materials engineering.