* 1338646
* Collaborative Research:  Deep Propagating Gravity Wave (DEEPWAVE)
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/2014,01/31/2019
* David Fritts, GLOBAL ATMOSPHERIC TECHNOLOGIES AND SCIENCES, INC.
* Continuing Grant
* John Meriwether
* 01/31/2019
* USD 1,502,502.00

DEEP propagating gravity WAVE (DEEPWAVE) is an interdisciplinary project
addressing the propagation and effects of gravity waves (GW) extending from
their generation in the troposphere to their breakdown in the mesosphere and
lower thermosphere (MLT). The project is designed by experts on the MLT and the
lower atmosphere. These research communities have not worked closely together
before, but a coupled approach is required to address these dynamics in a
comprehensive and consistent manner. GWs strongly influence the dynamics and
climate throughout the atmosphere. DEEPWAVE will provide a more complete
understanding of GW generation, propagation, breakdown, and energy and momentum
transport in the presence of large topography, cyclones, and strong wind shears
than has been possible previously.&lt;br/&gt; At the core of the project is a
6-week deployment of the NSF Gulfstream V (GV) research aircraft to Christchurch
in June and July 2014. The GV flights will take place over mountain wave
locations over and downwind of New Zealand, Tasmania, and islands in the
Southern Ocean as well as the southern circumpolar jet that is an additional
strong GW source. Recent satellite remote sensing has identified this region as
a primary global "hotspot" of GWs reaching high altitudes. Using the GV in situ
instruments, dropsondes, and three new airborne remote sensing instruments,
nearly the full vertical propagation path of GWs can be observed.&lt;br/&gt; The
GV will fly at altitudes from 9-13 km with in situ instruments observing the
structure and fluxes of GWs up to ~18 km. On the GV, high-power Rayleigh and Na
resonance lidars and an advanced mesospheric temperature mapper (AMTM) will map
out GW structures from ~15 to 100 km. These state-of-the-art measurements will
be supplemented by ground-based balloon and remote sensing instruments.
&lt;br/&gt; This 4-year research program includes DEEPWAVE measurements in 2014,
and extensive analysis efforts and associated modeling to quantify the observed
dynamics thereafter. All DEEPWAVE data will be made available in a timely
fashion. In addition to the investigators supported by this collaborative award,
participants supported by NRL as well as international collaborators from New
Zealand, Australia, Canada, Germany and the UK will be closely involved in the
DEEPWAVE project.