* 1338510
* NSF Wireless Spectrum R&D Senior Steering Group Workshop (WSRD)
* MPS,AST
* 04/15/2013,03/31/2014
* William Lehr, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 03/31/2014
* USD 43,029.00

The Wireless Spectrum R&D (WSRD) Senior Steering Group (SSG) of the National
Information Technology R&D (NITRD) program was stood up as a result of the
president's June 2010 memorandum on "Unleashing the Wireless Broadband
Revolution." WSRD's purpose is to implement section 3 of the presidential
memorandum, which directs the Secretary of Commerce, "in consultation with the
National Institute of Standards and Technology, National Science Foundation
(NSF), the Department of Defense, the Department of Justice, NASA, and other
agencies as appropriate, [to] create and implement a plan to facilitate
research, development, experimentation, and testing by researchers to explore
innovative spectrum-sharing technologies, including those that are secure and
resilient." WSRD facilitates coordination and information exchange regarding
federal government research in the spectrum domain.

Although WSRD is a committee of the federal government, it closely coordinates
its activities with private industry, public safety, academic researchers, and
state and local governments, as these sectors are major drivers of spectrum
requirements, research, and development. It does so through a series of
workshops that includes the participation of representatives of all of these
groups. Three workshops have been held so far: The first in Boulder, CO, in July
2011, which concentrated on coordinating the current and future federal spectrum
R&D portfolio within the broader context; the second in Berkeley, CA, in January
2012, which undertook a discussion of the need for a national-level wireless
testbed capability; and the third in Boulder, CO, in July 2012, which
concentrated on identifying specific research topics central to breaking the
dynamic spectrum access stalemate between incumbents and innovative new spectrum
users.

A challenge with the first two workshops was getting adequate and diverse
representation from some sectors, because of the lack of travel funds. In the
third workshop, and the workshop proposed here, limited travel funds are
available to invited participants who might otherwise have difficulty attending.
Priority will be given to improving the gender and racial diversity of the
workshop participants. The travel grant program will be led by Dr. Bill Lehr of
the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, who is the lead member of the
workshop organizing committee.