* 1338421
* EAGER: Accelerating catalyst discovery using systematic first principles chemical space explorations
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2014
* Ramamurthy Ramprasad, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 08/31/2014
* USD 60,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;PI: Ramprasad, Ramamurthy&lt;br/&gt;Proposal number:
1338421&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Connecticut&lt;br/&gt;Title: EAGER:
Accelerating catalyst discovery using systematic first principles chemical space
explorations&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The vision underlying this project is to
create an integrated paradigm based on high throughput&lt;br/&gt;first
principles density functional theory computations to accelerate the discovery
and design&lt;br/&gt;of next-generation oxide catalysts for chemical reactions
involving oxygen chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;The PI will focus on chemical
modifications of ceria through doping with elements across the Periodic
Table&lt;br/&gt;(45 in all, including K-As, Rb-Sb, and Cs-Bi), assess the
stability of the dopants in ceria,&lt;br/&gt;and interrogate the propensity of
the dopant to alter chemical reactions involving H2O, CO,&lt;br/&gt;CO2, O2 and
H2. In other words, the intent is to rapidly screen for dopants in ceria
that&lt;br/&gt;can significantly enhance the water-gas shift reaction (WGS: CO +
H2O -&gt; CO2 + H2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit
:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;WGS is an integral unit operation in industrial chemical
processes to manufacture ammonia,&lt;br/&gt;methanol, hydrocarbons, and
hydrogen. The reaction is slightly exothermic (enthalpy of reaction&lt;br/&gt;=
-41.1 kJ/mol) and the equilibrium favors product formation at low temperature.
However,&lt;br/&gt;the kinetics on typical catalysts are slow at low
temperature. The currently employed Cu-based&lt;br/&gt;ceria-supported WGS
catalysts are cheap. However, they have a number of disadvantages in
terms&lt;br/&gt;of operation, stability and propensity for deactivation due to S
and Cl. As a result, rigorous&lt;br/&gt;(and expensive) operator training has
become inevitable to prolong the life of the commercial&lt;br/&gt;WGS catalysts.
In contrast, the relatively expensive noble metal catalysts, such as Pt,
Pd,&lt;br/&gt;Rh, Ru, have high intrinsic activity. High cost has hindered their
implementation in industrial-scale&lt;br/&gt;WGS
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In an attempt to identify many more promising
WGS catalyst systems,&lt;br/&gt;the PI will use first principles density
functional theory (DFT), performed in a "high-throughput"&lt;br/&gt;manner to
allow him to rapidly consider an array of metallic dopant elements in
ceria&lt;br/&gt;spanning the Periotic Table (45 in all, including K-As, Rb-Sb,
and Cs-Bi). This is the first&lt;br/&gt;step in a hierarchy of screening
procedures before a detailed assessment can be made on a few selected
cases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts :&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Aside from
enhancing the fundamental understanding of WGS, the project will provide a
knowledge base&lt;br/&gt;to tackle complex chemistry interactions that could
lead to breakthroughs in optimum catalyst&lt;br/&gt;development, even for well-
established and well-known chemical processes. In the long-term,&lt;br/&gt;this
investigation could aid in the fundamental understanding of informatics-based
rational&lt;br/&gt;catalyst design for enhanced stability and
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Industrial experience of the PI will enhance
the engineering education of students and will&lt;br/&gt;aid in broadening
student exposure beyond the academic environment. The PI will
integrate&lt;br/&gt;quantum mechanical modeling techniques, and their
applications in catalysis, into multiple courses.