* 1338091
* MRI:  TLALOCNet - Development of a continuous GPS-MET array in Mexico for atmospheric, climatic, and seismotectonic research in the Americas
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Dennis DeMets, UNAVCO, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 08/31/2018
* USD 1,500,000.00

1338091 &lt;br/&gt;Miller&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Major Research
Instrumentation (MRI) Program grant supports the development of a continuous,
real-time, low latency Global Positioning System (cGPS) and collocated
meteorological sensing package (temperature, barometric pressure, relative
humidity, surface wind speed) array in Mexico for atmospheric, climatic, and
seismotectonic research in the Americas. The network has been coined TLALOCNet,
after the Aztec God of rain fertility and water. TLALOCNet will entail the
construction of six new GPS/Met stations located in the Sierra Madre Occidental
of northern Mexico, islands in the Pacific off central Mexico and two sites on
island in the Bay of Campeche, Gulf of Mexico. An additional 18 existing cGPS
sites along the western Coastal and interior regions of central Mexico proximal
to the Mexico subduction zone will be upgraded with modern GPS receivers and
choke ring antennas, upgraded power and telecommunication systems,
meteorological sensors, and enclosures to bring the full network to the
standards of the other tectonic geodesy GPS networks (e.g., EarthScope Plate
Boundary Observatory). TLALOCNet data will be openly and freely available and
discovery via UNAVCO web services. TLALOCNet data will offer the potential to
transformably advance understanding of atmospheric dynamics in a region that is
impacted seasonally and annually with large fluxes of atmospheric moisture from
the Pacific, the Gulf of Mexico and the Caribbean. GPS/Met enables the
derivation of total precipitable water (TPW) in the Earth's atmosphere in a cone
above GPS/Met stations by using the delay time of multiple frequency GPS
satellite signals that are influenced by the integrated amount of atmospheric
moisture from the top of the atmosphere to the receiver antenna. GPS-Met
observations of TPW complement other measurements of the vertical and horizontal
spatial and temporal distribution of water vapor in the atmosphere through
satellite remote sensing methods and weather balloon launched radiosonde
meteorological sensors. The real advantage of GPS-Met is that it is an all-
weather observation that can cost-effectively provide increased spatial and
temporal coverage at scales necessary to improve understanding of the causation
and evolution of mesoscale convective systems (MCS). MCS give rise to
spectacular volumes and intensity of precipitation in the tropics, especially as
that moisture cools and precipitates in response to the atmosphere's dynamic
interaction with mountainous terrain. MCS may account for between 50-70% of
total precipitation annually in northwestern Mexico and the southwestern U.S.
during the North American Monsoon. Seasonal and annual TPW in this region is
likely to be sensitive to changing climate and resultant hydrometeorological
impacts are likely to present large scale societal hazards (e.g., floods,
landslides) and have significant water resource management implications for both
Mexico and the southwestern U.S. TLALOCNet will also sustain and enhance
continued detailed studies of subduction zone dynamics and the earthquake cycle
in Western Mexico. Real-time, high rate GPS observations in this region will
advance studies of the subduction earthquake cycle, including studies of
coseismic rupture processes, postseismic fault afterslip and viscoelastic
rebound, episodic tremor and slip (in conjunction with ancillary but
contemporaneous seismic observations) , and interseismic elastic strain.