* 1338850
* RCN-SEES Arctic-FROST:   Arctic FRontiers Of SusTainability: Resources, Societies, Environments and Development in the Changing North
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2023
* Peter Schweitzer, University of Northern Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Erica Hill
* 08/31/2023
* USD 749,875.00

RCN-SEES Arctic-FROST: Arctic Frontiers Of SusTainability: Resources, Societies,
Environments and Development in the Changing North is an international
interdisciplinary collaborative network and platform for research exchange,
developing an interdisciplinary synthesis and establishing a future
international research program about Arctic and sub-Arctic sustainability and
sustainable development. The first US-based circumpolar initiative of this kind
and magnitude after the International Polar Year (IPY, 2007-08), Arctic-FROST
builds on IPY's success new collaborative research opportunities. The purpose of
the network is to contribute to conceptual, applied and educational aspects of
sustainability science about the Arctic and beyond. Arctic-FROST teams
environmental and social scientists, local educators and community members from
all circumpolar countries to enable and mobilize research on sustainable Arctic
development, specifically aimed at improving health, human development and well-
being while conserving ecosystem structures, functions and resources. Arctic-
FROST addresses three overarching questions: What does sustainable development
in the Arctic mean, locally, regionally, and globally? How is sustainable
development attainable in a changing Arctic? What are the best ways of measuring
achievements towards adaptation, thrivability and sustainable development in the
Arctic? Arctic-FROST organizes meetings and workshops that involve young,
Indigenous scholars and members of underrepresented groups, coordinates
educational activities, presentation and validation of research results through
researcher/community workshops and educational initiatives. Arctic-FROST
supports knowledge dissemination and methodological cross-pollination across the
four themes of sustainable regions, economies, cultures, and environments.
Arctic-FROST facilitates data sharing and exchange, contributing significantly
to Arctic research and cyberinfrastructure.