* 1338766
* I/UCRC:  Collaborative Research: Center for Arthropod Management Technologies (CAMTech)
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2013,12/31/2018
* Subba Palli, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 12/31/2018
* USD 308,000.00

1338775 Iowa State University; Byrony Bonning 13387667 University of Kentucky;
Subba Palli

The proposed Center for Arthropod Management Technologies (CAMTech) will
streamline and link the efforts of industry and academia toward effective
management of arthropod and nematode pests through a formalized and extended
research partnership. The research efforts will be anchored by Iowa State
University (ISU) as the lead institution, partnered with the University of
Kentucky (UKY).

The proposed Center comprised of Iowa State University and the University of
Kentucky will serve as an incubator for novel technologies. CAMTech will provide
the basic research foundation necessary for the applied research goals of
industry and will extend the utility of current arthropod management practices.
The goals of CAMTech will be to (i) conduct pre-competitive research and
transfer knowledge to industrial partners for in house development, (ii)
optimize and extend the versatility of current technologies, and (iii) train
undergraduate and graduate students as well as postdoctoral scholars for
potential future employment within industry. An interdisciplinary team has been
assembled with UKY researchers extending and complementing the skills and
expertise of ISU researchers.

Establishment of this Center will enable a cohesive industry-university alliance
that will allow industry to communicate their needs to academia toward a common
goal, and to facilitate collaboration amongst companies. The diverse team of
researchers will provide knowledge of fundamental systems relevant to arthropod
management, allowing Center members to derive value from fundamental research
and to expand the utility of current approaches. Students and postdoctoral
researchers within the proposed Center will receive outstanding professional
development training at both ISU and UKY. The commitment of ISU and UK to
develop the academic potential of underrepresented groups in STEM fields will be
further enhanced by informal mentorships, internships and career options with
CAMTech industrial partners.