* 1338088
* MRI: Acquisition of an LC/MS/MS System for Multidisciplinary Research and Educational Projects
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* David Cocke, Lamar University
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 08/31/2018
* USD 456,549.00

1338088&lt;br/&gt;Chen&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Liquid Chromatography (LC) is widely
used in analytical and bioanalytical areas as a routine technique to identify,
quantify, and purify components present in a mixture. The conventional procedure
for these imposes ambiguity on the results. Inclusion of Mass Spectroscopy to LC
will help to minimize this uncertainty. LC/MS/MS is a powerful technique with
very high sensitivity and selectivity. Generally its application is oriented
towards the specific detection and potential identification of chemicals in the
presence of other chemicals in a complex mixture to cover wide applications
ranging from accurate mass measurement and structural characterization of
unknowns to trace-level quantitative analysis. Lamar University (LU) is pursuing
enhancement of their analytical capabilities for the environmental and
biochemical research in both college of engineering and college of Arts &amp;
Science. The team is requesting funds for acquisition of a LC/MS/MS for faculty
and student research projects and inter-university collaborative projects.
Currently, there are no LC/MS or LC/MS/MS instruments on the LU campus.
Researchers must get such analyses at commercial facilities where the costs and
lead time are extremely high. If the LC/MS/MS can be acquired, the team plans to
achieve the following two objectives: (i) basic research and development of new
analysis methods in Chemical Engineering, Civil and Environmental Engineering,
Chemistry and Biochemistry, and Biology, and (ii) application of the latest
technology and pedagogical practices to educate students in these areas.