* 1338188
* MRI: Acquisition of a laser scanning confocal microscope system to advance research and training in biology, chemistry, and physics at Lewis &amp; Clark College
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Janis Lochner, Lewis and Clark College
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Sanford
* 08/31/2016
* USD 306,119.00

An award is made to Lewis &amp; Clark College (L&amp;C) in Portland, Oregon to
acquire a Zeiss LSM 710 Confocal Microscope, which will enable at least six
different laboratories on campus (in Biology, Chemistry, and Physics
Departments) as well as two collaborating labs at other institutions (in
Molecular Biosciences and Neurology Departments) to expand and innovate their
existing research programs. Confocal microscopy is an advanced fluorescence
imaging technique that has a number of advantages over traditional fluorescence
microscopy and is a particularly powerful tool for live imaging experiments. The
enabled projects focus on live imaging, both in whole organisms (zebrafish,
nematode, yeast) and in cultured neurons (mouse). Some of these include: 1) a
powerful multicolor approach (Brainbow) to test how newborn cells in the
immature brain transform into organized neuronal circuits; 2) fluorescence
resonance energy transfer (FRET) to study interactions among ribosomal
components in yeast; 3) photoconvertible proteins to study the regulated release
of factors in hippocampal neurons during neuronal activity; and 4) in vivo
imaging techniques in living zebrafish to study the behavior of proteins that
underlie Parkinson's Disease in humans. The principal investigators have
externally funded, active research programs that engage undergraduate students
as partners in data generation and publications in peer-reviewed journals.
Acquisition of a confocal microscope will help these laboratories to generate
high-quality publications in areas that utilize and develop cutting-edge live
imaging approaches. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The confocal acquisition will also
have a number of important broader impacts. First, future generations of
scientists will have the opportunity to master modern imaging approaches during
their undergraduate training. Many L&amp;C students go on to Ph.D. programs and
careers in science after winning competitive research fellowships. In part this
can be attributed to L&amp;C's strong focus on involving undergraduates in
meaningful research; in the past five years, more than 90 undergraduate students
have contributed as co-authors on publications. These dedicated and capable
students will become trained in advanced microscopy by using the confocal system
in their coursework and/or research laboratory. Second, L&amp;C is a leader in
the training of groups that are traditionally underrepresented in science. The
natural sciences at L&amp;C boast large numbers of women majors. In addition,
L&amp;C runs a successful, HHMI-funded summer research program that brings high
school students from under-represented groups to campus for an intensive, 8-week
laboratory experience. The confocal microscope will thus impact large numbers of
young women who have chosen to pursue a career in science, as well as high
school students who are just beginning to consider the direction of their future
training. The opportunity to conduct live imaging experiments is often inspiring
for students at this critical stage in their career path. Finally, the L&amp;C
Watzek Library Digital Initiatives staff will help design and construct an
online public gallery that will showcase selected images and videos captured
using the confocal microscope. The funded equipment thus has the potential to
impact the broader community and to increase scientific literary among the
public