* 1338627
* 2013 Professional Development Workshop in Ceramics
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2015
* Ricardo Castro, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 06/30/2015
* USD 49,994.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: &lt;br/&gt;The goal of the 2013 Professional
Development Workshop in Ceramics is to enhance and strengthen the career
development of the next generation of U.S. leaders in ceramic materials research
and education. Five early-career faculty who have recently been awarded NSF
CAREER grants from the Ceramics Program in the Division of Materials Research
are the main focus of the workshop activities. They will be immersed in one and
a half day technical and professional development workshop along with fifteen
senior colleagues and peers from both national and international scientific
communities with expertise in ceramic materials. The interaction between all
participants will impact the early-career faculty?s respective fields of
research, allow exchange of best practices for training and teaching students,
and facilitate the forging of new collaborative or cooperative research
opportunities worldwide. The workshop takes place during the International
Conference on Advanced &amp; Nano Materials (ICANM 2013) and is open to all
registrants. Placing the workshop in conjunction with an international
conference will amplify its impact by bringing in a larger audience, in
particular assistant professors and postdoctoral associates, increase the
visibility of the early-career faculty, and may, in some cases, reduce overall
travel time and cost.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: &lt;br/&gt;The
2013 Professional Development Workshop in Ceramics focuses on five technical
topics presented by each early-career faculty: 1) structure-property
relationships arising from interfaces of bi-phase ceramics; 2) radiation
interactions with nanoceramics; 3) electronic properties of perovskite thin
films heterostructures; 4) development of environmentally-benign piezoelectric
materials; and 5) enhancement of pyroelectric and electrocaloric effects in
complex oxide thin films. The workshop is open to all ICANM 2013 conference
attendees. An early-career faculty will lead one of the topics with a short oral
presentation, followed by a question and answer period from a panel of experts
in the faculty?s field. The experts will critically evaluate her/his research
plans, career development, and education efforts by offering suggestions, asking
questions, and providing positive feedback. Further discussion with the audience
will follow. This workshop in the third in a series; previous participants have
found the environment to be positive and the commentary to be helpful in their
scientific and professional careers. Post-doctoral associates and new assistant
professors have found the workshops to be both inspiring and useful.