* 1338585
* Conference: 2014 Origins of Life, January 12-17, 2014 in Galveston, TX
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Steven Benner, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Susanne von Bodman
* 05/31/2014
* USD 8,000.00

Overview:&lt;br/&gt;The 2014 Gordon Research Conference (GRC) on the Origins of
Life will bring together researchers from diverse backgrounds to discuss topics
aimed at understanding the origin of life on Earth and its potential
distribution throughout the universe. It brings together biologists, geologists,
chemists, physicists, astronomers and practitioners of numerous other
disciplines from a wide variety of geographical locations. Speakers include a
wide spectrum of individuals from universities, research institutes, and
government organizations. The meeting will be held January 12-17th at the Hotel
Galvez in Galveston, Texas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit:&lt;br/&gt;The 2014 meeting is organized by Dr. Steven A. Benner (The
Foundation for Applied Molecular Evolution, Gainesville, FL) and Dr. Stephen
Freeland (Institute for Astronomy, University of Hawaii, HI). Both organizers
are well respected in the Origins of Life community and represent several
disciplines included in the meeting's scientific agenda. Topics of discussion
will include: the nature and experimental reconstitution of the earliest cells;
the study of organic compounds in extraterrestrial environments and their
possible contribution to the prebiotic inventory, the nature of the early Earth
and other planetary environments, self-replicating chemical systems, the origin
and evolution of the translation apparatus and the search for life beyond Earth.
The Gordon Research Conferences have a long history of providing a venue for
scientific exchange among junior investigators and senior scientists in small,
intimate meetings. The format of the GRC itself will follow an established
pattern that includes formal talks, posters, and ample time for informal
discussion. These meetings foster an atmosphere of intense scientific
interaction and many opportunities for building scientific networks. Compared to
other meetings on the origin of life, this meeting fills a unique niche in two
respects: it has a narrower scientific focus than many larger meetings
(International Conference on the Origin of Life, Bioastronomy, Astrobiology),
and the U.S. location allows facile participation by young scientists who
frequently cannot afford to attend international meetings
abroad.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;In addition to the
scientific discourse, the 2014 GRC will also explore the role of philanthropy in
Big Science and how private entrepreneurs can better interact with scientists.
Improving science literacy among the public will also be discussed including
methods of how to effectively transfer science into science fiction in popular
culture. A large effort is being made to increase the participation of women and
minority groups at the meeting, including serving as discussion leaders and
speakers. A concerted effort is being made to advertise the meeting to national
and international organizations, including former attendees of GRC and Gordon
Research Seminars (GRS) series in this and other disciplines, and members of the
major international astrobiological societies.