* 1338896
* Graduate Student Travel Support Program for the 2013 V.M. Goldschmidt Conference in Florence, Italy August 25-30, 2013
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2014
* Carla Koretsky, The Geochemical Society
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 07/31/2014
* USD 40,000.00

This award will support participation by graduate students and early career
scientists in the 2013V.M. Goldschmidt Conference in Florence, Italy, during
August 25-30, 2013. This travel grant will enable the best and brightest
students from the US and US Territories, students who might otherwise be unable
to attend due to financial constraints at their home institutions, to benefit
from all the advantages this meeting has to offer at this turning point in their
respective careers. Applications will be collected from the students, then
reviewed and ranked by a volunteer committee of scientists. The Geochemical
Society is contributing $10,000 so that a total of 40 students, who are
presenting their work at the conference, will receive $1,250 each toward travel
expenses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Goldschmidt conference is the premier venue
for geochemistry. Thematic issues to be addressed at the conference span a broad
range of sub-disciplines in low- and high- temperature geochemistry, including
cosmochemistry, mantle geochemistry, early and deep earth, continental crust,
interfacial geochemistry, subduction, evolution of the early Earth's
environment, volcanoes and hazards, energy resources, ores, climate changes,
atmospheric geochemistry, weathering and tectonics, anthropogenic pollutants,
biogeochemistry, analytical and computational geochemistry, hydrogeochemistry,
mineralogy and mineral physics. In addition to oral and poster presentation
sessions, students will have an opportunity to participate in field trips and
workshops associated with the conference.