* 1338144
* MRI: Acquisition of a Transcranial Magnetic Stimulator to Enhance Research and Undergraduate Education
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Kelly Jantzen, Western Washington University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2016
* USD 197,530.00

With Major Research Instrument Support, Dr. Kelly Jantzen and his collaborators
at will purchase a Magstim Super Rapid2 Transcranial Magnetic Stimulator for the
Psychology Department and Behavioral Neuroscience Program at Western Washington
University(WWU). WWU, a liberal arts undergraduate institution located 90 miles
north of Seattle and 50 miles south of Vancouver, Canada, serves an important
segment of first-generation and low-income students who may struggle to access
higher education. The addition of TMS to the Behavioral Neuroscience Program
will 1) expand laboratory capability for understanding the neural basis of
cognition, 2) enhance undergraduate training and teaching (both in the lab and
in the classroom) in human cognition and neuroscience and 3) foster greater
collaboration across the Program, the Psychology department, University and
community, in part, by providing a platform for translational research.
Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation (TMS) is a central tool in cognitive
neuroscience because, unlike other human brain imaging approaches, TMS allows
for the investigation of causal relationships between localized brain function
and human behavior. The TMS will be employed in two main research programs
involving a number of collaborative scientists working on both basic and
translational research. The Integration of action and perception program seeks
to understand neural mechanisms for how humans coordinate, correct and control
action. The research team will use TMS in conjunction with high-density
electroencephalography (EEG) to understand the brain network involved in the
integration of action and vision, to learn how information about sensorimotor
coordination is used to correct ongoing actions and finally to uncover how
frontal brain regions play an inhibitory role over action execution. A related
translational program will combine human TMS studies with and animal research to
further understand the role of frontal cortex in exerting inhibitory control
over action and cognition. The second Language Processing in the Brain program,
shows great promise for making new and exciting discoveries in understanding how
humans process language. Research will investigate how musical training enhances
the processing of language in the right hemisphere. The team will test whether
altering neural excitability in tempo-parietal cortices with TMS will influence
categorical perception of speech sounds In part 1, the effects of disrupting
activity in right posterior-superior temporal regions of musicians and non-
musicians will be evaluated. In part 2, researchers will evaluate the influence
of using TMS to enhancing activity in these same regions. The team will extend
these findings to clinical work using TMS to investigating constraint induced
language therapy in aphasics

The research and training program enabled by the equipment will foster
intramural and extramural collaborations and increase WWU's competitiveness for
extramural research funding and publishing. The equipment will support ongoing
and help foster new collaborations within WWU and between WWU and other
institutions and the community. The instrumentation will provide training and
access to mainstream electrophysiological methodologies to undergraduate
students, many of whom are the first in their family to attend university.
Training in Cognitive Neuroscience methods provides opportunities in
neuroscience, industry and healthcare. TMS is rapidly gaining in popularity for
the treatment of a number of clinical disorders and we have the opportunity to
produce undergraduates with extensive training and direct experience.