* 1338329
* Earth-Life Transitions:  Linked geochemical/biotic response to massive volcanic CO2 injection during the Triassic-Jurassic mass extinction
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2019
* David Bottjer, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Dena Smith
* 07/31/2019
* USD 1,000,000.00

Atmospheric CO2 rise is one of the most pressing societal and scientific issues,
but future projections of&lt;br/&gt;system behavior often rely heavily on models
rather than data. Earth underwent a very relevant analog&lt;br/&gt;experiment
200 million years ago, and this project seeks to learn and abstract from that
experiment. The&lt;br/&gt;CO2 release associated with the Triassic-Jurassic
(T-J) boundary is estimated to have risen at a rate&lt;br/&gt;comparable to the
present-day (as a result of the Central Atlantic Magmatic Province volcanism,
CAMP),&lt;br/&gt;and tellingly, it was associated with a mass extinction.
Notably, representatives of the fauna that inhabits&lt;br/&gt;today's seas, the
so-called modern fauna were preferentially negatively affected by the T-J event
versus other mass extinctions, making the T-J perhaps the most relevant mass
extinction with respect to the present-day impact of high CO2 levels on the
biosystem. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The T-J event is arguably the least studied of
the mass extinctions that frame the Mesozoic, and it&lt;br/&gt;represents an
underutilized opportunity to investigate a geologically rapid injection of CO2
into the Earth&lt;br/&gt;system. The results of this CO2 pulse are quantifiable,
and will serve to establish new models of system&lt;br/&gt;response to
punctuated perturbations. The PIs believe that using novel geochemical tracers
for&lt;br/&gt;weathering and redox, coupled with biofacies analysis, will result
in a paradigm shift in our knowledge of&lt;br/&gt;such an event. The proxies
will inform a novel model that links a solid Earth model, carbon cycle
model,&lt;br/&gt;and ecological model. This project will help to elucidate the
details of the most significant mass extinction&lt;br/&gt;to affect the modern
fauna. Moreover, the new models developed for the T-J event will have relevance
for&lt;br/&gt;other mass extinctions, including the ongoing Anthropocene event.