* 1338898
* I/UCRC:  Collaborative Research: Center for Freeform Optics
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2021
* Angela Davies, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Continuing Grant
* Crystal Leach
* 07/31/2021
* USD 410,000.00

1338877 University of Rochester; Jannick Rolland 1338898 University of North
Carolina at Charlotte; Angela Davies

The proposed Center for Freeform Optics (CeFO) aims to advance research and
education on the science, engineering and applications of freeform optics
through a dedicated, continuing industrial partnership. The research efforts
will be anchored by the University of Rochester (UR) as the lead institution,
partnered with the University of North Carolina at Charlotte (UNCC).

The proposed Center (CeFO) constitutes a unique research environment combining
the strengths of two top-tier research universities with the experiences,
insights, and needs of international industrial talent specialized in building
systems supporting the manufacturing, integration, and implementation of
advanced optical systems. CeFO will provide vertical integration of mathematics,
optics, optical science, materials science, optomechanics, precision optical
manufacturing and testing, and instrument design in order to transform the
optics industry in the 21st century.

Optical systems with freeform surfaces will usher in the next generation of
innovation in sensing, imaging, visualization and diagnostic instrumentation by
directing light in not 1-D, but 3-D. Novel designs with 3-D light paths will
allow compact optical systems to replace the current in-line designs (packaged
by flat fold mirrors) using freeform optics. Applications are emerging that
require innovative surface geometries with tight form-accuracy to increase
imaging and sensing capabilities and overall optical performance. The
participating universities in CeFO are dedicated to the recruitment and
retention of female and students from under-represented groups. The aggressive
recruitment of students from under-represented groups is one of the Center's top
priorities. The primary goal of active student involvement in the Center's
research activities is to accelerate the understanding of this new horizon in
optical technology by advancing research and education on the engineering and
science of freeform optics. Students will work directly with Center industrial
members to communicate and transfer key enabling technologies including design,
fabrication, assembly, testing, and integration