* 1338084
* MRI Consortium:  Acquisition of Instrumentation for High-Speed/Radiation-Hard Optical Electronics Design and Testing
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2013,10/31/2014
* Jingbo Ye, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Randy Ruchti
* 10/31/2014
* USD 175,000.00

This MRI Consortium Acquisition Award provides support for particle physics
groups at Ohio State University and Southern Methodist University to upgrade
their electronic and diagnostic instrumentation, to allow them to lead the
development of very high-speed optical data links for the upgrade of ATLAS
experiment at the CERN Large Hadron Collider, Geneva, Switzerland. While the
instrumentation will have direct impact on specific subsystems of ATLAS
including the IBL (or insertable B layer) of the Pixel Detector and for Liquid
Argon (LAr) Calorimetry, the instrumentation have will have broader
applicability to a wide variety of applications requiring ultra high-speed data
links. The intellectual merit of the work is directly related to the discovery
potential of ATLAS, which with CMS in 2012 co-discovered a Higgs Boson.
Following that discovery, the ATLAS collaboration has continued its search for
evidence of other beyond the Standard Model physics including super symmetry,
for which the pixel detector and LAr systems are central. This includes the
study of final states containing third-generation quarks: b-quarks with decay
vertices detected in the pixel system, and top quarks, with leptons and jets,
whose energy (and missing energy) is a principal measurement responsibility of
the LAr Calorimetry system. The broader impacts of the program include the
enhancement to campus laboratories of the proponents, which will directly impact
research and training of graduate and undergraduate students, and which is
expected to foster interactions with other campus researchers in including those
engineering and other science disciplines.