* 1338629
* Antarctic Futures Workshop:   US Opportunities for Collaborative Research in the Ross Sea Sector, Antarctica
* GEO,OPP
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2014
* Robert DeConto, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Isern
* 03/31/2014
* USD 18,120.00

Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;New Zealand has recently established the NZ
Antarctic Research Institute (NZARI). The travel support requested here will
allow U.S. researchers to attend an "Antarctic Futures Workshop" to help
identify set of scientific challenges where NZARI could collaborate with the
U.S. Antarctic Program (USAP) in the future. Some initial possible areas of
collaboration include: predicting non-linear behavior and tipping points in
Antarctica?s natural systems, tracking the impacts of change in Antarctica and
predicting far field responses, and assessing the resilience of Antarctic and
Southern Ocean ecosystems. The Ross Embayment remains a high-priority target
area to address these research topics. The workshop will be held March 13-15,
2013 in Auckland New Zealand. More than 50 New Zealand Scientists are expected
to attend. Most of the workshop agenda will be devoted to working group
discussions in order to focus areas of common interest. Eight US scientists
representing a wide range of disciplines have been invited to
participate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: &lt;br/&gt;The "Antarctic
Futures Workshop" will develop and refine key research questions that will
inform future NZARI research priorities in the Ross Sea region. U.S.
participation in the workshop will help define common opportunities and
interests between New Zealand and U.S. Antarctic research programs, with the
goal of facilitating the development of collaborative research proposals where
there is common interest and creating the ability to pool logistical resources
to ensure cost effective and transformative science.