* 1338441
* RAPID:   Stratigraphic architecture and sedimentology of the early Cambrian Maotianshan Shale
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2013,10/31/2013
* Michael Hofmann, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 10/31/2013
* USD 25,254.00

RAPID: Stratigraphic architecture and sedimentology of the early Cambrian
Maotianshan Shale&lt;br/&gt;Michael Hofmann, University of
Montana&lt;br/&gt;EAR-1338441&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded by NSF's Section
of International Science and Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;PI will travel to and
conduct field research in the Yunnan Province, China, to document and sample a
newly discovered exposure of the Maotianshan Shale interval in the Jianshan
quarry. This project is urgent, because the exposure will be removed in April
2013 when mining resumes. This laterally continuous outcrop exposes the entire
Maotianshan Shale interval over several hundred meters, making it a unique study
site to address many of the sedimentologic and stratigraphic uncertainties
associated with the Maotianshan Shale deposition and fossil preservation. In
addition to salvaging the fossil fauna, PIs plan to systematically describe the
overall stratigraphy of the Maotinashan Shale and to document the detailed rock
fabrics and sedimentology. In particular they will focus on the fossil bearing
layers in order to test the hypothesis that mesopycnal flows in a stratified
marginal marine basin contributed to the exceptional preservation of the
Changjiang Fauna. Working with Chinese colleagues and their students, the
university of Montana graduate student will experience synergistic,
interdisciplinary research and international collaboration in geology.