* 1338961
* Evolution of Colloidal Matter
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2013,06/30/2014
* Monica Olvera, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 06/30/2014
* USD 10,000.00

This award contributes support for the conference Evolution of Colloidal Matter,
to be held June 27-29, 2013 on the campus of New York University. The conference
brings together a group of world leaders in colloidal sciences and related areas
to discuss recent computational, theoretical, and experimental developments in
colloidal locomotion, growth, new amorphous and crystalline structures, active
matter and applications. The interaction among the participants will contribute
to the definition of the basic problems of the field and nucleate further
research leading to new scientific advances.

The conference reflects the excitement of the field reflected in the major
innovations in colloidal materials over the past decade, more than in the entire
previous history of the field. Colloids are fluids with tiny particles suspended
in them. Modern designer particles come with controllable shapes, made possible
by inventive chemistry or lithography, functionalization with proteins,
complementary DNA strands, and complementary particle shapes directed by patches
and particle geometry. Among the new class of colloids are particles with
interesting properties such as Janus Particles, Patchy Particles, Lock and Key
colloids, and Slippery Particles. Composite particles or patches can contain
catalysts making the colloids microreactors which can lead to particles that can
surf or swim. So, colloids include nonequilibrium, driven systems and enable
active materials which can be switched on and off with for example the
application of light.

These advances open new areas for fundamental research and also routes to
synthesize new materials. Thanks to the breakthroughs in the synthesis,
characterization and modeling of colloidal assemblies, various technological
advances have emerged including complex microfluidics devices, self-healing
materials, self-replicating colloidal arrays, cell scaffolds and photonic
materials with unique properties.

This award contributes support for the participation of women, underrepresented
minorities, and early-career speakers in the conference.