* 1338051
* MRI: Acquisition of SuperMIC -- A Heterogeneous Computing Environment to Enable Transformation of Computational Research and Education in the State of Louisiana
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2019
* Joel Tohline, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Edward Walker
* 09/30/2019
* USD 3,924,181.00

This is an award to acquire a compute cluster at LSU. The computer is a
heterogeneous HPC cluster named SuperMIC containing both Intel Xeon Phi and
NVIDIA Kepler K20X GPU (graphics processing unit) accelerators. The intent is to
conduct research on programming such clusters while advancing projects that are
dependent on HPC. The efforts range from modeling conditions which threaten
coastal environments and test mitigation techniques; to simulating the motions
of tumors/organs in cancer patients due to respiratory actions to aid
radiotherapy planning and management. The burden of learning highly complex
hybrid programming models presents an enormous software development crisis and
demands a better solution. SuperMIC will serve as the development platform to
extend current programming frameworks, such as Cactus, by incorporating GPU and
Xeon Phi methods. Such frameworks allow users to move seamlessly from serial to
multi-core to distributed parallel platforms without changing their
applications, and yet achieve high performance. The SuperMIC project will
include training and education at all levels, from a Beowulf boot camp for high
school students to more than 20 annual LSU workshops and computational sciences
distance learning courses for students at LONI (Louisiana Optical Network
Initiative) and LA-SiGMA (Louisiana Alliance for Simulation-Guided Materials
Applications) member institutions. These include Southern University, Xavier
University, and Grambling State University - all historically black colleges and
universities (HBCU) which have large underrepresented minority enrollments. The
SuperMIC cluster will be used in the LSU and LA-SiGMA REU and RET programs. It
will impact the national HPC community through resources committed to the NSF
XSEDE program and the Southeastern Universities Research Association SURAgrid.
The SuperMIC will commit 40% of the usage of the machine to the XSEDE XRAC
allocation committee.