* 1338052
* MRI: Development of a CAVE System for Immersive Video Research, Immersive Learning, and Visualization Support for Research at Villanova
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2018
* Frank Klassner, Villanova University
* Standard Grant
* Edward Walker
* 09/30/2018
* USD 1,674,322.00

This award enables Villanova to purchase and further develop an interactive
virtual reality system known as a System for Immersive Video Research, Immersive
Learning, and Visualization Support for Research (CAVE) at Villanova University.
The Falvey Memorial Library at Villanova will house the facility. CAVE
technology's ability to provide immersive experiences of rendered environments
is well-known. This project proposes development of a CAVE system with mobile
immersive spherical video technology to capture photorealistic representations
of real world environments without involved modeling. This development project
has two facets. The first lies in the integration of mobile immersive spherical
video camera equipment with a CAVE to display real-world environments, thereby
reducing environmental modeling time. This approach will permit greater usage of
CAVE technology for disseminating immersive views of significant locations or
phenomena without concern for the displayed material appearing too unrealistic.
The second facet is the project's visualization support for research across many
domains. CAVE placement near the greater Philadelphia area will permit increased
public access to the learning possibilities of the equipment, as well as support
the collection and dissemination of immersive videos of culturally significant
locations such as the Vatican Museum's facilities that are often not able to be
visited by large crowds. Understanding how to systematically use CAVE technology
in libraries has the potential to transform these institutions into social and
collaborative environments, called public Collaboratories. Classrooms for CAVE
use will be established.