* 1338175
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Confocal Microscope for Multi-disciplinary Research
* BIO,DBI
* 11/01/2013,10/31/2016
* Leilani Miller, Santa Clara University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 10/31/2016
* USD 407,821.00

An award is made to Santa Clara University to acquire a cutting-edge confocal
microscope. Students and faculty performing research in anthropology, biology,
bioengineering, and chemistry will use this confocal microscope. This microscope
allows researchers to make accurate and precise measurements in three dimensions
over time. This microscope enables faculty and students to collect critical
scientific data that will help address core questions in molecular and
developmental biology of both plants and animals. This microscope will also be
used to study the interaction of certain widespread chemicals with common
protein structures. The three dimensional shape of fossilized plant cells will
be captured on this microscope, and that information will be used to inform
models of past environments and plant evolution. Additionally this microscope
will be used to study the chemistry of specific emulsions, and to help develop
fluorescent proteins switches that will aid scientists in multiple fields.
Overall, a broad group of university faculty members and mentored student
researchers will use this microscope to study key questions in multiple areas of
biology and chemistry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Santa Clara University is a
primarily undergraduate university with student learning at its central focus.
The introduction of a confocal microscope to campus will greatly enhance the
opportunities for students to engage in scientific inquiry, while producing
useful data. SCU science graduates often go on to medical school, graduate
school, and the biotech industry. The success of SCU students is attributed to
the hands-on experiences they receive in the laboratory and classroom. Students
will be educated to use the confocal microscope in multiple faculty research
labs and in several classes. The training they receive in quantitative and
fluorescence microscopy will prepare them well for careers in diverse STEM
fields. The microscope will be used in an annual outreach event to attract
first-generation college students to the SCU science departments. This
microscope will be used to address important scientific hypothesis and to train
a diverse set of students. Exposure to this microscope will leave a positive
impact on students, by increasing their scientific literacy and enabling them to
pursue careers in STEM fields.