* 1338945
* Conference: 2013 CSHL Eukaryotic mRNA Processing Conference tobe held in Cold Springs Harbor, NY on August 20-24, 2013
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2014
* David Stewart, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 06/30/2014
* USD 5,000.00

Overview:&lt;br/&gt;COLD SPRING HARBOR LABORATORY
CONFERENCE&lt;br/&gt;EUKARYOTIC mRNA PROCESSING&lt;br/&gt;AUGUST 20 - 24,
2013&lt;br/&gt;The proposed conference on 'Eukaryotic mRNA Processing' will
convene scientists studying various aspects of mRNA processing, transport, RNA
interference, informatics and turn-over. Major advances have recently been made
in these areas, and the proposed conference will be a timely event for
discussing the latest unpublished results and exchanging ideas, thereby
fostering new developments in this rapidly moving field. The proposed 2013
conference will be held in August and is the ninth meeting of a conference that
is held every other year at Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory. The most recent
meeting was held in August 2011 and attracted 335 scientists internationally,
who are actively investigating various aspects of messenger RNA maturation in
eukaryotic cells, using genetic, biochemical, molecular, and cell biological
approaches. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;As in the
previous meetings, a major focus will be on nuclear events in mRNA maturation,
including mRNA splicing and polyadenylation, as well as the relevance of mRNA
maturation to the etiology of cancer, the connections between mRNA maturation
steps, the emerging fields of RNA interference and microRNA function and the
application of informatics and genome-wide approaches to the analysis of RNA
processing. The meeting format will consist of eight plenary sessions and two
poster sessions. Each plenary session will be subdivided into two parts
(separated by a coffee break) that focus on related but separate topics. This
subdivision, successfully piloted at the 2011 meeting, allows us to specifically
seek out a broader representation of fields and to recruit a more diverse set of
faculty as session chairs. As always, all speakers will be selected on the basis
of the submitted abstracts, which will encourage active participation by junior
scientists. We will particularly encourage presentation of unpublished work by
the students and postdoctoral fellows who are leading these projects, as has
traditionally been a hallmark and a unique strength of the Cold Spring Harbor
meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of
the proposed activity are manifold. First, they include the scientific
implications for other fields beyond eukaryotic mRNA processing of, as
discoveries in this field will continue to foster a rapid pace of fundamental
discoveries and insights in our efforts to more fully understand gene expression
in higher organisms. Second, they also include elements of education, training,
resource sharing, and opportunities for interaction and collaboration. In
particular, the meeting will provide: (i) training opportunities for junior
scientists that will promote the development of presentation skills as well as
overall scientific quality and analytical rigor; (ii) an intimate setting that
will foster meaningful scientific interactions among scientists at all career
levels; (iii) the dissemination of knowledge among multiple strata of research
and educational institutions; (iv) sharing of resources, both material and
informational; and (v) opportunities for the initiation of collaborations, which
can benefit scientists from smaller labs and/or from primarily undergraduate
(teaching) institutions who may have fewer resources and more limited access to
cutting-edge technologies than do scientists from major research institutions.