* 1338897
* I/UCRC:  Collaborative Research: Wheat Genetics Resource Center: A Public-Private Consortium
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2013,01/31/2019
* Bikram Gill, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 01/31/2019
* USD 560,500.00

Program Director's Recommendation 1338897 Kansas State University; Bikram Gill
1338906 Colorado State University; Patrick Byrne

Kansas State University (KSU), as the lead institution, will partner with
Colorado State University to establish an I/UCRC for Wheat Genetics that will
build upon the already existing Wheat Genetics Resource Center (WGRC) at Kansas
State University. The Center proposes to overcome challenges facing the wheat
industry partners, and that will strategically and efficiently derive value from
the wealth of genetic diversity in the Wheat Genetics Resource Center (WGRC).

The proposed Center will focus on developing new methods for using wheat genetic
diversity, both natural and induced, to solve problems for farmers and end users
of wheat. Industry members will provide market awareness, ensuring delivery of
traits important to end-users. WGRC's goal will be to significantly reduce the
market-ready time by providing novel traits in elite genotypes. WGRC will
develop and apply innovative methods to incorporate novel, high-value traits in
wheat breeding programs for sustainable and profitable crop production. WGRC
houses one of the worlds premier collections of wheat germplasm and genetic
tools, routinely capitalized in applied breeding programs worldwide.

The project will have significant broader impacts in a number of areas. Wheat is
a critical source of protein, and world health depends upon production which has
been impacted by climate change. A doctoral program in seed and wheat breeding
will be an element of the program and is clearly needed. Over the last few
years, the researchers involved in the center have had significant impact
through providing industrially relevant education to a large number of students,
including many from underrepresented groups.