* 1338010
* MRI: Development of an Apertureless Near-Field Scanning Optical and Magneto-Optical Kerr Effect Microscope for Nano-Science Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2013,04/30/2016
* Gary Bernstein, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 04/30/2016
* USD 440,000.00

This Major Research Instrumentation award supports the University of Notre Dame
(UND) with the development of a vacuum based apertureless near-field scanning
optical (ANSOM) and magneto-optical Kerr effect microscope for nano-science
applications. The instrument inherits the advantage of both atomic force
microscopy and optical microscope, which are its two complementary parts. To
date, there is no such system available from commercial vendors. Though ANSOM in
air has been rather widely applied to investigate electronic and optical
properties of nanoscale materials, it suffers from water contamination and noise
from the ambient. In vacuum, a few orders of magnitude improvement in the
detection of electrical and magnetic forces and a clean environment are
expected. Vacuum ANSOM will be developed and applied to semiconductor wire/dot
emission intermittency, nano-scale magneto-optical Kerr effects and more. This
instrument development necessitates collaboration among more than six research
groups at UND. Various projects will be designed to actively engage graduate
students, undergraduate students, K12 students and teachers throughout the
duration of the project. Upon completion of the development phase, the
instrument will be housed in the centralized UND Integrated Imaging Facility,
where a broader range of users can benefit from its unique
capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;******&lt;br/&gt;This Major Research
Instrumentation award supports the University of Notre Dame (UND) with the
development of a vacuum based apertureless near-field scanning optical (ANSOM)
and magneto-optical Kerr effect microscope for nano-science applications. The
instrument inherits the advantage of both atomic force microscopy and optical
microscope, which are its two complementary parts. To date, there is no such
system available from commercial vendors. Though ANSOM in air has been rather
widely applied to investigate electronic and optical properties of nanoscale
materials, it suffers from water contamination and noise from the ambient. In
vacuum, a few orders of magnitude improvement in the detection of electrical and
magnetic forces and a clean environment are expected. Vacuum ANSOM will be
developed and applied to semiconductor wire/dot emission intermittency, nano-
scale magneto-optical Kerr effects and more. This instrument development
necessitates collaboration among more than six research groups at UND. Various
projects will be designed to actively engage graduate students, undergraduate
students, K12 students and teachers throughout the duration of the project. Upon
completion of the development phase, the instrument will be housed in the
centralized UND Integrated Imaging Facility, where a broader range of users can
benefit from its unique capabilities.