* 1338877
* I/UCRC:  Collaborative Research: Center for Freeform Optics
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2021
* Jannick Rolland, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Crystal Leach
* 07/31/2021
* USD 2,646,003.00

1338877 University of Rochester; Jannick Rolland &lt;br/&gt;1338898 University
of North Carolina at Charlotte; Angela Davies &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
Center for Freeform Optics (CeFO) aims to advance research and education on the
science, engineering and applications of freeform optics through a dedicated,
continuing industrial partnership. The research efforts will be anchored by the
University of Rochester (UR) as the lead institution, partnered with the
University of North Carolina at Charlotte (UNCC). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed Center (CeFO) constitutes a unique research environment combining the
strengths of two top-tier research universities with the experiences, insights,
and needs of international industrial talent specialized in building systems
supporting the manufacturing, integration, and implementation of advanced
optical systems. CeFO will provide vertical integration of mathematics, optics,
optical science, materials science, optomechanics, precision optical
manufacturing and testing, and instrument design in order to transform the
optics industry in the 21st century. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Optical systems with
freeform surfaces will usher in the next generation of innovation in sensing,
imaging, visualization and diagnostic instrumentation by directing light in not
1-D, but 3-D. Novel designs with 3-D light paths will allow compact optical
systems to replace the current in-line designs (packaged by flat fold mirrors)
using freeform optics. Applications are emerging that require innovative surface
geometries with tight form-accuracy to increase imaging and sensing capabilities
and overall optical performance. The participating universities in CeFO are
dedicated to the recruitment and retention of female and students from under-
represented groups. The aggressive recruitment of students from under-
represented groups is one of the Center's top priorities. The primary goal of
active student involvement in the Center's research activities is to accelerate
the understanding of this new horizon in optical technology by advancing
research and education on the engineering and science of freeform optics.
Students will work directly with Center industrial members to communicate and
transfer key enabling technologies including design, fabrication, assembly,
testing, and integration