* 1338066
* MRI: Acquisition of Biplanar Digital Videofluoroscopy for X-ray Reconstruction of Moving Morphology
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Daniel Margoliash, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2017
* USD 537,058.00

An award is made to The University of Chicago to acquire and install a biplanar
videofluoroscopy system that uses X-rays to measure 3-dimensional movements of
the inside of animals through a method called X-ray Reconstruction of Moving
Morphology (XROMM). XROMM generates 3D measurements and animations of biological
movement by integrating 3D movement data collected using bi-planar digital
videofluoroscopy with CT scan-based reconstructions of animal anatomy. XROMM
makes it possible to measure movements of internal skeletal elements to which
external markers cannot be attached without disrupting animal function, to study
internal mechanics of small animals, such as mice, rats, and songbirds which are
too small for external markers, to study animals that will only behave in
optically opaque environment, such as in the dark, under soil, in water and/or
in structurally complex environments, and to image internal soft tissue
structures, such as muscles. The ability to make these measurements will enhance
and expand research and training in integrative and evolutionary biomechanics,
neuromechanics and neuroscience in the Chicago area. In particular, XROMM will
enable innovations in the following areas: (1) Comparisons of locomotion and
feeding movements of fish and amphibians in complex aquatic and terrestrial
environments, and their relationship to evolutionary changes in form at the
origin of tetrapods,(2) the diversity, complexity and control of 3D jaw and
tongue movements during feeding in living mammals, and their relationship to
changes in the structure of the feeding system during the origin and radiation
of mammals, and (3) the role of the brain in control of 3D movements of a range
of musculoskeletal organs, including jaws, tongues, eye muscles, and hands.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research equipment will have multiple impacts beyond
research, including teaching and training, public outreach and exhibit
development, robotics and applied biomechanics. The XROMM instrumentation will
provide postdoctoral researchers, graduate and undergraduate students with
access to state-of-the-art research equipment in a dynamic intellectual
environment that will make possible novel approaches to integrative analyses of
animal movement. Graduate programs with access to XROMM will include: at the
University of Chicago, the Graduate Program in Integrative Biology, the
Committee on Evolutionary Biology, the Committee on Computational Neuroscience
and the Committee on Medical Physics; at Northwestern University, the graduate
programs in Biomedical Engineering, Physical Medicine &amp; Rehabilitation, and
Physiology; and the inter-institution, interdisciplinary NSF IGERT program,
Integrative Training in Motor Control and Movement. Faculty and graduate
students in these programs are actively involved in outreach locally (Sisters 4
Science; Global Village Science Project; Brain Day), and at national and
international levels (Outreach programs in Fiji, New Guinea; Encyclopedia of
Life Project; Biomechanics Exhibit, Field Museum of Natural History). The XROMM
instrumentation will significantly augment these efforts by generating visually
compelling animations of animal movement for presentation and online
distribution. In making possible novel research into the role of the brain in
control of movement, this equipment will contribute to understanding of motor
control disorders including Parkinson's Disease and stroke.