* 1338944
* Collaborative Research:  Integration of Extended Magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) and Kinetic Effects in Global Magnetosphere Models
* GEO,AGS
* 06/15/2013,05/31/2019
* Amitava Bhattacharjee, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Ilia Roussev
* 05/31/2019
* USD 1,280,000.00

This grant is for partial support of a project selected and funded under the
2012 NASA-NSF partnership for Space Weather Modeling Collaborations. It is a
collaborative effort, led by Princeton University and with participation also
from University of New Hampshire, University of California-San Diego, NASA
Goddard Space Flight Center, and Los Alamos National Laboratory. The objective
is to undertake what amounts to a theoretical and computational grand challenge,
namely to develop a state-of-the-art global magnetosphere model that goes beyond
the standard framework of the resistive MHD model to include multi-fluid
physics, including a generalized Ohms' law, enhanced equations of state for
electrons and ions that incorporate kinetic effects, and multiple charged
particle species. To this end, the project will assimilate and represent many of
the remarkable advances made over the last almost 15 years in our understanding
of reconnection, instabilities of current sheets, multiple fluids, and
turbulence in collisionless plasmas within the framework of a global
magnetosphere code, the OpenGGCM, a traditional version of which is presently
used extensively in the community. A suite of mature physics-based modules,
based on high-Lundquist-number MHD, Hall MHD, hybrid, multi species, and fully
kinetic particle-in-cell codes exist amongst the team members and will be
brought together to produce a comprehensive, next-generation global
magnetosphere code that will include for the first time extended MHD and kinetic
effects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When completed, the resulting enhanced global
magnetosphere model will be delivered to the Community Coordinated Modeling
Center (CCMC) for easy and full access to the scientific community and eventual
transition to use for operational space weather forecasting. This will enable
the accurate modeling of the kinetic scale processes (e.g., magnetic
reconnection) responsible for extreme space weather events with direct impact on
human society. While the application is geared to the Earth's magnetosphere, the
core science module of the model has much broader applicability, and has
potentially transformative implications for our ability to understand and
predict a broad range of space weather phenomena in the heliosphere that involve
magnetic reconnection, instabilities of current sheets, and turbulence. The
team, which is a partnership between academia and national laboratories,
consists of several junior scientists, postdoctoral fellows, and graduate
students who will be educated in this broadly interdisciplinary subject,
involving theoretical as well as experimental space plasma physics, applied
mathematics, and high-performance computing.