* 1338205
* EESE: The Ethics of Algorithms
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2017
* Kristene Unsworth, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2017
* USD 300,000.00

This project will investigate the ethics and values of the computer scientists,
information scientists, and software engineers who create algorithms. The
research will contribute to the study of ethics and values in science and
engineering in four key ways. First, it will bridge silos between philosophical
and social scientific approaches to ethics to develop an integrated theoretical
approach which simultaneously identifies the analytical, moral reasoning that is
happening during the conceptualization and design phase as well as critically
analyzes the interplay between an individual's personal ethics and values and
the ethics and values created by aspects of policies, institutional, economic,
and cultural contexts. Second, the work will further the literature on
information ethics by taking an upstream approach that focuses on the design
process. The literature concerned with the ethical use of information technology
and computer science often focuses on the outcomes of these endeavors; switching
the analytical lens, the PI will join a small but growing literature that
addresses ethical questions at the design stage. Third, the research will
provide an empirical contribution to information science given its investigation
of the intersection of people, technology design and knowledge. Finally, by
focusing on algorithms, the project will contribute to broader discussions about
ethics, values, and big data; algorithms are the driving technique behind the
creation of big data sets, yet there is little talk about the decisions and
values that shape algorithm design and thus impact big data content.

Broader Impacts: The interrelationship between algorithms and big data is a
timely and important topic for investigation. This research will open the black
box of algorithmic design in order to provide more transparency for public
discussion and debate on the implications of this new way of organizing
knowledge and social life. Project outcomes will include a series of provocative
images, concepts, and scenarios (to be presented in a well-designed series of
cards), to impact graduate students in computer science, information science,
and engineering. The PI plans to work with professional organizations such as
the Association of Computing Machinery [ACM] and Computer Professionals for
Social Responsibility [CPSR] to address a wider range of issues in the
professional code of ethics.