* 1338139
* MRI: Acquisition of a Multi-beam (Ga, Ne, He,) Microscope for Nanomaterials Modification and Investigation
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Nipam Patel, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 08/31/2016
* USD 1,525,503.00

1338139&lt;br/&gt;Hosemann&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The acquisition of the ORION Nanofab, a Multi-
beam (Ga, Ne, He,) Ion Microscope for Nanomaterials Modification and
Investigation, will significantly upgrade the capabilities at the University of
Californian Berkeley campus and to outside users interested in ion microscopy.
The instrument will be housed at a multiuser facility on campus as a multi-user
device. The three ion beams Ga, Ne and He will allow for not just high
resolution ion imaging but also virtually damage-free nanofabrication and ion
patterning while also enabling direct He or Ne implantation studies. This
instrument combines fast ion milling using the Ga beam with a precise fine
milling utilizing either Ne or the He beam while being usable as helium ion
microscope (HIM) for high resolution imaging. The instrument will be used for
patterning in polymers, imaging of biomaterials, fabrication of optical
antennas, imaging cell structures, modifying grapheme structures, enabling nano-
scale heat transfer studies, quantitative characterization of near-field energy
transfer, in-situ He implantation, or for the manufacturing of damage-free and
site-specific TEM (transmission electron microscopy), APT (atom probe
tomography) and nanoscale specimens for further investigation. The device marks
a new generation of nanofabrication tools with wide applicability and
unprecedented resolution and accuracy. The novelty of this device will also have
a substantial impact on teaching at U.C. Berkeley as well as cutting-edge
demonstrations for students and outside interested
personnel.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program
grant supports the acquisition of a Multi-beam (Ga, Ne, He,) Microscope for
Nanomaterials Modification and Investigation at the University of California at
Berkeley. This tool will allow for advanced characterization of nanoscale
structures ranging from Biology, Chemistry, Geoscience, Materials Science,
Physics and Mechanical, Electrical, Mining and Nuclear Engineering. In addition,
the instrument will allow for materials modification at the nanoscale with
unprecedented precision and little damage to the material. The instrument
utilizes three different beams of ions allowing the user to select the right
beam for the right application and material. The instrument has extremely wide
applicability and will be installed as a multi-user tool incorporated into a UC
Berkeley user center accessible to scientists, engineers and interested
personnel nationwide. This instrument marks a new generation of ion beam
microscopes and nanofabrication tools allowing for the investigation and
modification of matter at the smallest scales. The tool will also be used to
demonstrate to the general public cutting-edge applications of nanoscale science
and technology using a "seeing is believing" approach. This instrument will also
have be used in teaching to students in the areas mentioned above by
incorporation of real life examples and demonstrations.