* 1338491
* Building Research Infrastructure and Community to Advance Social Scientific and Educational Use of Administrative Data
* SBE,SMA
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Isabel Bradburn, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* John Cherniavsky
* 09/30/2017
* USD 500,004.00

The state longitudinal data systems provide the potential for a wide range of
research studies to address practice and policy issues in STEM education. The
PIs of this study from the Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
are coordinating a research collaborative to expand the use of individual-level
administrative data from five sources, including social services, child care
quality, and educational data, and to coordinate with efforts in the state of
Virginia to expand the interoperability of data. They are structuring a research
panel to conceptualize the best use of administrative data to test scientific
models across a number of STEM education research agendas. The PIs are
developing a design data interface and analytic tools to increase research
capacity. Finally, they are coordinating data governance structures and
processes to provide for procedures for system use by academic researchers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While the technical infrastructure of state longitudinal
data systems has had wide support and made considerable progress over the past
10 years, the potential for these data to be used by educational and social
scientist researchers has not kept pace. This project informs the knowledge base
of how state administrative data can be coordinated and integrated to address
research agendas more systematically. Multiple policy and practice research
questions that look at student persistence and learning trajectories, evaluation
of interventions, and workforce development efforts have the potential to be
informed by research communities that are more systematically leveraging
integrated longitudinal data.