* 1338767
* RCN-SEES:  Sustainable Adaptive Gradients in the Coastal Environment (SAGE):  Reconceptualizing the Role of Infrastructure in Resilience
* GEO,RISE
* 01/01/2014,09/30/2019
* Don DeGroot, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Sarah Ruth
* 09/30/2019
* USD 736,707.00

The core objective of the Sustainable Adaptive Gradients in the coastal
Environment (SAGE) Research Coordination Network (RCN) is to develop a
transdisciplinary network of researchers and policymakers focusing on the
Caribbean and U.S. Northeast that will put forward a shared framework for better
informing resilient coastal infrastructure decisions based on physical, natural,
and societal conditions. The network of US, Caribbean and European engineers,
geoscientists, ecologists, social scientists, planners and policymakers is
designed to build connections among diverse disciplines and improve the flow of
information among leading researchers worldwide who are working on these topics.
The RCN's products will be annual, intensive three- to four-day workshops,
webinars, a training module synthesizing our findings, a survey of educational
pathways in resilient infrastructure, journal publications and white-papers for
policymakers translating our research findings into accessible language. All of
these activities are intended to promote a diverse and comprehensive research
network that fosters the future development of transformative, policy-relevant
research initiatives. A new resilient infrastructure framework serves as the
basis for this RCN, and includes understanding communities as existing and
evolving within adaptive gradients, addressing spill-over and equity effects of
infrastructure decisions, using evidence regarding the impacts of fast-onset
disasters (e.g., hurricanes, tsunamis) to improve practices and policies for
chronic, slow-onset phenomena (e.g. sea level rise), and tying the application
of our theory to increasingly available indicators of climate change and local
conditions. Caribbean region researchers and policy-makers are key partners in
this effort as they bring extensive practical and research experience in
managing disaster risk and recent highly innovative regional approaches to
adapting to climate change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent storm events in the U.S.
Northeast demonstrate that there is a pressing need for coordinated research
into the resilience of coastal infrastructures to current hazards and the
evolving effects of climate change. Infrastructure here includes physical
structures, ecological services, and the social practices that influence the
impact of hazards such as hurricanes and coastal flooding. Caribbean communities
have long experience with planning for and responding to coastal hazards, while
the Northeast has sophisticated infrastructural and research capacity on this
topic. This project will create a network of US, Caribbean and European
engineers, geoscientists, ecologists, social scientists, planners and
policymakers to develop and promote a robust interdisciplinary analytic
framework for the wide range of possible infrastructure responses to coastal
hazards, including social, ecological, and engineering/technical factors. This
will allow policy-makers to have clearer selection criteria for location-
appropriate and climate-adapted sustainable coastal infrastructure policy.
Coordination of research between the two regions opens possibilities for
improving the long-term sustainability of coastal communities in both locations
by improving decision-making regarding effective and sustainable new
infrastructure. The project will generate greater participation among US
minority students and researchers in, and improve student and professional
access to, training in coastal resilient infrastructure design, planning and
policy-making.