* 1338922
* I/UCRC:  Phase II: Center for Advanced Knowledge Enablement
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2022
* Sitharama Iyengar, Florida International University
* Continuing Grant
* Mohan Kumar
* 09/30/2022
* USD 914,750.00

Program Director's Recommendation &lt;br/&gt;1338922 Florida International
(FIU); Rishe &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal requests Phase II funding for
the Florida International University (FIU) to remain as an active site in the
Center for Advanced Knowledge Enablement (CAKE). FIU at CAKE is the lead
institution while Florida Atlantic University (FAU) Is a "Partner" site.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The faculty of the I/UCRC CAKE will carry out research in
performance studies, benchmark evaluations, and the application of novel
algorithms, routines, data models, network analyses and software tools to large-
scale data sets. The research will be conducted by faculty at Florida
International University (FIU), as well as the I/UCRC CAKE's ongoing affiliated
sites, who are investigating a broad range of aspects of the science of data
management and search. The Center, which will continue to be administratively
hosted at FIU, expects to grow to include other domestic and foreign university
partners. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research proposed by the Center addresses
challenges that cross scientific domains and vertical markets, as many
industries are facing existential problems due to the sheer influx of data
generated. The Center broadens participation of underrepresented groups in
several ways. The investigators will Leverage their track record of involving
FIU's predominantly Hispanic student population in research with programs such
as 'affinity groups' that enable research performed by the graduate and
undergraduate students to be shared with other students; the Center will expand
opportunities of mentoring and graduating computer scientists from under-
represented populations at the BS, MS, and PhD levels. As the I/UCRC CAKE
continues to grow, the center will build a cohesive structure spanning multiple
institutions, in part by enabling extended research visits at partner sites for
faculty and doctoral students. The Center plans to include other US universities
and international collaboration in the framework of its Latin American Grid
Project, an existing NSF PIRE, and other work with European and Asian
universities.