* 1338243
* ELT Collaborative research: Evolutionary and ecological responses of small mammal communities to habitat and climate change over the last 5 million years
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2017
* Pratigya Polissar, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Skog
* 07/31/2017
* USD 110,199.00

Technical description: The goal of this project is to test three models of
faunal change in response to biotic and abiotic forcings during the transition
to the modern grassland ecosystem in the Great Plains over the last 4.5 My: the
Red Queen, the Court Jester, and the Equilibrium Theory of Island Biogeography.
In doing so, we will answer four specific research questions: 1) Do long-term
changes in local habitat or climate control taxonomic diversity dynamics? 2)
Does climate change associated with the onset of Northern Hemisphere glaciation
at 2.5 Ma impact diversity dynamics or the ecological structure of communities?
3) How do catastrophic events (major ashfalls) impact diversity dynamics and
ecological structure of communities? 4) How are immigrant species accommodated
in the ecological structure of the contemporary community? We will analyze
diversity dynamics with an existing database of species occurrences in the Meade
Basin, SW Kansas in relation to reconstructions of local paleoecology,
paleoenvironment, and paleoclimate. We will characterize ecological structure of
communities with body sizes estimated from tooth dimensions and trophic
categories reconstructed from carbon isotope compositions of tooth enamel using
laser ablation isotope ratio mass spectrometry and a novel combination of
morphometric analyses based on high resolution microCT scans. Interpretation of
paleodiet proxies will be constrained by isotopic and morphometric analyses of
modern species with known diets and habitats from existing museum collections
and live trapping in grasslands around Meade, KS. Paleoenvironmental and
paleoclimatic reconstructions will be based on a comprehensive suite of proxies
measured on paleosol carbonates and bulk sediment samples collected in
stratigraphic association with known fossil sites and major ashfalls: carbon
isotope ratios of bulk organic matter, carbon and hydrogen isotope ratios of
leaf wax n-alkanes, lignin phenol ratios, plant phytolith assemblages, carbonate
clumped isotope paleothermometry, and paleosol elemental geochemistry and
mineralogy. Paleoclimate proxies and isotopic data will be compared to output of
regional scale, isotope-enabled paleoclimate simulations under various forcings.
Finally, we will construct ecological niche models for modern mammal species and
genera in the region and use paleoclimate model output to test how climate
change may have forced range shifts and taxonomic turnover in the Meade record.

Non-technical description: Understanding the origin of modern communities is a
fundamental goal of ecology, but reconstructing the history of communities that
include species with stratigraphic durations on the scale of hundreds of
thousands to millions of years necessarily requires data from the fossil record.
Similarly, inferences about the paleoecology of past communities are most robust
when informed by data from both living and fossil populations of extant species.
Despite the logical connections between ecology and paleoecology, relatively few
studies have bridged the gaps in the characteristic observational timescales and
methodologies of these disciplines to achieve a comprehensive view of the long-
term evolution of specific modern communities. The need to bridge these
disciplinary gaps is increasingly pressing in the face of anthropogenic climate
change and uncertainty about the magnitude and direction of responses by local
communities. This project will examine the ecological, environmental, and
climatic context of the origin of the modern small mammal community in the
grasslands of the central USA over the last five million years. We will test the
effects of both biological and non-biological factors on long-term taxonomic
turnover and ecological change in a stratigraphic sequence of local communities
using a combination of ecomorphology, biogeochemistry, paleoclimate modeling,
and biogeography. This project will link evolution, ecology, and paleoecology
with biogeochemistry to trace the emergence of a modern ecosystem over
geological time.