* 1338883
* Dissertation Research: Prehispanic Settlement Patterns of the Sogamoso Valley
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2014
* Robert Drennan, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2014
* USD 25,194.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Robert D. Drennan, doctoral candidate Sebastian
Fajardo will conduct a settlement pattern study in the Sogamoso Valley of the
eastern highlands of Colombia. The Muisca chiefs in this part of Colombia were
broadly described by the Spanish conquerors who arrived in the sixteenth century
as among the richest and most powerful rulers of indigenous northern South
America. The archaeological record of these societies suggests considerable
variability from one Muisca chiefdom to another in the nature and extent of
their development. In particular, it has suggested that chiefs in the southern
part of Muisca territory began to consolidate power over regional polities
before 1000 AD, and that this power was founded on control of basic resources
for intensive food production. This scenario fits with the idea that control of
economic resources provides for the development of especially large-scale
political integration under powerful leaders. In contrast, archaeologically
known chiefdoms in the northern part of Muisca territory, seem to emerge later,
and remained small in scale and generally less developed than those of the
south. It has been argued that this demonstrates the developmental limitations
of power based largely on feasting, social obligations, and religious authority,
since the northern Muisca area lacks readily intensifiable and controllable
agricultural resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although the focus is on one past
society the potential relevance is significant in a present day context. The
underlying goal of the research is to gain insight into the factors which guide
the development and maintenance of complex traditional societies which are
characteristic in many regions of the world today.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
principal chiefly center in the northernmost Muisca area was at Sogamoso, and
Spanish colonial accounts describe it as in important center indeed, focused on
a grand Temple of the Sun presided over by a chief whose power derived from
religious authority over a confederation of smaller polities. If accurate, these
accounts suggest considerable scope for a rather different pathway to the
development of chiefly power than that imagined for southern Muisca chiefdoms -
a pathway based more on religious belief than on economic control. Except for
excavations in and around the location of the Temple of the Sun itself, little
archaeological research has been carried out in the Sogamoso region. The
settlement study to be carried out by Mr. Fajardo will document the scale and
nature of the human community surrounding the Temple of the Sun, at both local
and regional scales. It will assess the extent to which a large-scale
consolidated regional polity with a major central place emerged. This will make
it possible to compare the largest and most impressive chiefly central
communities and regional polities of the northern and southern parts of Muisca
territory and assess more effectively their degrees of
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will also have broader impacts. As
dissertation research, it is vital to the training of the doctoral candidate. At
the same time it will provide experience and training in field and laboratory
methods to undergraduate archaeology students from several Colombian
universities. It will present new archaeological information to school students
and the general public by presenting preliminary results of the study in the
Museo Parque Arqueol√≥gico de Sogamoso, a regional landmark for synergistic
relations between academic research and contemporary communities.