* 1338260
* US-Based Students Support to Attend the IEEE International Conference on Mobile Data Management 2013 (IEEE MDM 2013)
* CSE,IIS
* 04/15/2013,03/31/2018
* Ouri Wolfson, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 03/31/2018
* USD 20,000.00

This proposal seeks support in the form of travel awards for U.S.-based graduate
and undergraduate students to participate in the 14th IEEE MDM 2013 Conference,
which will be held in Milan, Italy, June 3-6, 2013. The MDM series of
conferences, annually organized by the IEEE society since 1999, has established
itself as a prestigious forum for the exchange of innovative and significant
research results in mobile data management. The conference provides unique
opportunities for researchers, engineers, practitioners, developers, and users
to explore new ideas, techniques, and tools, and to exchange experiences in
mobile data management. Attendees will participate interactions via lively
presentations of accepted technical papers, posters and demos, and invited talks
given by leading academics and industry professionals of related fields. The
participation of US based graduate and promising undergraduate students will
result in the intellectual simulation of young minds to pursue advanced research
and development activities in this area that has huge technical and societal
impact, and helps U.S. keep the leading position in this vital field. To ensure
a broader impact in disseminating the results of the conference, and to garner
interest among young researchers in the fields of mobile data management, this
award is for travel grants enabling student travel to attend IEEE MDM 2013 and
the workshops to be held in conjunction with the MDM 2013. The purpose is to
encourage the attendance of students who otherwise would not have the
opportunity to participate in such a conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
allocation of the grants will be based on need and impact of the applicant?s
attendance in increasing the diversity of conference participation. Minority
students, students from underrepresented institutions, and students in financial
need will be given higher priority.