* 1338478
* EAGER: Nanoparticle-mediated increase in viral plaque formation
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2015
* Marisa Pedulla,  Montana Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 07/31/2015
* USD 99,907.00

The PIs have found from preliminary data an increase in the potency of
bacteriophages on the inclusion of Fe-doped apatite (commonly,
Ca10(PO4)6(OH,F,Cl)2 ) nanoparticles. This EAGER proposal is aimed at exploring
these findings to determine the validity and mechanism for this unexpected
response. This work is potentially transformative in elucidating innovative
ideas about the relation of nanomaterials to virus-bacteria
interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;This research
explores the possibility that engineered nanoparticles could be used to control
the infection of bacteria by viruses (bacteriophages). If nanomaterials can be
designed to increase viral infection of bacteria, the materials could be used
enhance antibiotics in therapeutic applications, or they might possibly cause
ecological harm to natural bacteria in soils or water. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
further explore the preliminary results, the proposal will address three
research questions: &lt;br/&gt;(1) What is the relationship between increased
bacteriophage plaques and the NP?s size, shape,&lt;br/&gt;surface charge,
crystal structure, surface functional groups, and solubility? Is the
effect&lt;br/&gt;seen with Fe-HA NPs simply a result of generating soluble iron-
coordinated complex species?&lt;br/&gt;(2) Can NPs cause dispersion of phage
agglomerates resulting in more infectious phage particles&lt;br/&gt;and more
plaques?&lt;br/&gt;(3) Does this phenomenon extend to viruses of
eukaryotes?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact of this work includes contributions to the training of
undergraduate and&lt;br/&gt;graduate students in multidisciplinary skills,
including molecular and microbiology, chemistry,&lt;br/&gt;materials science and
nanoscience. Montana Tech is well-positioned to address the
training&lt;br/&gt;of a historic mining community that lags behind other regions
in STEM based education. The&lt;br/&gt;project will include women and students
from tribal communities. The ?phage-digging? outreach&lt;br/&gt;associated with
this work has been in place for some time and conducted by Dr. Pedulla
for&lt;br/&gt;high and middle school students for several years. The PIs will
test many of the seventy phages&lt;br/&gt;newly isolated via outreach programs
with Fe-HA NPs to determine the breadth of this phenomenon&lt;br/&gt;and its
potential impact on regional ecology. The PIs hope to extend this research into
a NSF RUI&lt;br/&gt;funded program and will continue to incorporate this
research into educational components&lt;br/&gt;in existing graduate and
undergraduate courses taught by the PIs.&lt;br/&gt;We are highly inspired by
such a cross-disciplinary investigation and believe that it may&lt;br/&gt;pave
the way to greater interaction between various groups across our campus, the
state, and&lt;br/&gt;even other institutions nationwide