* 1338432
* Collaborative Research: Adaptable life history strategy of a migratory large predator in response to El Nino and climate change
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2014
* Kelly Benoit-Bird, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 06/30/2014
* USD 75,993.00

This project will examine the response of Dosidicus gigas (Humboldt squid) to an
El Niño event in 2009-2010 that was accompanied by a collapse of the commercial
fishery for this squid in the Guaymas Basin within the Gulf of California. This
large squid is a major predator of great ecological and economic importance in
the Gulf of California, the California Current, and Peru Current systems. In
early 2010, these squid abandoned their normal coastal-shelf habitats in the
Guaymas Basin and instead were found in the Salsipuedes Basin to the north, an
area buffered from the effects of El Niño by the upwelling of colder water. The
commercial fishery also relocated to this region and large squid were not found
in the Guaymas Basin from 2010-2012, instead animals that matured at an
unusually small size and young age were abundant. A return to the large size-at-
maturity condition has still not occurred, despite the apparent return of normal
oceanographic conditions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The El Niño of 2009-2010
presented an unforeseen opportunity to reveal an important feature of
adaptability of Dosidicus gigas to an acute climatic anomaly, namely a large
decrease in size and age at maturity. Now these investigators will have the
opportunity to document recovery to the normal large size-at-maturity condition.
The specific aims of this project are: 1) continue a program of acoustic surveys
and direct sampling of squid that has already been established in the Gulf of
California in order to assess distribution, biomass, life history strategy diet,
and migratory and foraging behaviors relative to pre-El Niño conditions and 2)
conduct analogous surveys in Monterey Bay, California in conjunction with long-
term remote operated vehicle surveys of squid abundance. The data from these
studies will provide a comparison of recovery in the two different squid
populations and yield valuable insights into what ecological effects an area is
expected to experience with an invasion of either small or large Humboldt squid.
As long-term climate change progresses, squid of both forms may expand northward
into the California Current System.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Training will be
provided for participating graduate and undergraduate students and an
established collaboration will be continued with a technical college in Mexico
that involves Mexican undergraduates in local sampling and developing public
outreach aimed at the local squid fishing community. Squid abundance (biomass)
and foraging (diet) data will be incorporated into NOAA fishery-management
models being developed for Humboldt squid. Findings of the project concerning El
Niño, climate change, and squid fisheries will be incorporated into an
established outreach program with NOAA (Squids4Kids), the Google Science Fair
Science Hangouts program, and a NEH Summer Institute on John Steinbeck at
Hopkins Marine Station. The investigators will continue to contribute exhibits
being developed on squid at both the Monterey Bay Aquarium and Hatfield Marine
Science Center.