* 1338901
* Planning Grant:  I/UCRC for Multi-functional Integrated System Technology
* ENG,EEC
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2015
* David Arnold, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Raffaella Montelli
* 06/30/2015
* USD 55,971.00

Planning Grant for an I/UCRC for Multi-Functional Integrated System Technology

1338901 University of Florida; Nishida 1338895 University of Central Florida;
Yuan

The vision of the proposed Center "Multi-Functional Integrated System Technology
(MIST) is to pioneer the More than Moore" era by translating novel materials,
devices, and manufacturing processes into multi-functional integrated systems
that yield rich functional diversity compared to traditional integrated circuit
platforms. The University of Florida (UFL) and the University of Central Florida
(UCF) are collaborating to establish the proposed center, with UFL as the lead
institution.

The proposed Center aims at the innovation beyond Moore's Law. Through
iindustry-driven collaborative research initiatives, interdisciplinary mixing
and intersectional collisions will be promoted in order to catalyze innovation
opportunities such as combinations of computing, sensing, actuation, and energy
storage/generation on the same system on a chip (SoC) or system in package
(SiP). The MIST Center will lay the pavement on the roadmap to next-generation
integrated electronic systems.

A result of Moore's law is the transformation of the computing platform from the
advent of the solid-state mainframe computer to the desktop computer to the
laptop computer, and most recently to the tablet computer. Research at the MIST
Center will operate at the forefront of this transformation by connecting
research advances in materials science, electronics, magnetics, acoustics,
photonics, microfluidic devices, MEMS, and circuits to societally relevant
technologies with industry guidance. The proposed I/UCRC MIST Center will
integrate a strong team of complementary investigators, train the next
generation of graduate students who are versed in cutting edge research,
actively recruit and introduce participants from underrepresented groups in
science and engineering, and team with industrial member companies, governmental
agencies, and associations. These exchanges will broaden the perspectives of all
involved participants.