* 1338507
* BCC Forecasting the Break: Building Community and Capacity for Large-scale, Data-Intensive Research in Forced Migration Studies
* SBE,SMA
* 09/15/2013,12/31/2014
* Jeffrey Collmann, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* kevin Leicht
* 12/31/2014
* USD 271,598.00

SMA-1338507&lt;br/&gt;Susan F. Martin&lt;br/&gt;Sidney
Berkowitz&lt;br/&gt;Jeffrey R. Collman&lt;br/&gt;Lisa Singh&lt;br/&gt;Georgetown
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will assemble a multidisciplinary
community of scholars and practitioners to create community and capacity for a
large-scale, data intensive early warning system for detecting forced migration
or population displacement. The system will be based on Raptor, a vast
unstructured archive at Georgetown University of over 600 million publicly
available open-source media articles. Mobilizing vast amounts of open source
data will enable discovery of patterns of acute events (triggers) and/or slow-
onset processes (trends) in the context of pre-existing stressors. Developing an
effective early warning system of population displacement requires collaboration
and shared learning between subject matter experts who understand the factors
that contribute to forced migration at the macro, meso and micro levels and
technical experts who understand how to collect, store, mine and analyze masses
of data derived from international, national and local sources. Bringing
together social scientists and computer scientists will expose social scientists
to new modeling approaches for analyzing their subject matter. At the same time,
computer scientists will exploit domain expertise in the social sciences. This
expertise will provide insight for the development of beyond state of the art
data mining of very large open source data bases for event detection, sequential
mining and change detection. Participants will include scholars from many
universities and practitioners from relief and migration-oriented organizations.
The results of this endeavor will be: 1) methods and algorithms that can serve
as a blueprint for integrating computational models into new avenues of social
science research, and 2) a community and a plan for improving early warning of
forced population displacement through human-computer analysis that address two
key societal concerns, population changes and social
disparities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;Effective early
warning of forced population displacement will help in state- and organization-
level planning and preparation for such movements, as well as directly aid
potential refugees and displaced persons before, during and after their exodus.
Planning can lead to action to try to avert mass displacement, preferably by
tackling the triggering events and stressors and providing options to those who
would otherwise be forced to relocate (e.g., getting food to villages at risk of
famine). Earlier warning may also help divert forced migrants from risky modes
of movement (e.g., via non-seaworthy boats or across landmine infested borders).
Early warning of displacement would enable the pre-positioning of shelter, food,
medicines and other supplies in areas that are likely to receive large numbers
of refugees and displaced persons.