* 1338425
* EarthCube Domain End-User Workshop: Integrating Real-time Data into the EarthCube Framework; Boulder, Colorado; June 17-19, 2013
* GEO,AGS
* 04/15/2013,11/30/2014
* Michael Daniels, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Linnea Avallone
* 11/30/2014
* USD 95,634.00

This grant supports a workshop entitled "EarthCube Domain End-User Workshop:
Integrating Real-time Data into the EarthCube Framework" to be held in June 2013
in Boulder, Colorado. The primary objective of this meeting is to bring together
users and providers of real-time data across geosciences disciplines to address
community needs for effectively and efficiently handling and applying this type
of data. Through oral presentations and in breakout sessions, attendees from
universities, federal agencies and industry will develop example cases and
explore issues related to gathering and quality control of real-time data that
can be used to inform the cyber-infrastructure development within
EarthCube.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Real-time geoscientific data has the
potential to revolutionize the application of scientific data in contexts of
importance to a broader audience. Such data streams are key inputs, for example,
to operational forecast models and warning systems that inform the general
public of impending hazardous weather. This workshop will have a broader impact
by helping to build capacity among the community of real-time technologists and
researchers whose work affects a wide range of users, including water resource
managers, energy planners, farmers, school districts, disaster mitigation and
relief planners, urban managers, utilities, cities, etc.