* 1338274
* Instance Compression
* CSE,CCF
* 12/15/2012,08/31/2013
* Lance Fortnow, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Dmitri Maslov
* 08/31/2013
* USD 35,208.00

Can one efficiently compress search problems with small witnesses into problems
whose size depends on the length of the instances? Recent results have given
strong negative evidence, for example, that one cannot efficiently map the
problem of finding a clique of size k to a problem of size polynomial in k.
These question has surprising applications to parameterized complexity,
cryptography, probabilistic proof systems and structural complexity.

This project will look to extend these results to a number of different
directions including showing similar results for probabilistic compression which
seem to require new breakthroughs in pseudorandom generators. Also can ever
compress a function f that depends on m instances of an NP problem of size n to
a single instance of size polynomial in n where the AND function seems to be the
major barrier. Finally this project will explore new applications of this line
of research as well as other related topics in computational complexity.

While this proposal takes a theoretical approach to instance compression, in the
long-term continued research in complexity will help focus efforts when trying
to tackle difficult computational problems that arise in practice. This project
explore these problems with graduate students as part of their thesis research.
Research from this project will be desseminated through conference and invited
presentations and publications in conferences, journals and on the Internet.