* 1338773
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Hunter-Gatherers, Archaeogenomics, and the Evolutionary History of the Foxes of California's Channel Islands
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2014
* Paul Shackel, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2014
* USD 24,950.00

One of the greatest environmental impacts of ancient people was the introduction
of both domestic and wild species to non-native habitats. Globalization has led
to the rapid spread of exotic and invasive species, but the movement of species
through trade networks and human migration extends back at least 20,000 years
and intensifies during the last 10,000 years. The analysis of ancient DNA and
genomic data permits one to investigate the possible prehistoric introduction or
movement of the now endangered island fox (Urocyon littoralis) by Native
Americans across the California Channel Islands. The Channel Islands contain
some of the earliest human occupations in coastal North America at 13,000 cal BP
and some of the most populous hunter-gather groups in the world with extensive
trade networks between the islands and mainland. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
endemic island fox of California's Channel Islands is a federally listed
endangered species and has been the subject of considerable conservation
research, including a captive breeding program. Despite decades of research,
significant questions remain about when foxes colonized the Channel Islands and
the role that Native Americans may have played in their introduction and
dispersal to six islands. Most researchers agree that Native Americans
deliberately introduced island foxes from the northern to the southern Channel
Islands by 5,000 years ago, and recent research raises the possibility that
Native Americans may have first introduced foxes from the mainland to the
northern Channel Islands. This is supported by their widespread distribution on
six islands, their absence in fossil deposits or in very early archaeological
contexts, and the significance of foxes in Native American religion and
ceremony.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using archaeological, historic (19-20th century),
and extant island foxes samples, C. Hofman is characterizing genetic variation
of thousands of loci across the island fox genome to test the hypothesis that
foxes were first introduced to the Channel Islands by Native Americans during
the Holocene. By dating dispersal/introduction events and placing them in the
context of the archeological/fossil records using high throughput sequencing,
this study will investigate the role of anthropogenic, biotic (introduction and
dispersal of other species), and environmental factors (e.g. climate change) in
shaping island fox genetic variation across several millennia. These data will
allow a better understanding of how humans have interacted with and influenced
animals by introducing them to new environments, obscuring the distinction
between nature and culture. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will form Hofman's
PhD dissertation and will be published in peer-reviewed archaeological,
biological, and interdisciplinary journals, synthesized in a technical report,
and summarized in a brief educational document for the Channel Islands National
Park (CHIS). This project will demonstrate the importance of integrating
archaeology and genomics for understanding ancient and modern human
environmental relationships and modern conservation biology. Archaeological
investigations of human-animal relationships through time can help document the
influence of Native Americans on species distribution, abundance, and ecology.
Understanding how species and humans adapted to and influenced changing
environments in the past will inform decisions about protecting, preserving, and
restoring biodiversity in the future.