* 1338256
* Collaborative Research:   Integrated Data-Model Analysis of CO2-Climate-Vegetation Feedbacks in a Dynamic Paleo-Icehouse
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2019
* Michael Hren, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 12/31/2019
* USD 203,500.00

COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH :Integrated Data-Model Analysis of CO2-Climate-Vegetation
Feedbacks in a Dynamic Paleo-
Icehouse&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;by&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Isabel Montanez, Univ.
California, Davis EAR-1338281&lt;br/&gt;Christopher Poulsen, Univ. Michigan,
EAR-1338200&lt;br/&gt;Joseph White, Baylor University,
EAR-1338247&lt;br/&gt;Michael Hren, Univ. Conneticutt,
EAR-1338256&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Overview: Vegetation-
COÂ¬2-climate feedbacks have been shown to be an important component of the
climate system, capable of perturbing atmospheric circulation, continental
surface temperatures, and hydrological cycling on regional- to global-scales.
Recent work indicates that vegetation-climate feedbacks likely had the potential
to push the late Paleozoic climate system between glacial and interglacial
states and to strongly modify the climate regime within these states. The
details of the nature, time-scales, and potential impact of these feedbacks
remain elusive. This multi-disciplinary project, driven by three interlinked
hypotheses, addresses these shortcomings and analyzes the roles of CO2- and
orbital-forcing and vegetation-climate feedbacks in promoting glacial-
interglacial transitions on eccentricity- to multi-million year time-scales:
&lt;br/&gt;- The response of vegetation to primarily CO2-driven glacial-
interglacial transitions depended on the timing, magnitude and duration of CO2
forcing and whether critical ecological thresholds were reached.&lt;br/&gt;-
Tropical vegetation, by way of physiological forcing, impacted low-latitude
climate and water &amp; C cycling&lt;br/&gt;- Vegetation-climate feedbacks - on
a global-scale - amplified radiatively forced glacial-interglacial transitions
through changes in direct surface forcing and terrestrial C &amp; N
cycling.&lt;br/&gt;These hypotheses are being tested through integrated
empirical, experimental and multi-scale modeling approaches across a spectrum of
time- (10 to 1,000,000 yr) and spatial-scales (leaf-to-canopy-to-global climate
system). Climate-CO2-vegetation feedbacks, including the role of plant
physiological forcing of climate will be assessed through a two-stage modeling
effort that will first reformulate a terrestrial biosphere model (BIOME-BGC)
using the empirical and experimental results coupled with modeling sensitivity
experiments to define plant functional traits for late Paleozoic PFTs. In the
second stage, we will incorporate these PFT traits into NCAR's fully coupled
Community Earth System Model and use this version to investigate glacial-
interglacial dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This research will generate
the first high-resolution, high-precision reconstruction of atmospheric CO2
during the LPIA, which when incorporated into the climate modeling will provide
insight into the evolution of earth system processes, including the terrestrial
biosphere, in an icehouse under changing CO2 levels relevant to our long-term
future. This study will be the first modification of terrestrial biosphere
models to account for paleo-PFT traits and investigation of paleovegetation-
climate feedbacks thus providing an improved understanding of the potential of
non-angiosperm plants to influence hydrologic and C cycling through
physiological forcing. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Cross-disciplinary training
and mentoring will occur through in-residence internships for the Ph.D.
students. Underrepresented students to Earth and environmental sciences will be
integrated through a range of summer and academic year internships and programs
at the collaborating institutions. This study will contribute directly to a
Carboniferous exhibit planned for the Paleontological Halls of the National
Museum of Natural History, Smithsonian Institution. All data generated by this
study will be archived and shared via publications, and web-accessible tools.