* 1338285
* ELT:   Collaborative Research:   Stratigraphic refinement, systematic and biogeographic relationships of the late Cretaceous-Paleocene Deccan biota of India
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2014,02/28/2019
* Steven Manchester, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Dena Smith
* 02/28/2019
* USD 280,000.00

This is a project to conduct detailed studies of anatomically preserved fossil
plants from deposits in India that were growing at a time when the Indian
subcontinent was about to collide with southern Asia. The focus of the research
is on the floristic changes that occurred as a result of that continental
collision, and the global biological catastrophe that it is hypothesized to have
caused. The Intertrappean beds developed during intervals between major plateau
basalt eruptions of the late Cretaceous-early Paleocene are famous for their
fossil content, including remains of terrestrial mammals, dinosaurs, mammals,
molluscs and abundant fossil plants. Fossils that are the focus of this study
are among the most extensive and well preserved in the paleontological record.
Detailed knowledge of the fossil plants preserved in those beds, and the
floristic turnover from the Late Cretaceous through the basal Paleogene will
provide a benchmark for understanding the relationship between climatic and
floristic change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because this study will focus on climate-
change driven changes in regional and global floristics, it has great potential
to provide insights about vegetational changes that are likely to result from
the global climate change that is beginning at this time. Obviously, these
insights will help predict the types of global vegetational changes that we may
expect to see in the near future, and help inform decisions about how to manage
such changes through the selective allocation of resources. The disciplines
that&lt;br/&gt;are represented by the PI team, and the approach that has been
proposed is comprehensive and potentially transformative with respect to the
vital insights that will result from characterization of floristic changes
through this crucial period in the history of the earth. The combined use of
broad-based plant systematics, coupled with detailed studies of flowers, fruits,
and wood to address these important&lt;br/&gt;questions is a most ambitions and
creative approach that has not previously been attempted.