* 1338018
* MRI: Development of Terahertz Electronics Characterization System
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2013,12/31/2015
* Partha Dutta, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Dimitris Pavlidis
* 12/31/2015
* USD 644,214.00

The goal of this project is to develop unique Terahertz Electronics
Characterization (TEC) System to enable investigations of advanced
nanostructured novel THz electronics materials.&lt;br/&gt;This system is a
prerequisite for developing electronic devices and systems operating at
terahertz frequencies.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The proposed TEC System
will be uniquely suited for characterization of advanced nanostructured THz
electronics materials and devices and fundamental THz science studies. This will
include studies of electron transport at THz frequencies and in ballistic
devices, THz response of hot electrons, non-linear response at THz frequencies,
device-circuit interaction, plasmonic crystal physics, near field imaging, THz
system parameter extraction, studies of biomolecules, signatures of biological
objects investigations of THz and sub-THz integrated circuits, fundamental
research on high field subpicosecond transport, THz characterization of carbon-
based, and topological insulator electronics (including single layer, few layer,
and multiple layer graphene THz devices. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The
emerging advanced nanostructure electronic THz devices will enable massive new
applications in homeland security, biotechnology, medicine, and industrial
controls with multi billion market potential. Even beyond these applications,
the nation to first develop THz electronics will control the future of
electronics industry. The proposed THz electronic characterization system will
allow for non-destructive characterization of THz nanostructures under operating
conditions (i.e. under voltage bias and/or current flowing). This is the key for
validation, understanding, and optimization of novel materials and devices for
THz applications and for spectrum expansion for dramatic increase in bandwidth.
Our preliminary measurements have already demonstrated potential for
subwavelength terahertz imaging, ability to detect minute leakage currents,
testing of high-speed ICs under bias, and potential for estimating the junction
operating temperature at a nanoscale. Employing slit-periodic antennas and
arrays of transistors should improve the device sensitivity by orders of
magnitude.