* 1338312
* ELT Collaborative Research:  Perturbation of the Marine Food Web and Extinction During the Oceanic Anoxic Event at the Cenomanian/Turonian Boundary
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2018
* Bradley Sageman, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Dena Smith
* 08/31/2018
* USD 222,275.00

ELT Collaborative Research: Perturbation of the Marine Food Web
and&lt;br/&gt;Extinction during the Oceanic Anoxic Event at the Cenomanian/Turon
ian&lt;br/&gt;Boundary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;by&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Timothy
Bralower, Penn State University, EAR-1338316&lt;br/&gt;Bradley Sageman,
Northwestern University, EAR-1338312&lt;br/&gt;R. Mark Leckie, Univ.
Massachusetts, Amherst, EAR-1338317&lt;br/&gt;Julio Sepulveda, MIT,
EAR-1338318&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;The expansion of oxygen-
deficient waters, known as hypoxia, is occurring seasonally in places such as
the Gulf of Mexico as a result of warming and pollution. Hypoxia can affect all
marine organisms through the loss of habitat, changes in predator-prey dynamics,
and availability of nutrients for primary production. Ocean acidification
resulting from the input of anthropogenic CO2 is already impacting the ability
of many organisms to grow shells. The geological record contains a series of
natural experiments that allow us to address the biological response of the
biota to ocean acidification and widespread oxygen deficiency.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Cenomanian-Turonian boundary (94 million years ago in
the middle of the Cretaceous Period), a time interval marked by mass extinction,
was also characterized by global oxygen deficiency and likely ocean
acidification. Thus, the Cenomanian-Turonian boundary is an excellent ancient
model for the impact of anthropogenic activities on marine ecosystems. A superb
opportunity exits to explore the impact of oxygen deficiency and ocean
acidification during the Cenomanian-Turonian boundary in rock outcrops from the
western and southern margins of the US Western Interior Seaway. In Utah, rocks
contain original ammonite aragonite as well as remains of large marine reptiles.
In Texas, British Petroleum has made available a unique core and exclusive
access to outcrop sections. Back-hoeing of rock outcrops will unearth pristine
fossil shells suitable for reconstruction of ancient environmental conditions
using geological proxies, and coring will provide rocks that can be studied to
determine changes that took place over centuries. The insight gained from the
CTB can be applied to other intervals of biotic upheaval in Earth history and
will help improve projections of the impacts of human activities, including
hypoxia and ocean acidification, on modern ecosystems.