* 1338487
* BCC-SBE/EHR: Developing Community & Capacity to Measure Noncognitive Factors in Digital Learning Environments
* SBE,SMA
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Britte Cheng, SRI International
* Standard Grant
* John Cherniavsky
* 08/31/2017
* USD 500,000.00

Researchers from SRI International are building a collaborative research
community to support the measurement of noncognitive factors associated with
learning in science, technology, engineering and mathematics using data from
digital learning environments. Constructs such as engagement, grit, tenacity and
perseverance are examined as they are strong predictors of academic outcomes.
The project uses an evidence-centered design to provide a structured approach
for assessing these hard to measure constructs. Products from the research
include a detailed framework and shared worked examples that can be used to
build common measurement approaches. In addition, the project builds the
capacity for a community of software developers, learning science researchers
and measurement specialists to work together to expand what is known about how
to integrate cognitive and noncognitive outcomes in digital learning
environments.

The focus of this work is the use of a framework for assessment called evidence-
centered design (ECD). ECD is well suited to supporting the development of
rigorous measures of noncognitive assessments as it supports researchers in
identifying where and how such constructs are manifested in digital learning
environments. The researchers from SRI leverage the infrastructure for learning
resource analytics (the Learning Registry) that they have developed to create a
content-distribution and replication network to support the work of the
community that they are building in this project. White papers from the
workshops articulate the research agenda that the digitial learning environment
research community is developing. Two workshops support the efforts to develop
the worked examples of the measurement of noncognitive outcomes and five
knowledge community building sessions, as preconference workshops and symposia,
provide a dissemination mechanism to support bringing additional researchers
into this community.

This project builds strongly on the previous work that has been conducted by SRI
and by the researchers they intend to include in the community for which they
are building capacity. The digital learning environments that are the focus of
the worked examples of the connection of noncognitive and cognitive factors
represent a strong set of the projects that have been funded by NSF. They are
the learning environments that are most prevalent in the research and
development environment in the STEM digital learning environment and include
other digital environments, such as the Khan Academy, that are widely used in
education. With the growing interest in college and career ready standards and
the emphasis on workforce development skills that emphasize soft skills, the
project brings together a community of researchers around a common, important
problem.