* 1338485
* TOWARDS A CELLPHONE-BASED INFRASTRUCTURE FOR HARVESTING DYNAMIC INTERACTION NETWORK DATA
* SBE,SMA
* 09/15/2013,02/29/2016
* Bilal Khan, CUNY John Jay College of Criminal Justice
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 02/29/2016
* USD 249,780.00

Social networks--that is, collections of individuals linked by inter-
relationships--are by now well-known important factors in understanding social
and behavioral phenomena. Missing from prior considerations is the fact that
these relationships represent sequences of dynamic short-term interactions,
where each interaction reflects the concerns of a particular environment.
Present survey-based research methods are not able to capture accurate, detailed
data on interactions within social networks over long timescales, and yet, such
data would likely lead to significant new insights into the contextualized
behavior of individuals, the way in which communities emerge, and the flow of
information/transformation within human societies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project brings together a multi-disciplinary team from sociology, anthropology,
criminology, psychology, public health, and education, to identify critical
research problems whose resolution would be advanced by the availability of
dynamic interaction data. The research requirements of these diverse disciplines
will be synthesized by computer scientists, leading to the design of a new
cellphone-based system which will be capable of revealing the form and evolution
of dynamic interaction networks in a privacy-preserving manner. To evaluate the
design, a small-scale prototype will be developed, and applied in a case study
exploring the impact of dynamic student interactions on individual academic
performance. Potential future iterations of this tool will ensure the confirmed
willing participation of study participants by the inclusion of a component
requirement to 'opt in' in order to take part in the automated data-collection
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By leveraging recent advances in proximity-based
network technology and data science to yield the design of a general-purpose
cellphone-based system that can provide much-needed access to dynamic
interaction network data, this project furthers a deeper understanding of human
societies by enhancing long-term research capabilities across a range of social,
behavioral and economic sciences. The case study will validate the system
design, while also providing new insights on patterns of interaction in social
networks, and their potential impact on student achievement.