* 1338738
* EAGER: Collaboratove Research:  Diversity and the Wealth of Nations
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2015
* Quamrul Ashraf, Williams College
* Standard Grant
* Georgia Kosmopoulou
* 08/31/2015
* USD 49,915.00

Diversity and the Wealth of Nations&lt;br/&gt; Existing theories of comparative
development highlight a variety of proximate and ultimate factors underlying
some of the vast inequities in living standards across the globe. The importance
of geographical, cultural and institutional factors, human capital formation,
ethnic, linguistic, and religious fractionalization, colonialism and
globalization has been at the center of a debate regarding the origins of the
differential timing of transitions from stagnation to growth and the remarkable
transformation of the world income distribution in the last two centuries. While
theoretical and empirical research has typically focused on the contemporaneous
effects of such factors, attention has recently been drawn towards "deep-rooted"
factors that have been argued to affect the course of comparative economic
development from the dawn of human civilization to the modern era.&lt;br/&gt;
This research will advance and empirically examine several hypotheses about the
importance of diversity in the understanding of contemporary economic
development across the globe. The hypotheses rest on the interplay between two
conflicting effects of diversity on the development process. On the one hand,
diversity tends to reduce cooperation and disrupts socioeconomic order,
inhibiting the ability of society to operate efficiently with respect to its
production possibility frontier. On the other hand, a wider spectrum of traits
is more likely to contain the ones that are more complementary to the
development and successful implementation of advanced technological paradigms
via (i) specialization in complementary tasks, or (ii) greater variance in
cognitive traits conducive to innovations. &lt;br/&gt; This first part of the
project will explore the role of diversity in the emergence and prevalence of
interethnic conflicts in the modern era, reflecting the long shadow of
prehistory through its effect on genetic diversity. Exploiting variations across
national populations, it will establish that genetic diversity has contributed
significantly to the incidence and onset of interethnic conflicts in the 20th
century. In particular, this finding will be shown to reflect the adverse effect
of diversity on interpersonal trust and cooperation, the contribution of
diversity to inequality, the association between diversity and divergence in
preferences for public goods and redistributive policies, and the impact of
genetic diversity on the degree of ethnic fractionalization and
polarization.&lt;br/&gt; The second part of the project will explore the role of
European colonialism on comparative development across countries in the Americas
over the last 500 years via its differential effect of the diversity of the
American population. Specifically, the research will advance the hypothesis that
the migration to the New World in the course of European colonization
significantly altered the diversity and, hence, the composition of human capital
in New-World countries. In particular, the level of diversity that existed in
the New World during the pre-colonial era increased substantially, towards the
optimal level, in the post-1500 time period. Moreover, consistently with
documented patterns of European colonization, the increase in diversity was
larger in those New World locations where the initial population density was
lower. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The proposed project will redirect research in the
field of economic growth into important unexplored interdisciplinary avenues.
Moreover, the research will yield important and novel policy implications by
contributing to the understanding the of role of diversity in sustaining the
growth process of advanced economies and in facilitating the economic take-off
of less developed economies.