* 1338112
* MRI: Acquisition of a Neurophysiology Laboratory for a Research and Training Initiative in Affective, Social, and Cognitive Neuroscience
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2018
* Jessica Choplin, DePaul University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2018
* USD 394,312.00

With the support from the National Science Foundation's Major Research
Instrumentation Program, Dr. Joseph A. Mikels and his four co-investigators will
purchase an integrated electroencephalography/event related potential (EEG/ERP)
acquisition system with eye tracking and physiology measurement capabilities.
With these technologies, the research team will explore the neural and
physiological underpinnings of several affective, social, and cognitive
phenomena across the adult life span. This equipment will strengthen the
teaching, training, and research infrastructure necessary to better serve DePaul
University undergraduate students, graduate students, and faculty. This teaching
and research laboratory will serve the needs of both the faculty and students in
several departments, and will represent a centerpiece program that will enable
DePaul to become a competitive institution in the health and life sciences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team includes active researchers in the field
of emotion, cognition, social psychology, and neuroscience. Five collaborative
research projects are proposed. Project 1 focuses on how changes in emotion and
cognition across the adult life span influence decision making. The PI will
measure EEG/ERP alongside physiological measures of emotional arousal to
understand the underpinnings of age-related changes in decision making. Tasks
will be administered in which older adults demonstrate biased and non-optimal
choices in different contexts of information presentation, for instance the
framing effect and ratio bias phenomenon. Project 2 will explore the causal
mechanism underlying motivational shifts that occur in reaction to the finitude
of life and life experiences. The project will utilize ERP methods to understand
how mortality salience and emotional factors influence brain activation and
information processing in older and younger adults. This work will also extend
the evaluation of similarities between two pitted theories - Socioemotional
Selectivity Theory (SST) and Terror Management Theory (TMT) - to the domain of
art appreciation. Project 3 will use ERP and eye-tracking methods to examine the
neural mechanisms of age differences in the processing of emotionally valenced
information (i.e., the positivity effect) in the context of naturalistic
evaluations. In addition this project will examine how the relationship between
these judgment phenomena potentially affects age-related differences in home-
loan choices. Extending SST and the positivity effect to this domain promises to
shed light upon how to better protect seniors from fraud. Project 4 explores how
working memory capacity affects cerebral localizations of various inference
generations during reading. In addition, researchers will examine the time
course under which inferences occur in younger as well as older adults while
reading narrative text. Project 5 will use ERP methods to better elucidate the
precise time course of lexical processing above and beyond traditional reaction
time (RT) measures across the adult life span. Interestingly, older adults tend
to be slower in lexical decision tasks, but they extract the lexical information
as efficiently as younger adults. Using ERP methods, the current project will
shed light on the relationship between features in RT distributions and ERP
components in a lexical processing task and how they change as a function of
aging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project draws its intellectual merit from the
goal of extending the research capabilities at DePaul University to include
neuroscience and physiology methods. These methods will allow the faculty and
students to explore questions of a deeper nature, as described
above.&lt;br/&gt;The core of the research concerns changes in human cognitive
function over time and this is an issue of importance given the aging population
of the United States and the increasing numbers of older individuals in the
workforce. The broader impact of this research also stems from its applicability
across several domains of inquiry from cognition to social psychology and
decision sciences from a life-span perspective.