* 1338680
* Field Experiments on Charitable Giving at a Public University
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2013,01/31/2017
* Jonathan Meer, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 01/31/2017
* USD 199,000.00

This project consists of a field experiment on motivations for charitable
giving, conducted in conjunction with the annual fund and capital giving
campaign at a major public research university. The collaboration between the
researchers and the university has the potential to answer important questions
in three main motives for giving: prestige, reciprocity, and social norms. The
experiments gauge the effect of prestige (acknowledgment) and giving categories
on donations; the importance of gifts and reciprocity (gift exchange) as motives
for giving; and the role of social influence and norm compliance on giving. The
large sample size allows the researchers to compare the effectiveness of various
fundraising techniques, alone and in combination.

Approximately 300,000 former students are randomly assigned to receive different
solicitation letters. These letters vary the offer of recognition from the
university in response to donations as well as the levels of suggested donations
in order to identify whether bunching at the bottom of categories, which has
been documented in the existing literature, is due to reference points or a
desire for prestige. Additionally, related treatments offer gifts in exchange
for donations, as is common for charitable organizations. The mechanisms by
which reciprocal gift-giving by the charity affects donative behavior is
identified by varying the size of the gifts, the required donation amounts, and
the opportunity to opt out of receiving the gift. Giving by donors is examined
both in response to the initial solicitation and over the longer term to study
persistence in philanthropy.

Charitable giving plays a large role in the United States. The results of this
research will provide guidance to practitioners, especially in higher education,
on how to raise funds more efficiently, thus increasing both the level of
prosocial behavior in general as well as enhancing the ability of organizations
to raise funds to promote the provision of higher education. By leveraging an
existing campaign, it is possible to accumulate a large new data set that will
provide insight into theories of charitable giving that span multiple fields in
social science in ways that are not otherwise possible.