* 1338298
* ELT Collaborative Research:  Bayesian Paleoclimate Proxies-Transforming the Vertebrate Fossil Record
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2019
* Simon Brassell, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Margaret Fraiser
* 07/31/2019
* USD 168,394.00

Technical description. This project links functional anatomical traits in
mammals and reptiles to temperature, precipitation, and vegetation cover using a
Bayesian framework that allows us to explicitly test these vertebrate
environmental proxies against independent pedogenic and paleobotanical evidence
in order to reconstruct paleoclimates of the North American interior during the
Miocene. We build estimates of paleoenvironment from entire faunas rather than
individual species in order to combine the predictive strengths of ectotherms
(reptiles) and endotherms (mammals). Our objectives are: (1) assemble a database
of functional traits from Miocene vertebrate fossils at the local assemblage and
biocenosis scale in the central Great Plains based on the extensive fossil
collections of the Nebraska State Museum and biomolecular proxy data from select
fossil localities; (2) develop Bayesian probabilistic climate spaces from
sampled traits in modern faunas; (3) use the trait-climate spaces to estimate
Miocene paleoenvironment and test for consilience between vertebrate estimates
and independent proxies; (4) use the trait-based proxy results to test competing
hypotheses of mid-continental floral composition and to determine the extent of
coupling between global climate change and local environments during episodes of
warming and cooling. This study is the most taxonomically and anatomically
comprehensive analysis of faunal traits ever performed on a continuous
terrestrial vertebrate fossil record, and our method can be extended to other
proxies (stable isotopes, biomolecules, paleoflora) as a general method for
paleoenvironmental estimation. We will generate paleoclimate profiles through
the Miocene that can be used to test General Circulation Models and to forecast
regional impacts of future anthropogenic global climate change.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical description. This project uses the
relationship between the physiology and ecology of living mammals and reptiles
to their modern environments to reconstruct the past climates and environments
of the interior of North America during the Miocene Epoch (5.3 to 23.0 million
years ago) using the fossil record. We will use the functional properties of
different living and fossil species that are represented by their skeletal
anatomy, such as method of locomotion, dietary specializations, and
physiological regulation of body temperature, to reconstruct temperature,
precipitation, and floral composition during known histories of global climate
change. This approach provides paleontologists with a sophisticated way of
understanding the geographic complexity of environmental change using fossils
and it provides a record of what changes actually occurred in the Miocene. We
will develop a new statistical framework for conducting such research that
allows us to determine the relative probabilities of different past climates.
For example, environmental temperature and precipitation are correlated to body
size and tail length in modern snakes and correspond to the relative proportions
of ankle bones in modern carnivorous mammals. By measuring these traits in
fossil assemblages, we can statistically estimate past climates based on the
relative probabilities of different temperature and precipitation values from
both snake and mammals. Our method allows us to better assess the complex
relationship between organisms and changing climate at both local and global
scales, and will provide precise past climate values that can be used to test
General Circulation Models and refine the ability to forecast future climate
change. &lt;br/&gt;In addition to increasing our understanding about these
important issues, the funds spent on this project will provide training in
geology, anatomy, computer programing, and mathematics to university
undergraduate and graduate students. Additionally, it will contribute to
scientific conferences and museum exhibits for the general public.