* 1338959
* RAPID: Basin-scale genetics of marine zooplankton
* GEO,OCE
* 12/15/2013,11/30/2016
* Erica Goetze, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 11/30/2016
* USD 199,405.00

Marine zooplankton show strong ecological responses to climate change, but
little is known about their capacity for evolutionary response. Many authors
have assumed that the evolutionary potential of zooplankton is limited. However,
recent studies provide circumstantial evidence for the idea that selection is a
dominant evolutionary force acting on these species, and that genetic isolation
can be achieved at regional spatial scales in pelagic habitats. This RAPID
project will take advantage of a unique opportunity for basin-scale transect
sampling through participation in the Atlantic Meridional Transect (AMT) cruise
in 2014. The cruise will traverse more than 90Â° of latitude in the Atlantic
Ocean and include boreal-temperate, subtropical and tropical waters. Zooplankton
samples will be collected along the transect, and mitochondrial and
microsatellite markers will be used to identify the geographic location of
strong genetic breaks within three copepod species. Bayesian and coalescent
analytical techniques will test if these regions act as dispersal barriers. The
physiological condition of animals collected in distinct ocean habitats will be
assessed by measurements of egg production (at sea) as well as body size
(condition index), dry weight, and carbon and nitrogen content. The PI will test
the prediction that ocean regions that serve as dispersal barriers for marine
holoplankton are areas of poor-quality habitat for the target species, and that
this is a dominant mechanism driving population genetic structure in oceanic
zooplankton.

Two graduate students will be trained in association with this project, gaining
experience in both sea-going and laboratory research. Science outreach will be
conducted through a dedicated cruise blog that will target elementary school
children and draw from the live zooplankton images and science content generated
during the 2014 AMT cruise. The proposed research will provide important
insights into processes controlling genetic variation in marine holoplankton,
and is directly relevant to understanding the capacity of these populations to
respond to climate change.