* 1338192
* MRI: Development of Advanced Visualization Instrumentation for the Collaborative Exploration of Big Data
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2013,12/31/2017
* Jurgen Schulze, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 12/31/2017
* USD 2,406,430.00

Proposal #: 13-38192&lt;br/&gt;PI(s): Kuester, Falko; DeFanti, Thomas A.;
Rosing, Tajana S.; Schulze, Jurgen P.&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of
California - San Diego&lt;br/&gt;Title: MRI/Dev.: Advanced Visualization
Instrumentation for the Collaborative Exploration of Big Data&lt;br/&gt;Project
Proposed:&lt;br/&gt;This project, developing a Scalable Omni-Presence
Environment (ScOPE), a next generation visualization system for collaborative
exploration of large volumes of data, provides an environment for analyzing,
processing, and visualizing Big Data resulting from many different areas of
science and engineering. The instrument serves as an integrative, virtual
metaphor for a combined microscope and telescope, enabling users to explore data
from the nano to macro to mega scale. ScOPE provides researchers the ability to
study simulated and acquired data at a level of precision previously unmatched.
It is expected to become the platform for training a new generation of users to
be fluent in data analytics in collaborative environments. Initially, three
universities will have direct access to the ScOPE instrument and all its
features: U. California-San Diego (UCSD), Jackson State U. (JSU), and U of Texas
Medical Branch (UTMB). Nonetheless, following the tradition of the project team
(effectively done with earlier generations of visualization technologies (e.g.,
OptIPortal tile display walls now installed at more than 100 institutions
worldwide), the critical components of the infrastructure will be broken such
that they may be replicated for use at remote locations by other research or
educational institutions. The developers anticipate that private-sector
collaborators, such as Qualcomm and Intel, will help popularize use of specific
components for the nation?s big-data analytics infrastructure. Notwithstanding,
the broadest impact of the instrument should be evident in the discoveries and
advances made by engineers and scientist that use ScOPE to enhance collaboration
and analysis in the disciplines that have been singled out as ?Domain Drivers?
for the project. These include projects led by researchers in ocean sciences
(and ocean observatories); cyber-archaeology and cultural heritage diagnostics;
real-time brain imaging; digital cinema and very-high quality digital media;
integrative computational biology; underwater microscopy; molecular dynamics;
structural biology and computational chemistry; and large-scale numerical
simulation. In turn, these domain specialists will work alongside computer
scientists who will address grand challenges in system architecture, data
transport, security, representation, arching, processing multi-modal analytics,
and human-computer interaction. ScOPE?s long-distance collaboration will be
supported by telepresence at bandwidths ranging up to 40 Gigabits per second.
Thus, the project creates a highly interactive collaboration space equipped with
a natural human-computer interface and advanced 3D modeling and rendering at a
sufficient scale to tackle complex experiments and analyze large amount of
visual and numerical data pertaining to phenomena of wide dimensions and extreme
time scales. Domain drivers have been identified to ensure that the resulting
environment and tools are applicable to a broad array of scientific disciplines.
These include earth system sciences, civil and structural engineering,
mechanical and aerospace engineering, biomedical and electrical (and ocean
observatories engineering, social sciences, and anthropology. This project takes
a great leap forward into a new generation of collaborative environment that
until recently was unthinkable. The display capabilities will no longer be
passive; envisioned is a continuous spatial workspace imaging, including eye,
skin response, and even mobile electroencephalography sensing, allowing ScOPE to
respond to and infer user intent. The environment will be designed specifically
to handle ?big data,? using a failure-tolerant and cloud-centric approach while
also downsizing the supercomputer flash memory architecture. ?Big Data.? The
instrument will enable scientific discoveries as well as research on how best to
process, analyze, and visualize Scope will serve as a prototype for other
similar instruments. The research enabled by ScOPE will have impacts in many
areas of science.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;As previously mentioned,
the ScOPE instrument provides researchers the ability to study simulated and
acquired data at a level of precision previously unmatched. ScOPE is expected to
become the platform for training a new generation of users to be fluent in data
analytics in collaborative environments. The developers anticipate that private-
sector collaborators, such as Qualcomm and Intel, will help popularize the use
of specific components for the nation?s big-data analytics infrastructure.
Notwithstanding, the broadest impact of the instrument should be evident in the
discoveries and advances made by engineers and scientist that use ScOPE to
enhance collaboration and analysis in the disciplines that have been singled out
as ?Domain Drivers? for the project. These include projects led by researchers
in ocean sciences (and ocean observatories); cyber-archaeology and cultural
heritage diagnostics; real-time brain imaging; digital cinema and very-high
quality digital media; integrative computational biology; underwater microscopy;
molecular dynamics; structural biology and computational chemistry; and large-
scale numerical simulation. In turn, these domain specialists will work
alongside computer scientists who will address grand challenges in system
architecture, data transport, security, representation, arching, processing
multi-modal analytics, and human-computer interaction. The instrument will have
direct impact on three universities, while the technology developed in building
the instrument will inform the construction of similar instruments around the
nation. To promote greater public appreciation of scientific research, the
public will be invited to tour the visualization facilities, hopefully
encouraging young people to enter career in science and engineering. The area of
ScOPE accessible to the public will have significant impact on the public?s
impression of academic research. ScOPE?s capabilities are likely to transform
our ability to collaborate with distributed research teams and be directly
applied to day-to-day research.