* 1338820
* I/UCRC:  Collaborative Research - Proposal for Phase II of the SiSoC NSF I/UCRC
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2013,12/31/2015
* Lewis Reynolds, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Raffaella Montelli
* 12/31/2015
* USD 185,450.00

The proposal requests Phase II funding for the North Carolina State University
(NCSU) and Georgia Tech (GT) to remain as active sites in the Center for Silicon
Solar Consortium (SiSoC). NCSU is the lead institution while GIT is a "Partner"
site.

The proposed center's goal is to help reestablish a global leadership role for
the US Silicon PV industry by having government together with the solar-electric
power industry jointly stimulate high quality university level research and
education, while developing an expanded and skilled workforce. The NCSU research
center will emphasize materials characterization leading to a fundamental
understanding of impact of defects/impurities/mechanical behavior of solar cell
materials emphasizing the development of advanced characterization tools to
accommodate the various needs of both single- and multi-crystalline Si wafers,
thin films and nanoscale PV science and technology. The GT research will focus
on reducing the cost of PV generated electricity and designing and fabricating
high efficiency solar cells. Their demonstrated expertise in developing low-cost
materials and rapid thermal processes for next generation silicon solar cells
will provide training and enriching the educational experience of PV
knowledgeable students.

SiSoC will actively develop a skilled workforce, while meeting the rapidly
growing demand for clean energy with an emphasis on minimal environmental impact
on our planet. This will be enabled by having other government agencies,
together with the solar-electric power industry jointly stimulating high quality
university level research and education. The specific scientific results will be
widely disseminated through semi-annual SiSoC review meetings, conference
presentations, and publications. The research activity will also be amplified
through student internships at industry member locations. The PIs plan to hire
undergraduates as lab assistance under NSFs REU Program to create an excellent
outreach opportunity for underrepresented minorities/women to participate in PV
materials research.