* 1338471
* BCC: Broadband Use Mapping, Data and Evaluation
* SBE,SMA
* 09/15/2013,12/31/2015
* Karen Mossberger, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2015
* USD 499,788.00

SMA-1338471&lt;br/&gt;Caroline Tolbert&lt;br/&gt;Colin Gordon&lt;br/&gt;Kevin
Leicht&lt;br/&gt;Julianna Pacheco&lt;br/&gt;The University of
Iowa&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Karen Mossberger&lt;br/&gt;Arizona State
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broadband has been called the most important
infrastructure challenge of the 21st century by the National Broadband Plan.
But, it is broadband use rather than availability of infrastructure that enables
the access to information, communication and services that is at the heart of
broadband's promise. For theory and for public policy, more needs to be known
about broadband use by individuals, organizations, and communities, including
geographic variation. This project has two dimensions: 1) The construction of a
new nationwide dataset that will provide local data on broadband usage that can
be analyzed to understand geographic variation in broadband use and its impact
on outcomes in areas such as economic development, health, education, and more.
2) Fostering an interdisciplinary broadband research community through the
creation of a portal/repository for broadband evaluation research and data, a
conference, and a seed fund competition for new types of broadband data. This
study expands prior research in Chicago and other select cities to map
nationally Internet use and online political, economic and human capital-
enhancing activities. Statistical modeling will be used to create biannual
estimates of Internet use and online activities for every county in the United
States, all metropolitan areas and the nation's 50 largest cities. This will
create a longitudinal dataset of 20 years that does not currently exist. We will
use available respondents in the Current Population Survey (CPS) annual Internet
Use Supplement from 1995-2015, merged with aggregate census tract level data
measuring socioeconomic conditions of neighborhoods. For Chicago, Los Angeles
and New York City, the nation's three largest cities, we will create estimates
of Internet use across community areas or neighborhoods. Multi-layered maps
based on this data will be made publicly available through the portal, using GIS
software and open source online platforms such as those used by Worldmap at
Harvard University. This data will provide a unique view of geographic variation
in technology use over time, which can be used by researchers to examine social
change and measure social impacts for technology use. Interaction across policy
areas and disciplines can help researchers to better understand causal
mechanisms or the conditions under which technology use matters for a variety of
outcomes. Activities for building an interdisciplinary research community
include sharing of the dataset and maps on a portal with a repository and
discussion platform, and a seed fund to promote further experimentation with new
methods of broadband data collection. A conference will be held to further
develop the portal and to reach out to networks of broadband evaluation
researchers and broadband data experts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
&lt;br/&gt;As information, services, and activities have migrated online,
Internet use has become a necessity for full participation in society. But
inequality in access remains a barrier and better information on how broadband
is actually used is needed to guide public policy. Data on geographic variation
can inform policy decisions about targeting and program planning, and can be
used to track the impact of local or neighborhood trends or interventions in
areas such as health or education. In addition, we propose an interdisciplinary
collaboration to gather various types of data and evaluation research on
broadband use, in order to offer better guidance for policymakers about trends
and best practice.