* 1338446
* Catalyzing a Cross-Disciplinary, Cross-University Urban Research Agenda in the Age of Digital Data
* SBE,SMA
* 09/15/2013,06/30/2016
* Christopher Winship, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Heng Xu
* 06/30/2016
* USD 495,403.00

The Boston Area Research Initiative (BARI), a new entity based at Harvard's
Radcliffe Institute for Advanced Study, proposes to catalyze and pursue a cross-
disciplinary, cross-institutional urban research agenda that capitalizes on the
data opportunity presented by the ongoing digital revolution. The proposed
project will be organized around three main activities, each supported by BARI's
rich network of data holders and users at Boston-area universities, public-
sector agencies and private companies:

1) The identification and procurement of data that describe the people and
places of the greater Boston area. 2) The support of original collaborative
research by members of the BARI network that utilizes next-generation data in
conjunction with traditional data sources and new methodologies. 3) The
construction of a prototype Data Library that archives and catalogs both the
data supporting the current research agenda, and the secondary data sets that
emerge from their analysis, enabling future work and teaching applications to
build off these initial projects. Intellectual Merit

In recent years, many public and private institutions in cities have begun
collecting administrative data from high to adequate quality, ranging from real-
time descriptors of neighborhood conditions, to communication between
individuals and movement between neighborhoods, to patterns in the education,
health, and economic sectors. These next-generation data collectively provide a
basis to create a comprehensive picture of human behavior in cities that has the
potential to transform theoretical models of urban governance and behavior
throughout the social, behavioral and economic sciences. BARI seeks to stimulate
an urban research agenda that utilizes these data with a focus on three
crosscutting themes:

1) Stability and change in neighborhoods, especially the social processes by
which neighborhoods and their residents reciprocally shape each other across
time. 2) The social structure of the city, or how interpersonal, attitudinal,
and institutional relationships that cut across neighborhoods create an
interlocking set of structures that potentially influence resource allocation
and the way that neighborhoods operate. 3) Cognition and context, specifically
how cognitive mechanisms and cultural narratives can drive behavior in urban
neighborhoods, and the consequences those behaviors have for both the
characteristics of a given neighborhood and its relationships with other
neighborhoods.

The proposed agenda will be undertaken by BARI's leadership team, a set of
experienced urban scholars at Harvard and Northeastern Universities, and the
broader BARI network, which has over 100 members including faculty from ten
Boston-area universities and experts from a range of government agencies and
private companies. The project will also collaborate with initiatives in other
cities, such as Chicago, and is designed to yield generalizable knowledge and
portable methodological strategies. Broader Impacts

The scholarly works that emerge from this project will contribute to the
development of a computational social science that utilizes the rich content of
next-generation data. Resulting insights will also provide the basis for
teaching and policy innovations, with the translation from research to practice
enhanced by BARI's already strong ties with the public sector. Finally, the
efforts and products from the proposed project will pave the way for similar
work in other cities and contribute to a comparative urban science.