* 1338297
* US-China planning visit: Development of High Performance and Multifunctional Infrastructure Material
* O/D,OISE
* 12/01/2013,11/30/2017
* Hao Wang, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 11/30/2017
* USD 12,818.00

The primary objective of this proposal is to develop collaboration between Dr.
Shaopeng Wu of Wuhan University of Technology in Wuhan, China and the PI of this
project, Dr. Hao Wang of Rutgers University in New Brunswick, U.S. for
innovative developments in the field of infrastructure material and pavement
engineering. The focus area is the development of multifunctional asphalt
materials with superior mechanical properties and as well as self-sensing
potential through the integration of experimental investigation and
computational modeling. This collaboration will provide a foundation to advance
fundamental understanding and development of high performance and
multifunctional infrastructure material using nanotechnology. This will not only
have the potential of improving mechanical properties (stiffness, fracture
toughness) and durability of infrastructure material, but also change its
electro-mechanical properties (i.e. piezoresistivity), and thermal conductivity.
This offers an opportunity to tailor and produce a new smart material. Although
the research is mainly focused on asphalt materials, the knowledge developed
from the proposed collaboration is also applied to other construction
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The foreign partner in China has an extensive
experimental facility for U.S. students to work as exchange students. The PI
will incorporate findings from this project into civil engineering courses and a
new graduate course. The proposed collaboration will recruit women undergraduate
students into future research activities, in collaboration with The Academy at
Rutgers for Girls in Engineering and Technology (TARGET) program.