* 1338930
* Planning Grant:  I/UCRC for Assistive Technologies to Enhance Human Performance
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2014
* Fillia Makedon, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Raffaella Montelli
* 07/31/2014
* USD 16,032.00

1338930 University of Texas at Arlington (UTA); Makedon &lt;br/&gt;1338932
University of Texas at Dallas (UTD); Daescu &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
I/UCRC will focus on assistive technologies to enhance human performance by
removing or helping to overcome physical, cognitive or operational domain
obstacles and help the human reach his or her potential as much as possible. The
research efforts will be anchored by the University of Texas at Arlington (UTA)
as the lead institution, partnered with the University of Texas at Dallas (UTD).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Assistive technologies (AT) use computer tools and methods
to increase, maintain, or improve the functional capabilities of people with
disabilities, as well as to enhance the productivity of well-bodied people. ATs
can improve work efficiency, identify safety risks, shorten the learning curve
or worker training through simulations, improve resource allocation, creativity
and communication. In healthcare environments, AT tools can enhance sensory and
cognitive capabilities, improve training &amp; delivery, enable remote
monitoring, delay physical and cognitive decline in chronic conditions,
personalize rehabilitation, predict risks for the elderly who live alone,
monitor sleep disorders, design better prosthetics or drugs, design better
robotic assistants, smart wheelchairs, therapy games and tools to monitor
mental/physiological conditions, such as depression, epilepsy, or heart
problems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The center will promote the development of AT
research infrastructure in industry, research centers and academia. It will help
generate new jobs and new types of products and services. The proposed center
will help prepare a future generation of competitive employees-scientists, and
will provide new opportunities to engage students early, before graduation, in
internship or research projects related to the company's interests. Both UTA and
UTD, have a strong track record in training students in AT areas and have
ongoing research that ranges from better ways to identify software errors, to
analysis of facial expressions to identify arthritic pain, or efficient
multimodal database searches.