* 1338078
* MRI Collaborative: Development of a Data-Intensive Scalable Computing Instrument for High Performance Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2018
* William Gropp, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 09/30/2018
* USD 532,000.00

Proposal #: 13-38078&lt;br/&gt;PI(s): Chen, Yong; Gropp, William D.; Smith,
Philip W.; Sun, Xian-He; Zhuang, Yu&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Texas Tech University
&lt;br/&gt;Title: MRI Collab/Dev.: Data Intensive Scalable Computing Instrument
for High Performance Computing&lt;br/&gt;Project Proposed:&lt;br/&gt;This
project, developing DICSI, an all-around computing instrument that compensates
the limitations of existing computing-centric HPC instruments toward data-
intensive applications, supports five large research projects in HPC system
design, computational chemistry, biotechnology, and atmospheric science. Based
on research introducing the application-aware and decoupled-execution paradigm
concept, the project addresses the big gap between research prototypes and the
engineering solution. Impact on future applications, algorithms, and instruments
design is expected since the instrument could open up new research areas in
supporting data-intensive sciences and possibly reshape HPC instruments adopted
in National Computing Facilities and some institutions. In addition to the
conventional HPC compute nodes, DISCI has a set of specially designed data
nodes. The data nodes offer in-situ data processing to reduce data movement and
data-access delay and dynamic provisioning as 'fat' compute nodes when
necessary, while the functionality of compute nodes remains the same as in
conventional instrumentation. These data nodes work with compute nodes in
concert and together they provide an optimum system performance for data-
intensive HPC. Based on a hardware-software co-development principle, the
instrument consists of two components: the DISCI system architecture and the
DISCI runtime software. The system architecture builds an HPC instrument with a
data-centric view. The runtime software extends the MPI (Message Passing
Interface) and MPI-IO library to support data nodes and their associated in-situ
processing. The instrument will enable and foster research activities in the
areas of chemical dynamics simulation, simulations of turbulent flows,
atmospheric data assimilation and weather forecasting, computational biology,
and computer systems that PIs and senior personnel conduct. &lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;This development project will enable academic departments,
cross-disciplinary units, organizations, and multi-organization collaborations
to integrate their development, education, and outreach efforts. &lt;br/&gt;To
attract underrepresented students into the DISCI development, the institution
will coordinate with institutional projects at respective organizations. The
experience gained will be integrated into undergraduate and graduate courses and
summer orientation trainings to get students involved in the development. The
education plan concentrates on supporting data-intensive HPC and training a
broadly inclusive and globally competitive science workforce. The project is
expected to provide the pathway to future national HPC instruments to support
data-intensive sciences. Furthermore, it could have a direct impact on building
exascale HPC instruments.