* 1338642
* Meeting: International Conference on Duckweed Research at Rutgers University on August 21-24, 2013
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2013,04/30/2014
* Eric Lam, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Kent Chapman
* 04/30/2014
* USD 11,250.00

The quest for sustainable production of biomass and renewable fuels that have
low carbon footprints has become a global priority. Creating and adopting new
biomass and fuel production platforms that are ecologically and economically
sustainable will be essential, but pose a formidable challenge. Duckweed is a
family of aquatic plants that holds great potential as a feedstock for fuel and
feed production. The chief characteristics that make duckweed ideal for waste-
to-biomass conversion are their rapid growth rate and their growth
characteristics that enable simple harvest strategies. Duckweed thus provides a
promising platform for creating sustainable solutions to biomass production that
can be coupled to reclamation of wastewater from different sources. The
formation of a well-coordinated, interdisciplinary community of researchers and
commercial developers will be a key step toward building successful teams for
duckweed research, as well as product development to benefit society-at-large.
In this project, the investigators will organize an international conference
that focuses1 on integrating researchers and commercial stakeholders that are
establishing the essential resources to advance the duckweed platform. From
diverse areas of molecular biology, ecology, wastewater remediation, to feed and
fuel production using duckweed, this conference will provide an intimate forum
for data sharing as well as the cross-fertilization of ideas and technical
resources. An important objective will be the creation of an International
Steering Committee for this field in order to promote education, research and
training of duckweed researchers, students and entrepreneurs. The broader impact
of this project is expected to galvanize the duckweed community in both the
academic and commercial sectors for realizing the tremendous potential of this
novel micro-crop to create a new industry that will also be ecologically sound.