* 1338440
* Development of Rigorous Computational Capabilities Based on the Invariant Imbedding Principle for the Simulation of the Optical Properties of Dust and Ice Crystals
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Ping Yang, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Edward L. Bensman
* 08/31/2017
* USD 565,425.00

The conventional T-matrix method to simulate the optical properties of
atmospheric particles, pioneered by Waterman (1972) and further developed by
others (e.g., Mishchenko and Travis, 1994), is based on the extended boundary
conditions (hereafter, EBC-TM) involving integration over the particle surface,
which is sensitive to surface discontinuities such as sharp edges and corners.
In practice, the EBC-TM is primarily applied to regular geometries such as
spheroids, circular cylinders, and Chebyshev particles over a limited size
parameter range. Conceptually different from the EBC-TM, the invariant imbedding
T-matrix (II-TM) method stems from volume-based electromagnetic integration. A
preliminary study (Bi, Yang et al., 2013) has demonstrated that the II-TM can be
applied to a much wider size parameter range than the EBC-TM. Moreover, from a
practical perspective, the II-TM is feasible to be applied to general
nonspherical and inhomogeneous morphologies (note, the feasibility has been
demonstrated in the case of hexagonal ice crystals). The goal of this award is
to develop a rigorous II-TM package to accurately simulate the optical
properties of assumed irregular dust particles, polluted dust particles, soot
aggregates mixed with sulfate, ice crystals with air bubbles or black carbon
inclusions, hollow ice crystals, and aggregate ice crystals with surface
roughness. As a useful tool for the light scattering community, the II-TM model
will provide a benchmark reference to assess the numerical performance of
various numerical approaches and semi-classical approaches. Furthermore,
databases of the optical properties of pure and polluted dust in the solar-to-
infrared regime and of ice crystals, snow flakes, and graupel particles in the
microwave regime will be simulated by using the accurate modeling capabilities.

Intellectual Merit :

The II-TM package will represent state-of-the-science light scattering
computational capabilities, which will facilitate the establishment of a
benchmark reference to guide the further development of various numerical and
approximate methods. The outcome of this project may substantially enhance the
current level of knowledge about the optical properties of two prominent
atmospheric particulate matters, dust aerosols and ice crystals. Databases of
the scattering and polarization properties of pure and polluted dust and of ice
crystals, snowflakes, and graupel particles will find immediate downstream
applications in atmospheric research, particularly, in remote sensing and
radiative transfer simulations.

Broader Impacts :

The II-TM model will directly contribute to the reduction of the uncertainties
in the optical properties of dust and ice crystals that are critical to the
study of airborne dust and ice clouds from various perspectives including the
atmospheric remote sensing and radiative forcing assessment, and may find
applications in other disciplines, e.g., bio-optics. Particularly, the database
that will be disseminated on-line will have immediate applications to the
studies involving ice clouds and dust aerosols by many researchers. Furthermore,
this project will have a significant educational component focused on mentoring
a postdoctoral researcher, training a graduate student, and developing teaching
tools.