* 1338541
* Data on the mind: Center for Data-Intensive Psychological Science
* SBE,SMA
* 09/15/2013,02/28/2018
* Alison Gopnik, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 02/28/2018
* USD 531,482.00

Psychological research has traditionally been conducted using laboratory
experiments, bringing a small number of people into a research laboratory and
asking them to complete a task. But the existence--and increasing availability--
of online datasets on human behavior and new technologies for data collection
suggests a different approach might be possible: mining large databases for
clues about how people reason, learn, and interact. Dr. Griffiths, Dr. Gopnik,
and Dr. Keltner will establish a research center at the University of
California, Berkeley to explore the potential of this data-intensive approach to
psychological science. The research center will work with a network of
researchers across the country and companies developing technologies for
collection of behavioral data to establish pilot projects in cognitive
psychology, developmental psychology, and social psychology. These pilot
projects will include examining what online databases reveal about human
reasoning, how mobile devices can be used to study how children learn, and
whether interactions on social networking websites can answer questions about
human emotion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"Big data" research is currently dominated
by computer scientists and statisticians, but the questions that are often the
focus of this research "understanding human behavior" have traditionally been
the domain of psychologists. The new research center for data-intensive
psychological science will bring these groups together by establishing
collaborations between researchers and developing a curriculum for training
students to work at the intersection of these disciplines. The results will be
potentially transformative for psychological research, taking it out of the
laboratory and into the world. By asking questions that are motivated by decades
of psychological theory, data-intensive psychological research will provide new
insights into analyzing large behavioral datasets that are potentially relevant
to any research project or commercial enterprise that relies upon this kind of
data.