* 1338423
* BCC - Building an Interdisciplinary Equal Employment Opportunity Research Network and Data Capacity
* SBE,SMA
* 09/15/2013,12/31/2016
* Donald Tomaskovic-Devey, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2016
* USD 245,216.00

SMA- 1338423 &lt;br/&gt;Donald Tomaskovic-Devey &lt;br/&gt;M.V. Lee Badgett
&lt;br/&gt;Fidan Kurtulus &lt;br/&gt;University of Massachusetts
Amherst&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will accomplish two tasks. The first
is to create an interdisciplinary social science network to advance
organizational-level analyses of employment dynamics. The second is to create a
mechanism for permanent data archiving and broad scientific access to data
products, metadata and confidential source data. The overall goal is to provide
large scale data capacity and access to future generations of scientists, policy
makers, with information spillovers to citizens and
employers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research network spanning the social
sciences will collaborate in the development and scientific use of data
collected by the U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC). Since 1966
the EEOC has been collecting panel data on employment patterns from private
sector workplaces, unions, state and local governments, and elementary and
secondary schools. Collectively these represent the largest and longest
collection of organizational panel datasets in the world and are an
extraordinary source of data for scientific and policy studies of organizational
employment dynamics. The network is expected to result in collaborations on
methodological and data quality issues, new research on employment distributions
and discrimination, organizational population dynamics, and new opportunities
for researchers in multiple scientific areas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
network will also create a metadata repository to reduce the barriers to entry
for researchers, as well as to open up the use of data in creative ways.
Currently, data access restrictions limit the formation of collaborative
research networks among scientists. Researchers new to the data typically invent
(or reinvent) data management, measurement, and sampling protocols. As a result
replication is rare and research programs are individual rather than collective.
The project will create a virtual metadata repository to insure that current
published work and non-confidential data products are broadly disseminated to
the scientific community. The project will also develop plans for the creation
of a permanent data archive and research portal to preserve and magnify these
scientific synergies. Together the network and virtual metadata repository will
generate new connections across currently siloed research communities and will
connect the data to entirely new areas of scientific research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: &lt;br/&gt;The core contribution of
research using the EEOC data is to further our understanding of gender, racial,
ethnic, religious, age, disability and sexual orientation employment integration
and discrimination. This will be accomplished by encouraging scientific
exploration and making data more accessible to both the scientific community and
to the public. The broadest impact of the project will be to enhance the
public's and policymakers' understanding of the societal and organization
processes which lead to diverse workplaces and reductions in discrimination and
inequality.