* 1338197
* International Advanced Course on Regenerative Medicine Manufacturing Workshop to be held on April 28-May 3, 2013 in Algarve, Portugal
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2013,11/30/2013
* Todd McDevitt, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Athanassios Sambanis
* 11/30/2013
* USD 22,000.00

CBET - 1338197 PI: Todd McDevitt

Stem cell engineering is a rapidly emerging interdisciplinary field that
integrates principles of stem cell biology with the physical sciences and
engineering to advance regenerative cell therapies and in vitro diagnostic
platforms to commercially viable and scalable technologies that will
significantly impact the biomedical sciences and society at large. While stem
cell research is on the verge of broadly impacting many elements of the medical
field regenerative medicine, drug discovery and development, cell-based
diagnostics and cancer the bioprocess engineering that will be required to
manufacture sufficient quantities of functional stem cells for these diagnostic
and therapeutic applications is at an early stage of development. The current
state of the field of stem cell research offers a unique opportunity for
scientists and engineers, working together, to contribute significantly to the
generation of robust, reproducible and scalable methods for phenotypic
characterization, propagation, differentiation and bioprocessing of stem cells.

Many of the unique challenges posed by stem cell research could be addressed by
applying innovative technological advances occurring in adjacent disciplines for
similar purposes, but different applications. Presentations during the workshop
will include talks on fundamental basics of stem cell biology, scaleable culture
techniques, bioanalytical characterization, manufacturing practices and enabling
technologies. This program provides a unique opportunity for trainees and
researchers to learn about common and quantitative methods for stem cell
isolation, characterization, propagation and differentiation in a scalable
manner to efficiently produce sufficient numbers of stem cells and derivatives
in accessible formats in order to yield a spectrum of novel therapeutic and
diagnostic applications of stem cells.

Intellectual Merit: The intellectual merit of the proposed workshop is the
stimulation of creative, original, and potentially transformative new ideas and
concepts and the identification of future directions in regenerative medicine
manufacturing, thus generating a broader impact to the fields of stem cell
biology, engineering, manufacturing and medicine.

Broader Impacts: The discussions at this workshop will advance our understanding
of the underlying scientific and technological issues and challenges in further
developing regenerative medicine biomanufacturing, and facilitate
interdisciplinary interactions that may lead to new global collaborations and
initiatives. By having female and minority participants attend the workshop, it
will broaden the participation of underrepresented groups. This workshop will
also stimulate translational research and innovation, facilitate the integration
of education and research, and inspire and help train the young future leaders
of stem cell engineering and manufacturing. Workshop Website -
http://berg.ist.utl.pt/regenerative-medicine/