* 1338449
* Authors without Borders: Investigating International Authorship Norms Among Scientists and Engineers
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2013,03/31/2018
* Dena Plemmons, Sigma Xi, The Scientific Research Honor Society, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Dudka
* 03/31/2018
* USD 296,128.00

EESE 13-38449&lt;br/&gt;Dena Plemmons &lt;br/&gt;Sigma XI Scientific Research
Society&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
addresses the issue of authorship conflicts in scientific papers. Authorship
conflicts may arise in any collaboration, domestic or international, but
international collaborations pose unique challenges. It is unclear whether
authorship conflicts in international collaborations arise due to normative
differences, or due to individual transgressions that collaborators mistakenly
interpret as cultural differences. Work done in the US suggests that differing
perspectives on individualism, ownership or group responsibilities affect
collaborations, but this variation has not been systematically documented. For
authorship in particular, societal hierarchies and gifting practices have been
indicated as potential sources of cultural differences. This information gap has
implications for how scientists are trained in the responsible conduct of
research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team, led by Dena Plemmons of San
Diego State University, will deploy consistent discussion group methods across
nationalities and disciplines. Twenty four small peer discussion groups will be
formed. Four countries, the US, China, Brazil, and Germany, and two disciplines,
neuropsychology and engineering will be represented. The small discussion groups
and follow-up interviews will provide foundational data to develop a survey for
wide distribution, with the ultimate goal of creating a curriculum for
international authorship ethics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will fill an
important gap in the literature on the ethics of global scientific authorship.
The inclusive design of the project will provide a novel dataset of both
theoretical and practical value for the survey development. It will also
facilitate transparency and foster professionalism among scientific authors.