* 1338988
* Nebraska-Rouen Collaborations:  Hyperbranched Polar Polymers as Solid Lubricants
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2015
* Jiantao Guo, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 08/31/2015
* USD 53,232.00

This project will address a very fundamental component in materials processing
and manufacturing: grafting polar polymers to surfaces of a solid nanomaterial
to create metal-organic frameworks (MOFs). This project will bring together
three research groups with highly specialized expertise in an interdisciplinary
approach to investigate surface corrosion, defect repair, and polymer binding on
MOFs, as well as examine the kinetics of the grafting process. The goal is to
develop solid lubricants which are essential in manufacturing processes and in
applications of materials in highly demanding environments, such as long-term
biomedical implants. This approach, which has never been attempted, would be a
significant contribution to the field of materials research into solid
lubricants.

Research into new processes to develop new properties of materials is critical
to creating uses for materials in applications as varied as biomedical devices
and automotive manufacturing. Solid lubricants would be invaluable applications
in automotive manufacture where there are stringent standards for wear
protection. The collaboration will also introduce US students and postdocs at
the University of Nebraska-Lincoln to the facilities and expertise available at
the Universite de Rouen and provide valuable training to enable the US to
develop a globally competitive science workforce.