* 1338694
* FESD Type I: The Dynamics of Mountains, Landscapes and Climate in the Distribution and Generation of Biodiversity of the Amazon/Andean Forest
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2020
* Christopher Dick, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 08/31/2020
* USD 4,430,000.00

The forests of tropical South America host some of the highest biodiversity on
Earth. In this project, an interdisciplinary team of geologists, climatologists,
and biologists will take advantage of recent advances in their respective
disciplines to develop an integrated understanding of how climate and geology
interact to shape the distribution and generation of biodiversity in these
Amazon/Andean forests through time. The Amazon and Andes are a dynamically
linked highly interactive system. On long timescales, uplift of the Andes
affects Amazon climate and hydrology. Andean uplift also generates the sediment
fill, nutrient supply, river routing, and soil composition of the adjacent
lowland basin of the Amazon and hence affects the productivity of its forests.
But the interactions are bi-directional, because changes in climate, hydrology,
and sediment supply influence rates of uplift through isostatic (buoyancy)
effects produced by weathering and erosion. Together the multiple system
components interact in complex ways to effect the origin and demise of new
species and thus determine biodiversity. Today, this biodiversity is threatened
by global climate change and other human activities. For example, a major
emerging threat is the planned construction of headwater dams that will sever
the transfer of nutrients from the Andes to the Amazon and impact the
productivity and diversity of its forests and waterways. Thus, more than ever,
there is a need for better understanding of the factors that foster the
evolution and maintenance of biodiversity. The project is an interdisciplinary
effort that unites scientists from both North and South America. It will support
the education, training, and mentoring of undergraduate students, graduate
students, and postdoctoral scientists at this exciting new frontier through the
integration of fieldwork, laboratory studies, and
modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Before it is possible to quantify relationships
between extrinsic forcings (e.g. climate, tectonics, hydrology) and the observed
distribution of species through time, it is first necessary to generate
accurately dated histories of the underlying geologic and climatic processes and
to explore the governing rules for how environment influences diversity. The
interdisciplinary team will undertake new detailed field and laboratory
investigations of key aspects of the system components of the linked Andes-
Amazon system, emphasizing: (1) determination of the history of Andean uplift,
particularly in the oft-overlooked Western Cordillera; (2) a first attempt at
reconstruction of a complete history of Cenozoic paleoclimate in the western
Amazon lowlands; (3) isotope-enabled ocean-atmosphere climate modeling at key
Cenozoic time slices; (4) molecular genetics of woody plant taxa carefully
chosen to test several fundamental hypotheses about the role of uplift and
climate in generation of diversity; (5) construction of an over-arching modeling
framework (that incorporates new data on uplift, climate, and biota) linking
paleo-topography, climate, hydrology, and nutrient cycling to plant traits,
productivity, ecologic niche, and species distribution. The ultimate goal is to
understand the role of environment and environmental history in genetic
differentiation of populations and the origins of new species. By deciphering
how environment affects biodiversity and, conversely, how genetic sequences of
plant species encode the history of the physical environment, it is envisioned
that molecular phylogenetics will inform geological history, much like
paleontology informs stratigraphic and paleoenvironmental interpretation, and a
new field of "geo-genomics" will emerge.