* 1338415
* PDB Management by the Research Collaboratory for Structural Bioinformatics
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2019
* Helen Berman, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Cooperative Agreement
* Peter McCartney
* 03/31/2019
* USD 32,756,652.00

An award is made to Rutgers, the State University of New Jersey to manage the
Protein Data Bank (PDB), an international repository and primary source for
information about the structure of biological macromolecules. The PDB is a key
research resource that is essential for our understanding of living systems. It
serves a broad community of experimental, structural, and computational
scientists, and educators at all levels. PDB access is provided through primary
web and ftp sites (www.pdb.org, ftp.pdb.org) or via multiple mirror sites
distributed worldwide. The PDB will be managed by the Research Collaboratory for
Structural Biology (RCSB), consisting of a partnership between Rutgers, the
University of California San Diego and the Scripps Institute of Oceanography to
provide a single, searchable archive of accurate and well-annotated data on
experimentally determined macromolecular structure. Systems developed by RCSB
are currently being used for data processing, archiving, distribution and query,
as well as maintenance of the physical archive. In addition to continued
operation of the primary data archiving, ingestion, and dissemination functions,
the project will implement several enhancements to the infrastructure associated
with the two main operational functions of the archive: data ingestion and
processing, and data dissemination. Improvements include provision of a robust,
high-throughput pipeline to manage ongoing increases in the volume and
complexity of data submitted to PDB, development of query, analysis,
visualization, and reporting tools to enhance access to PDB data, and develop a
range of education and outreach activities that support the use of PDB data by
teachers and students at all educational stages. The result of this effort will
be a significant improvement in the utility and value of the Protein Data Bank
for both specialists and non-specialists alike. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mechanisms
for increasing the broader impacts of this work include the following: a series
of workshops and meeting sessions, active participation in scientific meetings,
a regular newsletter, the on-going use of a help desk to increase the access and
utility of PDB for the specialist and non-specialist research community, and use
of focus groups to insure maximum usability of PDB data. Participation in
graduate and undergraduate coursework design and implementation and in
structured research opportunities is being used to increase the impact of PDB on
university-level education. Participation in teacher training workshops and a
collaborative effort to launch a teacher development program provide
opportunities to bring PDB resources to the K/12 environment. The general public
is being made aware of PDB efforts through a traveling art exhibit and through
frequent news releases and informational programs. Online-based activities like
the ?Structural View of Biology? and ?Molecule of the Month? will reach
audiences nationally and globally. New activities to be introduced under the
current award include increased outreach to under-represented communities and
the development of annual theme topics to provide a focus for national
integration of education activities involving structural biology. Collectively,
these efforts will extend the benefits of PDB resources and activities to the
broadest possible community.