* 1338072
* MRI:  Acquisition of an Analytical Transmission Electron Microscope with Cryogenic Imaging Capabilites for Research and Teaching at a PUI
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Shivendra Sahi, Western Kentucky University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 08/31/2016
* USD 425,000.00

With this award from the Chemistry Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program
that is co-funded by the Chemistry Research Instrumentation and Facilities
(CRIF) Program, Professor Hemali Rathnayake from Western Kentucky University and
colleagues Shivendra Sahi, Muhammad Jahan, Rajalingam Dakshinanurthy and Rodney
King will acquire an analytical transmission electron microscope (TEM) with
cryogenic imaging capabilites. The proposal is aimed at enhancing research and
education at all levels, especially in areas such as (a) organic-inorganic
nanostructures as energy harvesting materials for green energy technology; (b)
synthesis and characterization gold nanoparticles for antimicrobial
applications; (c) genome discovery and exploration; (d) in plant-mediated
biosynthesis of gold and silver nanoparticles; (e) nanomachining and
characterization of thin films; (f) carbon nanotubes and clays; and (g) modified
natural minerals for water treatment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In a transmission
electron microscope (TEM) a beam of electrons is transmitted through a very thin
sample. These electrons interact with the material as it passes through and then
an image is formed from such interaction which is then enlarged and focused onto
an imaging device, e.g., a camera. This technique is capable of providing direct
information on the local structure rather than the average structure determined
by other techniques such as X-ray or neutron diffraction analysis. TEM has
become an important research tool in the life, physical, material, and
environmental sciences. Some examples are the study of complex systems such as
tissue, polymers, gels, multi metal oxides, and others. The instrumentation will
be used in research activities and also for research training and education of a
large number of students from diverse backgrounds.