* 1338616
* Variations in Vulnerability to Victimization: Identifying Individual and Community Factors
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Amy Kate Bailey, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 07/31/2017
* USD 199,602.00

SES-1338616&lt;br/&gt;Amy Kate Bailey&lt;br/&gt;University of Illinois at
Chicago&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intergroup conflict is typically rooted in
competition for some sort of socially valued good. Community-level theories
predict that conflict increases when one group threatens the status, authority,
or material resources of the other group. That might suggest that the
individuals selected as victims would be those whose characteristics pose the
greatest threat to prevailing social arrangements -- those who are the most
successful. Research on both historical lynching and contemporary bias crimes,
however, tells us that it is people who have lower socioeconomic status, fewer
apparent social ties, who are chosen as victims, but also tells us that people
victimized by more and less severe attacks often differ from each other. This
study will help to resolve this tension between theories that explain the
emergence of conflict and those that explain both the selection of victims and
the severity of their victimization. It will incorporate the social, policy, and
economic context of intergroup conflict; the severity of victimization; and the
relative and absolute characteristics of victims themselves. It will expand
understanding of the role of victim characteristics by allowing the researcher
to identify how individual traits are related to victimization itself as well as
the severity of attack, once a person has been selected as a potential target of
intergroup violence. While lynching is largely an historic practice,
victimization based on gender, perceived sexual identity, race/ethnicity,
religious adherence, and economic status continues to plague societies around
the globe. This project will help reframe our understanding of the dynamics of
victimization in multiple ways. The researcher will use historical census
records to locate individuals who were threatened with lynching, but not killed,
in ten Southern states across a span of 50 years (1882 - 1930). Records for
these intended victims, and all other people in their households, will be merged
with existing data on people who were lynched, as well as on nonvictim members
of their communities. Comparing these groups will allow the researcher to
identify the characteristics that put individuals at risk of various levels of
victimization. The investigator will also incorporate county-level social,
demographic, economic, and political data to determine which community factors
placed high and low status people at elevated risk of victimization. Data,
including a database and "case files" with research notes and historical
documents for each case, will be distributed via a public web
site.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
promote training and learning by incorporating graduate and undergraduate
students at an urban, public university in the conduct, presentation, and
publication of research. The quantitative analyses, identifying the
characteristics that predicted victimization and its severity, as well as the
contextual factors that put individuals with particular characteristics at risk,
will help us better understand contemporary bias crime and ethnic conflict.
Finally, the interactive elements of the website develops and implements a new
model of incorporating broader public participation in the collection of social
scientific data, allowing members of the public to conduct their own archival
research and contribute to the development of our data. The publicly-available
website will allow academics, amateur researchers, and genealogists to access
information on lynched and intended victims, and help improve the quality of the
data.