* 1338099
* MRI: Acquisition of Big-Data Private-Cloud Research Cyberinfrastructure (BDPC)
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2016
* Moshe Vardi, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 09/30/2016
* USD 400,000.00

Proposal #: 13-38099 PI(s): Vardi, Moshe; Allen, Genevera; Bradshaw, Stephen;
Karaki, Lydia; Veeraraghavan, Ashok Institution: Rice University Title:
MRI/Acq.: Big-Data Private Cloud Research Cyberinfrastructure (BDPC) Project
Proposed: This project, acquiring a novel cyber-infrastructure instrument for
big data cloud computing designed as a loosely coupled computations system with
large memory requirements, enables a significant range of application domains as
well as research into infrastructures for cloud computing. The domain sciences
addressed range from development of big-data enabling software technologies
spanning fundamental computer science work, to the analysis of electronic
medical records, twitter streams, and hurricane evacuation strategies.
Additional benefits are expected in understanding disease and therapeutic
treatments, and in the development and application of mathematical models in the
areas of machine learning, optimization, compressed sensing, image processing,
and statistical analysis and data mining. The instrument will also help bridge
the gap between numerical models and observations in astrophysics. Broader
Impacts: The broader impacts on society, and especially in education and
training (including for members of underrepresented groups) are all compelling.
The instrument will directly impact the educational experience for all students
taking classes in computing and computational problem solving. The targeted
research communities are diverse and broad, including the underrepresented
groups, with strong empirical and experimental components. The proposed
instrument is highly suitable for training and education.