* 1338173
* MRI: Acquisition of a Combined X-ray Photoelectron Spectrometer and Scanning Auger Microprobe
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* John Hemminger, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 08/31/2016
* USD 550,000.00

With this award from the Chemistry Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program
and co-funding from the Chemistry Research and Facilities (CRIF) Program,
Professor John Hemminger from University of California Irvine and colleagues
Regina Ragan, Matthew Law, Reginald Penner and Daniel Munn will acquire a
combined X-ray photoelectron spectrometer (XPS) and scanning Auger microprobe
(SAM). The proposal is aimed at enhancing research and education at all levels,
especially in areas such as (a) XPS and Auger electron spectroscopy (AES) depth
profiling, SAM, and UPS studies of solar cell absorbers and device stacks; (b)
characterization of metal oxide and metal chalcogenide nanocrystals for
photocatalysis; (c) ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS), XPS and AES
depth profiling studies; (d) manganese dioxide nanowires for ultra-high capacity
and rate capabilities for lithium cathodes; (e) correlating surface
functionalization and transport properties of single-walled carbon nanotubes;
and (f) dynamics of thermally-grown oxides in power generation and propulsion
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;X-ray photoelectron spectrometers are used for
chemical analysis. The XPS technique quantitatively measures elemental
composition, empirical formula, chemical state and electronic state of the
elements in a given material. A sample is irradiated with a beam of
monochromatic X-rays and the kinetic energies of the resulting photoelectrons
are measured and related to specific elements. XPS often plays a crucial role in
defining the system under study. The technique requires the use of ultra-high
vacuum conditions. In Auger electron spectroscopy, energetic electrons emitted
from an excited atom are analyzed to provide information on surfaces. The work
to be carried out by these investigators represents a wide array of systems
requiring surface characterization. The instrumentation will be used in research
activities and also for research training and education of a large number of
students from diverse backgrounds.