* 1338025
* The Fourth Oklahoma Partial Differential Equations (PDE) Workshop; Oklahoma State University; October 26-27, 2013
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2013,03/31/2015
* Jiahong Wu, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 03/31/2015
* USD 26,760.00

This NSF award supports the Fourth Oklahoma Workshop on Partial Differential
Equations (PDEs), which will take place at Oklahoma State University (OSU),
October 26-27, 2013. This workshop will feature several PDEs modeling fluids and
geophysical fluids. Among them are the surface quasi-geostrophic (SQG) equation,
the Boussinesq equations and the 3D Euler equations with special spatial
symmetries. There are very exciting new developments on these PDEs in the last
few years and significant progress has been made on many fundamental issues
concerning these PDEs such as the global (in time) regularity problem. This
workshop, inspired by these recent advances, strives to fulfill four major
objectives: 1) to broadly disseminate the most recent advances in the focused
research field; 2) to give local (Oklahoma and neighboring states) PDE
researchers an opportunity to communicate directly with the leading experts and
to expose themselves to the forefront research; 3) to provide a convenient
platform for our graduate students, recent Ph.D.'s, women and minorities to
present their research results; and 4) to stimulate interactions and
interdisciplinary collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PDEs are fundamental
tools in understanding many fluid phenomena ranging from small scale blood flows
to large-scale geophysical flows. The PDEs featured by this workshop have played
important roles in many practical applications such as in the study of
frontogenesis, the formation of sharp fronts between hot and cold air. This
workshop aims to bring the state-of-the-art research in the focused research
field to a broad audience in a timely fashion and to promote interactions and
interdisciplinary collaborations between mathematicians and meteorologists
including those in the National Weather Center in Norman, Oklahoma. It is hoped
that this workshop will help accelerate the incorporation of the present
cutting-edge research into the modeling and simulation of sophisticated weather
phenomena such as tornadoes.