* 1338509
* BCC: Organizing Multi-Disciplinary Communities to Conduct Data-Intensive Research on Education and Learning
* SBE,SMA
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Anthony Kelly, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* John Cherniavsky
* 08/31/2016
* USD 538,403.00

The PIs of this project are building the capacity for research within the data-
intensive environments of massive open online courses. The PIs are using as an
organizing example the World Education Portals (WEPS) massive open online course
(MOOC) that focuses on calculus and has been taught through Florida State
University and the University of Helsinki for over 8 years. The PIs are building
a community of researchers who are studying ways to improve student achievement
measures, pedagogical aspects and the extensions to mobile platforms. A specific
set of research foci for this community include the elements of design-based
experimentation in MOOCs, motivational and affective aspects that can be studied
within such environments, the development of new statistical and analytics
methods, ethical issues that surround access to data elements, and economic
aspects of MOOCs. Multiple workshops bring the community together, and
Mendeley.com (an academic social network) is being used to coordinate the
growing research agendas around MOOCs in the time between the workshops. The
project also includes an invitational conference to organize participant papers
for a set of proceedings and reports. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project builds
on work that was funded as part of a suite of projects collaborating virtually
with institutes of higher education in Finland. The project provides a vehicle
to move the development and initial research on MOOCs to a wider community. The
project leverages individuals who are experts in mathematics learning together
with experts in analytics and educational data mining to provide a deep
connection to learning in the MOOC virtual learning environments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A criticism of the learning analytics and educational data
mining research agenda is that a focus of the deep learning about STEM content
is not well represented in the research and development community. Too
frequently, the focus is on the technical development of the infrastructure and
the statistical processes that are necessary to analyze the large amounts of
data. What has been missing from the research agenda is the focus on how
students are learning in MOOCs and what aspects of the learning environments are
supporting that learning. This study brings the connection of the study of the
learning of mathematics into the analysis of the adequacy of the MOOC learning
environment.