* 1338809
* RCN-SEES: Integrating Land-Use Scenarios, Ecosystem Services, and Linkages to Society (Scenarios, Services, and Society - S3)
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2013,08/31/2019
* David Foster, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 08/31/2019
* USD 749,659.00

Land use is a major driver of global change and is intimately connected with
ecosystem structure and function, and with human well-being. Natural and managed
landscapes are called upon to supply food and fiber, support climate change
mitigation and adaptation, alleviate poverty, and support human well-being. Yet,
the knowledge base for understanding and promoting sustainable land-use
trajectories is highly fragmented and oftentimes isolated from its social
context and from the human communities who represent the principle agents of
change. This Research Coordination Project will create an interdisciplinary
network of scientists, decision makers and other stakeholders to synthesize
existing information, and produce science products to understand and advance
sustainable land-use trajectories. The major activities will be to: generate a
suite of qualitative land-use scenarios co-developed with stakeholders that
depict a range of possible future social, economic, and environmental realities
for the New England region of the United States; simulate the land-use scenarios
as they interact with multiple environmental stressors using existing modeling
frameworks; evaluate these scenarios in terms of ecosystem services that are
defined together with the stakeholders; and share knowledge with the broader
public and decision makers to advance sustainable land-use trajectories.

This project will integrate multiple broader impacts throughout its five-year
duration. By including post-docs and students at all levels as participants in
the network, this project will contribute to STEM workforce development by
offering direct experience in managing collaborative, interdisciplinary research
networks. The network will also provide training for scientists of all ranks in
techniques of stakeholder engagement, linking science with action, and science
communication. This project will sponsor regional workshops for developing
stakeholder-defined land use scenarios and for linking these to practical
solutions that can be put into action.