* 1338135
* MRI: Acquisition of a direct electron detector for the UCLA Titan electron microscope
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2015
* Hong Zhou, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2015
* USD 488,105.00

An award is made to University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA) to acquire a
Gatan K2 Summit camera for a Titan transmission electron microscope at the
California NanoSystems Institute (CNSI). The new camera will provide essential
instrumentation for more than 20 UCLA-based laboratories in the
schools/divisions of engineering, physical sciences, life sciences, medicine and
dentistry. Cutting-edge structural characterization of a broad range of
engineered and naturally-occurring nano-particles, nano-devices and nano-
machines, as well as novel materials will be carried out by high-resolution
electron microscopy and electron tomography for either improved design or for
better understanding of their mechanisms of actions. The MRI will radically
change the way data are acquired by enabling single electron detection and super
resolution electron imaging for electron microscopy and tomography.

Activities supported by the new camera have the potential to impact scientific
disciplines including physics, chemistry, biology, microbiology, engineering and
materials sciences, as well as society at large. By acting as a catalyst to
enhance education in cross-disciplinary and out-reach programs, the installation
of this new camera will boost research collaboration and interdisciplinary
training for a diverse group of graduate and undergraduate students, postdocs,
and faculty across four major colleges at UCLA. The faculty members supported by
the award all teach major courses at UCLA and will incorporate cutting-edge
research results from this MRI into undergraduate and graduate courses. The MRI
will further enhance CNSI?s outreach activities in the ethnically diverse Los
Angeles metropolitan area and increase research participation by minority
students at UCLA. Very broadly, the research results will be disseminated
through publications, technology transfer, and workshops and symposia. CNSI?s
strong entrepreneurship programs will also be leveraged to create new
intellectual property, jobs, companies, and industries related to nano sciences
and electron imaging