* 1338420
* Functional Approaches to the Origin of the Bilaterally Symmetrical Body Plan in Animal Development
* BIO,IOS
* 12/28/2012,08/31/2013
* Mark Martindale, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Anthea Letsou
* 08/31/2013
* USD 51,105.00

Mark Q.
Martindale&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IOB-0642273&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Functional
approaches to the origin of the bilaterally symmetrical body plan in animal
development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal addresses
how morphologically complex animals evolved from simpler-looking animals and the
relationship between morphological and molecular complexity. Most animals
display obvious features of bilateral symmetry, such as lateral appendages or
eyes, however, simpler, 'radially symmetrical' animals that arose early in
animal evolution do not display these features. Recent results from the
Martindale lab have shown that genes that normally participate in the formation
of bilaterally symmetric structures are not only present but expressed in
polarized patterns in the 'radially symmetrical' anemone, Nematostella
vectensis. These data indicate that 'radially symmetrical' animals are built on
a bilaterally symmetrical platform that arose earlier than previously thought.
Dr. Martindale proposes experiments to further investigate asymmetric gene
expression in Nematostella embryos. He will take advantage of Nematostella's
recently sequenced genome and his group's extensive experience in the study of
Nematostella embryogenesis. He will determine when asymmetric gene expression
first begins, the hierarchy of asymmetric gene activation, and the interactions
between genes that leads to asymmetric gene expression. To further determine the
generality of these results he proposes to study homologous gene expression in
closely related stony coral embryos. Dr. Martindale has a strong track record in
training graduate and postdoctoral students from diverse backgrounds and the
dissemination of results and reagents to the evolution and development
community.&lt;br/&gt;