* 1338404
* Developing Engineering and Science Collaborations Between the University of Massachusetts and Three Central American Universities
* O/D,OISE
* 08/31/2012,09/30/2014
* Kenneth Lee, Western New England University
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Dudka
* 09/30/2014
* USD 30,200.00

In this U.S.-Central American planning workshop researchers from the U.S. and
Costa Rica, Honduras, and Nicaragua will meet to catalyze a collaborative
research and education consortium known as the Networked Engineering Research
Center (NERC). The NERC will engage faculty, undergraduate and graduate students
in collaborative international research and education for designing and
implementing sustainable technologies and methods across disciplines, including
biology, chemistry, plastics engineering, chemical engineering, mechanical
engineering, civil engineering, marketing and finance. The five universities
involved in this consortium are the University of Massachusetts Lowell,
University of Massachusetts Amherst, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de Honduras,
Universidad Regional Autónoma de la Costa del Caribe de Nicaragua, and
Universidad Nacional de Costa Rica. The main goal of this effort is to define
and discuss specific collaborative research areas and education programs within
each institution. It is expected that these discussions will lead to the
development of a proposal to the NSF Partnership for International Research and
Education (PIRE) program.

The NERC allows close collaboration among scientists, engineers, and testbed
innovation partners (the practitioners who apply the engineered systems) to
develop and adopt renewable energy technology and biodiversity friendly agro-
forestry systems for the production of coffee, bio-fuels, and essential oils.
Coffee and the burgeoning growth of bio-fuel production and essential oils for
the cosmetics and pharmaceuticals industry are potential drivers for renewable
technology and innovations that will improve methods of biodiversity friendly
production. This collaboration enriches both research and teaching efforts and
provides challenges to students and teachers alike to adapt textbook knowledge
to complex and often competing forces of markets, cultures, and the natural
environment. The NERC will have broad implications for society by addressing
climate change, habitat loss, education, and the promotion of sustainable
products. U.S. students and early faculty members will participate in these
discussions and any subsequent interactions. Involvement of junior researchers
in international research is a major goal of OISE.