* 1338650
* The Andrzej Mostowski Centenary Conference
* MPS,DMS
* 05/15/2013,08/31/2014
* Roman Kossak, CUNY Graduate School University Center
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 08/31/2014
* USD 19,980.00

This is an application for travel funds to support 12 U.S. participants (four
research mathematicians and eight doctoral students) at the conference {\it
Mostowski 100} to be held at the Faculty of Mathematics, Informatics and
Mechanics of the University of Warsaw, Poland, October 11-13th, 2013. The
conference is organized with financial support of the European Mathematical
Society and Warsaw Center of Mathematics and Computer Science, Clay Mathematics
Institute, and is endorsed by the Polish Mathematical Society. The present
application is not intended to provide any funding for the conference itself,
only for funding for travel. There are several scientific themes of the
conference, each represented by leading specialists. Professor Mostowski made
contributions to several areas of Mathematical Logic. His most important work
was in Set Theory, and the selection of topics reflects that. Some of
Mostowski's ideas have found their application in Foundations Computer Science.
The program of the conference will include a lecture and a tutorial on some
recent and rather unexpected developments in this area. Many can benefit from
participation in the conference. In case this application is successful, the
opportunity to apply for travel grants will be advertised at the conference
website, in the Association for Symbolic Logic newsletter, and on popular logic-
related websites. Travel grant applications will be reviewed by a committee set
up and chaired by Sergei Artemov of the Graduate Center of City University of
New York. There are several faculty and graduate students at CUNY who are
interested in going to the conference, but the committee will make every effort
to make sure that the selection process is fair and open to everyone, with
particular attention paid to applicants from underrepresented groups.

Broader impacts of the conference: In the sciences generally, disciplines and
workers become increasingly specialized with the progression of generations.
This has certainly been the case with mathematical logic and foundational
studies. While this is not surprising, it is unfortunate for those whose concern
is the foundations of mathematics itself. A broad, informed, and unified outlook
is important. In 2013 there is a unique opportunity to have a conference aimed
at bringing together and affecting researchers across the various sub-
disciplines of foundational studies, encouraging interaction. This year is the
100th anniversary of the birth of Andrzej Mostowski. It will not be a
commemoration meeting, but rather the organizers plan to use Mostowski and his
ideas as a central organizing device, that will allow them to bring together
researchers in all the basic areas of foundational studies. The expectation is
that the speakers will present not only the panorama of results directly
stemming from Professor Mostowski's research, but also proposals for research
directions, unsolved problems, and possibilities for new applications.

The conference website is at http://mostowski100.mimuw.edu.pl/doku.php