* 1338064
* MRI: Colloidal Characterization Capability through Combined DLS-ACS Analysis
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2018
* Kannan Sivaprakasam, St. Cloud State University
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 04/30/2018
* USD 154,767.00

Technical&lt;br/&gt;This award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program
funds the establishment of an integrated particle property distribution
measurements system on a single ferronematic sample. Colloid dynamics are
particularly complex when strong interactions amongst the suspended particles
can overwhelm the fluctuation-dissipation and thermalization. This problem is
prominently manifest in ferrofluids where long range magnetic dipole
interactions can lead to gradual agglomeration and loss of desirable colloidal
characteristics. A particular class of ferrofluids known as ferronematics, where
specially fabricated ferromagnetic nano-particles are suspended in liquid
crystal host matrices, is gaining increasing popularity due to their strong
magneto-optical response. Long term stability of ferronematics depend on the
incorporation of surfactants that support sufficient electric charge or steric
effects to counteract the inter-particle magnetic attraction. Proper dynamical
representation of ferronematics requires that the mathematical dynamical
equation be modified to incorporate the inter-particle forces and be averaged
over the entire ensemble of particle physical, magnetic, and electric
properties. Dynamic light scattering with zeta-potential capability is used to
determine particle size and surface charge and then that information is fed
forward to the ac susceptibility measurement with swept frequency capability
that characterizes particle magnetics as a function of its physical dimension.
The combined distributions are then used to develop and validate advanced
dynamical models and to evaluate colloid stability against agglomeration and
sedimentation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non Technical&lt;br/&gt;As the science and
technology of nanoparticles evolve, various classes of liquid suspended
nanoparticles (colloids) are proving to be of particular importance to science,
engineering, and environmental applications. Understanding the critical
nanoparticle parameters that differentiate dispersed suspension from
sedimentation or agglomeration will lead to superior classes of engineered
materials such as ferrofluids, nano-drug delivery agents, and biofuels, as well
as improved environmental understanding of hydrologic flows in oceans and lakes.
This award from the Major Research Instrumentation program funds the
establishment of a complementary pair of characterization instruments. The first
tool determines particle size and surface charge distributions using Dynamic
Light Scattering (DLS). That information is then fed forward to a magnetic
measurement, AC Susceptibility (ACS), that utilizes the same colloid sample and
characterizes the particle magnetization distribution and magnetic switching
behavior. DLS will also be used for studying hydrologic sedimentation research
such as dynamics density and turbidity flows. In addition to colloidal research,
several undergraduate classes in the departments of chemistry, physics, and
atmospheric and hydrological sciences will incorporate these characterization
techniques in their instructional laboratories.