* 1338914
* I/UCRC:  Collaborative Research: Center for Spatiotemporal Thinking Computing and Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2019
* Peter Bol, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Behrooz Shirazi
* 08/31/2019
* USD 619,730.00

PROGRAM DIRECTOR'S RECOMMENDATION &lt;br/&gt;1338925 George Mason University;
Chaowei Yang &lt;br/&gt;1338914 Harvard University; Peter Bol &lt;br/&gt;1338902
University of California-Santa Barbara; Keith Clarke
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;George Mason University (GMU) as the lead institution,
Harvard University (HU), and the University of California Santa Barbara (UCSB)
are proposing to establish a center for spatiotemporal thinking, computing and
applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal seeks to establish an I/UCRC
for spatiotemporal thinking, computing and applications as a collaborative
platform among industry, university, government agencies, and other
organizations to advance this domain of knowledge. The proposed center will be
established based upon the previous successes at each of the three sites
including: a) the Center for Intelligent Spatial Computing (CISC) at GMU for
spatiotemporal computing/software development; b) the Center for Spatial Studies
(CSS) at UCSB for spatial thinking and analyses; and c) the Center for
Geographic Analysis (CGA) at Harvard for spatiotemporal applications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mission of the new Center would be to integrate these
technologies into a comprehensive spatiotemporal theory and applications.
Research results and success stories will be disseminated through publications
in relevant spatiotemporal venues as well as among the center member sites for
adoption and outreach. The PIs plan to use their established relationship with
leading organizations to broadcast the research results and recruit new members
through the organization channels. The PIs plan to develop new curriculum within
existing degree programs at the three sites, and to continue their diversity
traditions to include minorities and other underrepresented groups in center
activities