* 1338021
* MRI:  Acquisition of Raman Spectrometer System for Research and Associated Educational Programs
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Steven Buckner, Saint Louis University
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 08/31/2016
* USD 157,094.00

Pinkhassik&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award from the Major
Instrumentation Program supports the acquisition of an advanced Raman instrument
for the NanoCenter at Saint Louis University. In recent years, a cluster of
investigators formed at Saint Louis University with a strong research focus on
nanoscale materials and surface phenomena. The instrument will support multiple
research projects requiring regular access to a Raman spectroscopy system. This
new instrument will support innovative multidisciplinary projects and will
contribute to diverse educational and training activities. The main themes of
the planned research are developing and implementing novel methods of synthesis
and assembly of micro and nanoscale materials and hybrid structures, creating
functional nanodevices, and understanding decoherence in solid state quantum
computing devices. Researchers will use Raman Spectroscopy, a nondestructive
approach, to study specific designs, geometries, and chemical compositions of
structures and devices of interest. The multidisciplinary team of scientists at
Saint Louis University is highly qualified to conduct the proposed research
activities. The new Raman instrument will enable research leading to
technologies beneficial to society, such as selective nanosensors, efficient
nanoreactors, and new energetic materials. Understanding the structure of nano-
carbon materials and materials for quantum computing will contribute to rapidly
evolving areas of fundamental research. This instrument will be an integral part
of the interdisciplinary educational curriculum across several departments and
colleges at Saint Louis
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;******&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award from the
Major Research Instrumentation program supports the acquisition of an advanced
Raman spectrometer at Saint Louis University. The instrument will become one of
the core instruments of the newly established NanoCenter to support multiple
research and education activities of a diverse group of beginning and
established scientists. The main research areas supported by this instrument are
centered on creation and understanding of nanoscale materials. Research
involving this new instrument will span fundamental studies and development of
new technologies beneficial to society, such as nanoreactors, nanosensors, and
energetic materials. This instrument will be an integral part of the
interdisciplinary educational curriculum across several departments and colleges
at Saint Louis University. It will contribute to training activities at the
NanoCenter and an Interdisciplinary Graduate Science Program. The access to this
instrument will contribute to a targeted outreach program designed to increase
participation of underrepresented groups in science.