* 1338012
* MRI: Acquisition of an E-Beam Evaporator for Interdisciplinary Research and Education
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2015
* Richard Williams, Wake Forest University
* Standard Grant
* Eyad Abed
* 08/31/2015
* USD 225,048.00

The objective of this program is to strengthen the fabrication capabilities at
Wake Forest University (WFU) by acquisition of an electron-beam evaporation
system. This instrument will be unique in northwest North Carolina, provide a
comprehensive fabrication-characterization infrastructure, and allow
investigators to improve the quality and expand the scope of their research and
training endeavors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: The system will
enable researchers to grow single and multilayered non-magnetic, ferromagnetic
and organic metals, (doped metal) oxides, nitrides and a wide range of
semiconductors. It will advance several nanoscience, nanotechnology,
biotechnology and energy programs with the potential to yield transformative
applications in organic electronics and spintronics, solid oxide fuel cells,
solid electrolytes for Li-ion batteries, high-performance scintillators for
homeland security, photocatalytic membranes for water splitting and CO2
reduction, and the study of cell mechanics and protein mobility during
neoplastic transformation. Crucial fabrication tasks to realize these advances
are limited or impossible due to the current lack of infrastructure.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The instrument will significantly enhance
multidisciplinary cross-departmental research collaborations among groups from
WFU, neighboring institutions and small companies. Over 50 students and
postdoctoral fellows from WFU, Appalachian State University, Winston-Salem State
University, and Forsyth Technical Community College will use this instrument for
over 15 research projects. The system will support curricular improvement by
allowing new experiments that will expand Physics and Chemistry syllabi. About
150 graduate and undergraduate students will receive formal training in the 7
courses and a summer workshop that will use the instrument.