* 1338626
* Collaborative Research:  Values and Policy in Interdisciplinary Environmental Science: A Dialogue-based Framework for Ethics Education
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2013,10/31/2014
* Jan Boll, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* Wenda K. Bauchspies
* 10/31/2014
* USD 103,241.00

A collaborative team of investigators from Michigan State University and the
University of Idaho is working with instructors and students in
interdisciplinary environmental science programs (IESPs) to conduct systematic,
critical analysis of ethical concepts in the context of interdisciplinary
environmental science. IESPs have multiplied in post-secondary and graduate
curricula in response to pressing environmental problems. Ethical considerations
are of immense importance in addressing environmental topics, because they often
involve value judgments and the ethical issues involved are complex, multi-
faceted, and high-stakes. Yet, ethics education materials for graduate IESP
courses have not kept pace. This education and research project is developing an
approach to graduate ethics education in IESPs that can better prepare the next
generation of environmental scientists to solve complex problems. Materials
development is being guided by two pedagogical commitments: (a) a constructivist
paradigm that recognizes the social and collaborative nature of learning; and
(b) a commitment to problem-driven models of education. A structured, yet
flexible, framework is being created to enable development of course modules
that can subsequently be adopted for use in classroom dialogue, building on
results of work previously funded by NSF (the Toolbox Project - NSF award
#0823058). The framework consists of materials for instructors and students that
help them identify contexts in their IESP where ethical dilemmas generated by
value judgments are likely to occur. The framework has two dimensions,
corresponding to "content" and "method". The "content" concerns value judgments
that relate to (a) the conduct of interdisciplinary scientific research, and (b)
the impact of interdisciplinary environmental science on societal needs and
policies. The "method" engages students, as teams or groups, in critical,
conceptual analysis of value and policy aspects of their own practice as
scientists and engineers. Students in courses using these modules will
participate actively in identifying and assessing values-related challenges that
are at the intersection of multiple environmental perspectives and at the
intersection of science with policy. In addition to developing this framework,
the project team is conducting a rigorous evaluation of its effectiveness for
facilitating better consideration of ethical issues in IESP courses.
Dissemination of the framework broadly through presentations and publications
will strengthen interdisciplinary undergraduate and graduate education and will
also provide professional development opportunities, ethics training, and
mentoring for graduate research assistants.