* 1338553
* FESD Type I: Earth System Dynamics and its Role in Human Evolution in Africa
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2020
* Joellen Russell, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 08/31/2020
* USD 4,855,712.00

This project will collect and analyze lake sediment drill core records from key
localities in Kenya and Ethiopia to vastly improve our understanding of the
paleoenvironmental and paleoclimatic context of human evolution. Understanding
the relationship between climate/environmental history and human evolution is an
enduring challenge of broad scientific and public interest. Key questions
include: How did climate and tectonic change interact during critical intervals
of human evolution? What processes regulated this history on local to regional
scales? Do local records of climate change reflect global changes? How and when
did climatic and tectonic processes combine to influence early human habitats,
resources, and demography? Were these changing conditions related to
evolutionary processes and events in the human lineage? Research on this
relationship cuts across Earth, environmental and anthropological sciences. The
sediment drill cores we will collect from lake deposits will provide detailed
and highly resolved records of environmental history. Through data collection
and modeling we aim to fundamentally transform the debate concerning how
environmental dynamics at global, regional and local scales may have shaped
human evolutionary history.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will obtain
continuous paleoenvironmental records by drilling long cores from five high-
priority areas in Ethiopia (N. Awash River and Chew Bahir areas) and Kenya (W.
Turkana, Tugen Hills and southern Kenya Rift/Lake Magadi) where highly-resolved,
continuous lacustrine paleoclimate records can be collected through important
time intervals in the same basins that contain fossils and artifacts. Rather
than assume a linkage between environmental history and evolution, we designed
this study as a series of data collection and modeling exercises to explicitly
test overarching and local hypotheses about environmental and evolutionary
dynamics. Our high-resolution (centennial-millennial scale) and datable
geochemical, paleoecological and sedimentological records will allow
quantitative reconstruction of paleoprecipitation, paleotemperature,
paleohydrology and geomorphic evolution at a regional scale. We will correlate
these records using high-resolution tephrostratigraphy, magnetostratigraphy and
other geochronological techniques to adjacent exposures that contain hominin and
other vertebrate fossils, and artifacts, as well as to nearby marine records. We
will develop predictive numerical models of environmental change and ecosystem
response during critical intervals of human evolution and evaluate these models
against our new, high-resolution records. These experiments will examine how
landscape and climate change across a hierarchy of temporal and spatial scales
impacts the durability and predictability of critical ecosystem resources. They
will allow us to evaluate the importance of climatic thresholds and abrupt
environmental changes and better understand the earth system dynamics that might
have shaped the record of human evolution. Our modeling will generate new,
testable hypotheses of human evolution/Earth system dynamics, including possible
feedbacks from evolving hominin populations to their environments. Our project
will create a key data set for addressing fundamental, existential questions for
humanity. We will provide training and internship opportunities for 16 American
graduate students, 2 post-docs and 10 undergraduates, and numerous training
opportunities for African student and professional participants during the field
and initial core description phase of the project. We have also planned
significant investment in informal education, through a 3-D video project and
outreach activities we will coordinate with our three museum partners
(Smithsonian Institution, National Museums of Kenya and Ethiopia), both during
and following the drilling phase.