* 1338780
* I/UCRC:  Center for e-Design: IT Enabled Design and Realization of Products and Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2020
* Kyoung-Yun Kim, Wayne State University
* Continuing Grant
* Behrooz Shirazi
* 07/31/2020
* USD 409,878.00

1338780 Wayne State University (WSU); Kim &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wayne State
University (WSU) proposes to join the existing Center for e-Design that is
currently comprised of Iowa State (lead), Virginia Tech, Brigham Young
University, the University of Massachusetts, and the University of Buffalo. The
mission of the center is to create new tools, processes, and methodologies that
will assist in generating higher quality products at lower costs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wayne States team complements the existing university
partners' expertise in the four research thrust areas. The proposed sites
relevant, fundamental research includes semantic product design and
infrastructure, innovation tools for design fusion, virtual simulation, and
human-machine interface tools. Furthermore, Wayne State's team has significant
expertise in cultural and anthropological research in design, alternative and
renewable energy technology design and optimization, and STEM education. Wayne
State's participation can help grow the e-Design centers research to better meet
both current and emerging industrial and social needs. Wayne State brings
expertise from a diverse interdisciplinary team that draws from multiple
departments across academic schools within the university.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Site research from Wayne State's Center for e-Design will
be integrated into its broader graduate and undergraduate educational endeavors
to enhance students' development and preparation. Research will be integrated
into existing educational curriculum, thereby enriching course content and
student learning experiences in: design process and problem solving, decision
making in engineering design, advanced design theory and computational issues,
IT and knowledge engineering for design, and global product development. Wayne
State provides excellent industry-driven internship opportunities to its
graduate and undergraduate students. The proposed site plans to maintain a
policy of strong diversity within the Center, including continued partnership
and recruitment of minority and women graduate and undergraduate students.