* 1338264
* Collaborative Research:  Quantifying Stratified Turbulence in Estuaries
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2013,08/31/2013
* Malcolm Scully, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 08/31/2013
* USD 28,223.00

Understanding turbulent mixing in strong stratification is a longstanding
fundamental problem in fluid dynamics. The objectives of the proposed study are
to determine the mechanisms responsible for estuarine mixing at large gradient
Richardson number and to test turbulence parameterizations in this regime. Most
high-quality data in this regime have resulted from laboratory measurements and
direct numerical simulations. Field measurements of turbulent fluxes and
dissipation rates are essential to understand turbulence at geophysically
relevant scales. Estuaries are excellent laboratories for stratified turbulence
because they combine strong stratification with strong tidal forcing. The
measurements, simulations, and analyses will elucidate both stratified
turbulence and estuarine dynamics. Measurements are conducted in two estuaries
where the mixing is expected to be driven by distinctly different mechanisms.
The Mobile Array for Sensing Turbulence (MAST) measurements will be complemented
by three-dimensional Reynolds-averaged numerical simulations, which will place
the measurements in context with the larger scale estuarine dynamics and permit
evaluations of the turbulence parameterizations. The MAST is a new field
instrument platform that can resolve key turbulent quantities with unprecedented
spatial and temporal resolution. The objectives will be examined with MAST
measurements of turbulent fluxes, dissipation rates, and length scales with high
spatial and temporal resolution in fixed and underway modes, thus permitting
both long time-series measurements and quantification of spatial variability.
Three-dimensional numerical models play an increasingly important role as
management tools in estuarine and coastal environments. The broader also impacts
will include an explicit component to communicate the implications of this study
to improve the turbulence-closure parameterizations in estuarine and coastal
circulation models for interdisciplinary science and management applications.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;