* 1338892
* EarthCube GEO Domain Workshop:   Articulating Cyberinfrastructure Needs of the Ocean Ecosystem Dynamics Community
* GEO,OCE
* 04/15/2013,03/31/2015
* Danie Kinkade, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 03/31/2015
* USD 97,114.00

Ocean ecosystem dynamics encompasses a broad array of disciplines that seek to
increase our understanding of the interplay between the physical, biological,
and chemical processes in the ocean. Ocean ecosystem dynamics studies include
ocean productivity, population dynamics, biogeography, and biogeochemistry. It
is an interdisciplinary science that produces highly diverse data types that
pose unique challenges for data management, integration, and analysis. The goal
of this workshop is to surface requirements in this important ocean science
arena for a major new NSF data and knowledge management initiative (i.e.,
EarthCube) that is dedicated to revolutionizing geoscience by providing easy
access to, discovery of, and visualization of data from across the geo- and
environmental sciences. This workshop will bring together ~50 ocean water column
scientists to identify science drivers in the next 15 years in the ocean
ecosystem dynamics field and inform the EarthCube process about the data and
cyberinfrastructure needs of the associated scientific community. Issues of
different scales in time and space of both data and modeling efforts will be
discussed in reference to oceans, coastal waters, and the Great Lakes. The
workshop will also include cyber/computer science experts; and together workshop
participants will collectively define future science goals and focus on
identifying the most critical, widespread, cyberinfrastructure and data
management issues and problems holding back scientific advances in the area of
ocean ecosystem dynamics. Workshop participants will also discuss needs in
software and visualization that are needed to better understand and model both
present and new data. Broader impacts of the work include building
infrastructure for science by identifying needs that will help to shape the
final form of EarthCube cyberinfrastructure, support of two PIs whose gender is
under-represented in the sciences and engineering, and engagement of early
career scientists. A virtual component of the workshop will be held to help
broaden participation beyond those present on-site.