* 1338461
* Early Career:  Acquisition of Instrumentation to Measure Electrical Resistivity at the Field and Lab Scale
* GEO,EAR
* 02/26/2013,09/30/2013
* Kamini Singha, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 09/30/2013
* USD 92,711.00

1144043&lt;br/&gt;Singha&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant supports acquisition of
an ten channel electrical resistivity (ER) system (IRIS Syscal Pro) for the
Department of Geosciences at Penn State University. ER is sensitive to changes
in the electrical conductivity of the shallow subsurface and has applications
for spatially and temporally resolved observations of subsurface fluid content
and composition. As measured resistances between source and receiver electrodes
record the average electrical properties of porous media and conductive fluids
along the path length, measurements are a useful complement to discrete in situ
sampling and observations from wells. The ER system will support a range of
research including remote time series monitoring of hydrologic tracer transport,
imaging solute transport between aquifers and stream base flow, studies of
groundwater transport in desert ecosystems, and studies of the kinetics of
subsurface diagenesis of organics via bacterial iron reduction. The ER system
will support research at a Critical Zone Observatory (Shale Hills) and research
training through a three-week integrated hydrogeophysics summer course aimed at
underrepresented undergraduates from three Historically Black Colleges and
Universities partnered with Penn State (Jackson State University, MS; Fort
Valley State University, GA; and Elizabeth City State University,
NC).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;***