* 1338221
* Understanding Storm-Time Electromagnetic Ion Cyclotron (EMIC) Wave Occurrences and Their Relationship to Ground Signatures
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2014,08/31/2015
* Hyomin Kim, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Janet U. Kozyra
* 08/31/2015
* USD 72,123.00

The dynamics of the charged particles in the radiation belts has become an
increasingly important science problem is recent years as society has become
dependent on satellites in space. This is a project to investigate
electromagnetic ion cyclotron waves (EMIC) in the space and their signatures on
the ground. This project is well timed to support the NASA Van Allen Probes
mission. It will support the work of a young scientist just starting his
career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Radiation belt particles can be heated, scattered
and lost in their interaction with EMIC waves. The investigators will study the
propagation characteristics of the waves as a function of geomagnetic activity
and radiation belt dynamics. Since ground observations of the waves are much
easier and cheaper than satellite observations being able to study them from the
ground would be very useful. They will use GOES and THEMIS magnetic field data
from space along with conjugate data from the ground in Antarctica to address
three questions: 1.) What is the relative occurrence of EMIC waves both in space
and on the ground during each phase of a magnetic storm? 2.) Why are some of the
waves not observed on the ground during certain phases (main and recovery) of
the storm even though they are observed in space? 3.) How do heavy ions, He+ and
O+, contribute to radiation belt precipitation losses and EMIC propagation to
the ionosphere? This statistical study will be augmented by plasma data from
LANL and THEMIS spacecraft. Finally they will join with unfunded collaborators
at PPPL who will carry out wave simulation studies using a two-dimensional
finite element code. This part of the study will investigate attenuation of the
waves by heavy ions.