* 1338776
* Collaborative Research: Effects of Check Dams on Landscape and Society - A Catalyzing Visit to the Eco-Sensitive Shiwalik Foot Hills of India
* O/D,OISE
* 12/01/2013,11/30/2015
* Elizabeth Chacko, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Dudka
* 11/30/2015
* USD 13,725.00

This CNIC award supports the U.S.-India Collaborative Research: Effects of Check
Dams on Landscape and Society-a Catalyzing Visit to the Eco-Sensitive Shiwalik
Foothills of India. PI Ranbir Kang, Western Illinois University and collaborator
Elizabeth Chacko, George Washington University will initiate an international
collaboration with Drs. Dhian Kaur and K.P. Singh from the Departments of
Geography and Geology at Panjab University to study the geophysical and socio-
economic impacts of check dams in the Punjab. The research team will gather data
on the effects of check dams on channel morphology, surrounding land cover,
ground water levels, and local populations. They will use official government
and NGO data on agriculture, demographics, hydrology, vegetation, as well as,
focus groups and local inhabitants to understand the effects of check dams on
socio-economic progress and ecological change. The proposed research is novel in
that it will analyze not only the human-environment impacts of check dams in a
sub-tropical developing area, but also the feed-back mechanisms between humans
and the environment in such a locale. Two US graduate students will participate
in the field research in India. Findings from this study will be used to refine
research questions and hypotheses for a fully developed research proposal to be
submitted to NSF's Geography and Spatial Systems(GSS)Program.