* 1338042
* MRI: Development of an Instrument that Monitors Behaviors Associated with Obsessive-Compulsive Behaviors and Schizophrenia
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2022
* Arindam Banerjee, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2022
* USD 630,000.00

Proposal #: 13-38042&lt;br/&gt;PI(s): Papanikolopoulos, Nikolaos&lt;br/&gt;
Banerjee, Arindam; Bernstein, Gail; Hadjiyanni, Tassoulla; Lim, Kelvin,
K.&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Minnesota-Twin Cities&lt;br/&gt;Title:
MRI/Dev.: Instrument that Monitors Behaviors Associated with OCD and
Schizophrenia &lt;br/&gt;Project Proposed:&lt;br/&gt;This project, developing a
new instrument to facilitate data collection associated with clinical assessment
of complex mental health disorders such as obsessive-compulsive behaviors (known
as OCD), aims to enable long-term research advances in computer vision, activity
recognition and tridimensional reconstruction algorithms to automate the
identification of behaviors typical of OCD subjects. The immersion of selected
subjects in a virtual reality room (CAVE) is used to trigger specific behaviors
to be captured and analyzed. The sophisticated sensor system under development
will serve to collect these data and provide intelligent data processing
capabilities that would enable future exploration and testing of new diagnostic
and therapeutic protocols, leading to the establishment of the basis for, and
utility in, seeking early at-risk markers in children and adolescents. This
instrument initiative is based on the premise that expertise can accurately
identify useful diagnostic markers and on the belief that technologies can now
be developed to collect massive behavioral data in ways not previously done and
discover behavioral patterns.&lt;br/&gt;The instrument is expected
to&lt;br/&gt;- Provide extensive data collection associated with subjects
diagnosed with the respective disorders (data useful not only to clinicians but
also to computer vision and machine learning researchers among
others),&lt;br/&gt;- Capture interactions, behaviors, and physiological
reactions to real and/or synthetic multimodal stimuli (optical, acoustical,
etc.),&lt;br/&gt;- Allow computer and information scientists to develop
computational tools and algorithms to generate quantitative, adequate, and cost-
effective norms for screening a broad population, &lt;br/&gt;- Enhance Cognitive
Behavior Therapy (CBT) procedures and diagnostic protocols by integration of
technologies that can excite or inhibit triggers for schizophrenic or OCD
episodes,&lt;br/&gt;- Assess particular Augmented and Virtual Environments
(AE/VEs) and social media devices (smart phones and tablets) and their impacts
on the cognitive presence of normal versus afflicted subjects, and&lt;br/&gt;-
Evaluate whether an enhanced cognitive presence via an AE/VE can increase or
suppress (habituate) the intensity of behavioral symptoms detectable by sensors.
&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Among these we have:&lt;br/&gt;- Creation of large
and complex datasets that will enable computer scientists to apply the newest
computational tools on them,&lt;br/&gt;Development of a potentially
transformative technology-driven instrument for detecting early risk markers of
OCD,&lt;br/&gt;- Exploration of a platform well-suited to new directions for a
better characterization of mental disorders,&lt;br/&gt;- Systematic database
development of quantified, multimodal data and a sounder and more precise basis
for earlier detection,&lt;br/&gt;- Reduction of overall costs and a
parallelizing reduction in the long-term costs due to previously delayed or
incorrect diagnoses,&lt;br/&gt;- Reduction of anxiety, disruption, stress, and
sometimes real tragedy on patients and their families, &lt;br/&gt;- Earlier
detection and reduced need for drug-based, later stage interventions enabled by
the ease of testing, and associated societal benefits, and&lt;br/&gt;- Student
education and training in the use of the instrument.