* 1338429
* Travel Support for the Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 04/15/2013,03/31/2014
* Vivek Sarkar, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Hong Jiang
* 03/31/2014
* USD 9,000.00

The International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages
and Operating Systems (ASPLOS) is a premier multi-disciplinary conference for
research that spans the boundaries of hardware, computer architecture,
compilers, languages, operating systems, networking, and applications. ASPLOS
provides a high quality forum for scientists and engineers to present their
latest research findings in these rapidly changing fields. It has captured some
of the major computer systems innovations of the past two decades (e.g., RISC
and VLIW processors, small and large-scale multiprocessors, clusters and
networks-of-workstations, optimizing compilers, RAID, and network-storage system
designs). This proposal aims to support this highly regarded conference by
obtaining travel funds to help students defray the costs of attending the
conference in March 2013 in Houston, Texas USA. Priority will be given to those
students who will present their research at ASPLOS or its joint workshops, and
to women and other under-represented groups.

This proposal will have two primary direct benefits in terms of broader impact.
First, the ASPLOS conference will be strengthened as a result of the greater
attendance that this travel support will enable. Second, those students
receiving travel support will personally benefit from the opportunity to engage
in the all-important technical, professional, and social exchanges that ASPLOS
fosters.

We also expect this proposal to have two additional indirect impacts. First, we
plan to widely advertise the available support in order to attract women and
under-represented minority groups in attendance. Second, by providing this
support expressly to students, we expect to increase student participation in
the conference. We anticipate that the research results presented at the
conference -- as well as the emphasis on interaction between researchers in
academia and industry -- will be carried back by attendees to their home
institutions, resulting in heightened awareness and interests in
multidisciplinary research in computer architectures, programming languages, and
operating systems.