* 1338320
* Application of Rayleigh-Based, Multi-Element Coral Thermometry to Constrain Atlantic Sea Surface Temperatures During the Coldest Period of the Little Ice Age
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2016
* Anne Cohen, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 07/31/2016
* USD 302,138.00

The proposed work will test and apply a new technique for reconstructing sea
surface temperature (SST) at seasonal resolution using coral skeletons. The
technique, called Rayleigh-based multi-element (RBME) thermometry, uses multiple
element ratios to isolate the SST signal from other factors affecting coral
skeleton composition. To quantify the method?s accuracy and reproducibility,
RBME thermometry will be used to reconstruct SSTs from four species of modern
extra-tropical and tropical Atlantic corals in ~50-year sections for which
instrumental temperature records are available. The technique will then be
applied to fossil corals of the same four species to generate seasonal-scale SST
records for the coldest period of the Little Ice Age (1650?1700). These records
will lead to an improved understanding of the amplitude and spatial distribution
of SST change in the Atlantic during a climate anomaly that is not fully
understood.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will advance our capacity to
reconstruct past changes in the ocean?climate system, and thereby to understand
how this system may change in the future. The project will enhance research
infrastructure by developing computer code to make the RBME technique accessible
to the broader scientific community. A graduate student will be supported
through the WHOI/MIT Joint Program, and undergraduate students will be involved
via WHOI?s Summer Fellowship, Winter Internship, Minority Fellowship, and Guest
Student programs.