* 1338700
* Collaborative Research: Modeling the dynamics of integrated technical and moral reasoning in contexts of socio-scientific issues
* SBE,SES
* 01/15/2014,12/31/2017
* Andrew Elby, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Wenda K. Bauchspies
* 12/31/2017
* USD 225,561.00

In this project, researchers from the University of Maryland and the University
of California will build case-study accounts of the dynamics of how graduate and
senior undergraduate engineering students integrate technical and moral
reasoning as they grapple with the complexities of ethical decision-making about
a real-world scenario in a focus-group setting. The research evaluates not just
whether students gain basic knowledge of ethics principles, but also whether,
and in response to what contextual and instructional cues, students integrate
their scientific/technical knowledge, personal values, and professional ethics
to reason more deeply about messy real-world scenarios. To simulate workplace
teams, students will research and discuss the cases in small groups, and they
will engage in perspective-taking, role-playing, and other kinds of activities
and discussions. Fine-grained analysis of video of discussion sessions will
enable the research team to investigate what triggers, sustains, and/or disrupts
the productive weaving of ethical, situational, scientific and technical, and
social impact considerations during argumentation on socio-scientific case
studies. In the third year of the project, this qualitative research will inform
creation of survey tools for large-N exploration of hypotheses suggested by the
case-studies, as well as for measuring effectiveness of existing ethics
curricula/programs in improving students' ability to attend to the complex
interplay of scientific and moral reasoning in ethical decision-making. The
materials used for focus group discussions, accompanied by annotated video clips
of students engaging with those materials, will be packaged as curriculum
modules and facilitator guides that provide instructors with a feel for possible
directions of classroom discourse.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project addresses
the need for engineers to understand the social, ethical, environmental,
economic, and political impact of their scientific and technological
contributions. The research findings and materials developed can serve as a
model for a full semester course or course modules at undergraduate and graduate
levels. Facilitator guides produced from this project will help instructors
adapt the course to their institutional needs. Rich qualitative data will be
made available to the research community for additional analyses. The impact of
this work is to address deficiencies in traditional engineering curricula by
building new knowledge of how students learn to integrate scientific/technical
reasoning with moral reasoning, and by developing classroom interventions to
support this integrated reasoning.