* 1338502
* BCC Ohio Longitudinal Data Archive
* SBE,SMA
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Morton O'Kelly, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* John Cherniavsky
* 08/31/2016
* USD 499,615.00

The PIs of this project from Ohio State University expand the community of users
of the Ohio Longitudinal Data Archive (OLDA) as they develop a shared
interdisciplinary research platform across multiple universities and local and
state agencies. The PIs, one of whom is the director of the Ohio Education
Research Center and the other is the director of the Center for Human Resource
Research, assemble, document and disseminate previously isolated agency datasets
through an integrated data warehouse. They are augmenting the current cross-
agency data stewards advisory committee to bring researchers and agency
stakeholders together to determine research agendas that will address important
state and local educational questions. The project establishes the legal
agreements that facilitate access to the data, match and integrate multiple
forms of data, improve the technical accessibility and usability of data, and
connect with researchers and organizations in other states that are pursuing
similar goals to make cross-state comparisons easier to produce. A training
process to bring new graduate students and local and state agencies together
with university researchers facilitates the integration of data to inform
problems of policy and practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The federal government has
made substantial investments in the infrastructure of data into longitudinal
data systems, but the integration of these data across agencies and the
development of human capital to use these data have lagged. The project expands
the infrastructure in Ohio to conduct data-intensive research by developing an
open portal that allows researchers to examine data archive documentation and
codebooks to assess whether the data meet their research needs. The portal
provides the structure that researchers can use to gain permission to use and
securely access data. The project connects to multiple national efforts that
support the use of data in education. The PIs have a focus on the use of
longitudinal data systems to address important issues in STEM education, such as
the impact of STEM schools and the persistence of young STEM researchers in
postdoctoral experiences.