* 1339928
* Collaborative Research: Spatial Dynamics of Burn Severity and Post-fire Recovery in the High Park Fire Burn Area
* BIO,EF
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Michael Lefsky, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Ellis
* 06/30/2017
* USD 922,276.00

The western United States has experienced an unprecedented period of wildfires
in the last two decades, and both land owners and downstream water users are
vulnerable to wildfire and its effects on erosion and water quality. The 2012
High Park Fire was the second largest fire in Colorado history (over 35,000 ha
burned) and burned in a wildland-urban interface of public and private lands
located north and west of Fort Collins, CO. This research will provide a unique
understanding of the second largest fire in Colorado history. The award will
enable studies of the biological and physical dynamics of burn severity and
post-fire recovery 2012 High Park Fire using an integrative approach that
combines high resolution remote sensing provided by the National Ecological
Observatory Airborne Observatory (AOP) remote sensing instruments and in situ
field collected data. The award will provide funds for developing an integrated
understanding of the biological and physical responses to fire across a
spatially complex landscape. The study has six objectives: (1) characterize the
post-fire landscape, (2) investigate the effects of pre-fire landscape
conditions on burn severity, (3) examine the post-fire biological response, (4)
examine the post-fire physical response, (5) conduct an integrated biological
and physical assessment of the fire impacts on the Cache la Poudre watershed,
and (6) inform future AOP applications. Two of these (1 & 6) are methodological
objectives aimed at developing strategies for using AOP data to examine
landscape response to a large disturbance, and the remaining (2-5) are
scientific objectives related to understanding controls on burn severity and
post-fire response.

The data on the spectral, topographic and forest structure qualities of the
recovering landscape will facilitate an understanding of the physical and
biological processes of recovery within a common spatially-explicit three-
dimensional framework. By integrating the extensive information in the airborne
remote sensing data with field monitoring, the research allows examination of
spatial and temporal dynamics at a level of detail that would not be feasible
with field measurements alone. The combined biological and physical analyses
will facilitate understanding of the feedbacks between vegetation changes and
post-fire erosion and deposition patterns. Combining the field and remote
sensing datasets will allow an assessment of the impact of the fire, provide
data products useful to the scientific and management communities, and support
future research on ecosystem recovery. A postdoc and two graduate students will
be fully integrated in the research, thus building awareness and capacity for
using airborne remote sensing data in the future.