* 1339125
* Evolution and Domestication of Core Eudicot Defense Mechanisms against a Common Generalist Pathogen
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2020
* Daniel Kliebenstein, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 05/31/2020
* USD 1,342,248.00

Plant defense variation studies typically focus on single large effect genes
within a host or specialist pathogen that interact only with each other.
However, resistance to most generalist pathogens is quantitative and cannot be
investigated using few genotypically distinct individuals. This project will
begin one of the first direct surveys of how genomic diversity within and across
core plant lineages may be shaped by genomic diversity in a broad spectrum
generalist fungus that can infect most if not all plants. This will lead to the
development of novel biological and statistical methods to handle genomic
diversity across phylogenetic lineages and provide a unique multi-plant species
dataset that is currently only feasible with Botrytis cincerea. All data and
analysis protocols will be publicly available and microbial isolates will be
available upon request pending the acquisition of the appropriate permits. With
regard to training, the project will provide research opportunities for high
school, undergraduate, and graduate students. These students will be trained in
modern quantitative genetics of complex traits to prepare them for future
careers in industry or academics. As this is the one of the first instances of
attempting to do quantitative genetics in two interacting species, this will
place them at the forefront of the field in both theory and computational
applications. Undergraduates will develop and devise their own projects within
the frame of this project. Any publication resulting from this research will
likely include at least one undergraduate student as a co-author who was
integral in designing and interpreting the experiments. In addition, the
principal investigator will be involved in teaching, both in a university
classroom setting and in ongoing outreach efforts to educate community members
about plant metabolism, plant defense evolution, and quantitative genomics.

Plant/pathogen interactions determine plants fitness/yield. Most research on
plant/pathogen interactions focuses on epidemic diseases from pathogens that
infect only one or a few species similar to the human flu. However, this has led
to a paucity of research on pathogens that are endemic, like Botrytis cinerea or
the common cold, which can infect most host genotypes but only cause a low level
of economic loss. These generalist pathogens place evolutionary pressure across
plant lineages, yet this cross-lineage pressure is rarely systematically
addressed. For example, it is currently not known if there is a common plant
defense network against these generalist pathogens that can function in all
plants. To test this question, this project aims to: 1) measure lesion
development with a high-throughput platform across six plant species that have
independently undergone domestication (lettuce, tomato, grape, soy and
Brassicas) with 100 genome sequenced isolates of the pathogen, Botrytis cinerea;
2) use the genome wide association mapping dataset to identify pathogenicity
networks within the pathogen that allow it to infect these diverse hosts; 3)
identify and validate plant gene targets of these networks using a new co-
species co-expression network approach to test if the pathogen targets defense
mechanisms that are conserved or variant across plants and if these defense
mechanisms have been affected by human driven domestication; and 4) conduct
transcriptome profiling across these plant/pathogen combinations to identify
conserved or variant transcriptional responses across the eudicot lineages. By
including domestic and wild genotypes in each plant species this project will
provide a common reference frame in which to study how domestication may or may
not consistently influence plant defenses. In the longer term, this information
will provide for a better understanding of how selection pressures drive the
evolution of defenses within eudicot lineages towards generalist pathogens.