* 1339265
* CS 10K: Collaborative Research: A Structured CS Principles Approach to Professional Development for Maryland High School Teachers
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2019
* Marie desJardins, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 12/31/2019
* USD 876,125.00

The University of Maryland Baltimore County, in collaboration with the
University of Maryland College Park, will develop and evaluate professional
development activities focused on increasing the expertise of Maryland high
school teachers for teaching computer science, with the ultimate goal of
increasing the number of rigorous computer science classes offered across the
state and the number and diversity of students taking these classes. Experienced
higher education faculty and highly effective high school teachers will
collaborate to train other high school teachers to develop and offer a college
preparatory CS curriculum. In the first year, an initial cohort of 12 master
teachers will collaborate with the project leadership team to develop
standardized classroom materials based on the CS Principles curriculum and then
offer the CS Principles course in their home schools. In the second year, the
project staff will train less experienced teachers in the CS Principles
curriculum, and in the third year, the leadership team will demonstrate
scalability by supporting the delivery of multiple independently funded regional
workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will develop course
materials, create training materials, and increase the expertise of high school
computer science teachers in Maryland. Master teachers and apprentice teachers
will be trained in the new curriculum, increasing the readiness and ability of
schools and teachers to adopt and offer the CS Principles curriculum and
increasing the availability of academically rigorous CS courses in high schools
across the state. The proposed effort will ultimately lead to increased interest
of Maryland students in studying and pursuing careers in computer science.