* 1339036
* Exploring Cloud Paradigm and Practices for Science and Engineering
* CSE,OAC
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2017
* Manish Parashar, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 05/31/2017
* USD 299,984.00

Clouds abstractions and infrastructure are rapidly becoming part of the advanced
research cyber-infrastructure (ACI) providing viable platforms for scientific
exploration and discovery. As a result, it is important to understand how
emerging data and compute intensive application workflows can effectively
utilize a hybrid ACI integrating Cloud abstractions and services, and how such a
hybrid ACI can enable new paradigms and practices in science and engineering.
This EAGER explores innovative science and engineering application formulations
that are enabled by a hybrid federated ACI that includes Clouds and HPC
resources, as well as programming and middleware support for these new
application formulations. Specifically, the project focuses on three key
research thrusts: (1) application formulation; (2) programming models,
abstractions and systems; and (3) middleware stacks and management services, and
explore two applications use cases -- (i) an oil reservoir modeling application
based on an Ensemble Kalman Filter (EnKF), and (ii) molecular dynamics
simulations using asynchronous replica exchange. In each of these use cases
activities explore how the capabilities provided by resources and services in a
federated ACI can be leveraged to optimize metrics such as time-to-science,
cost-to-science and/or energy-to-science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cloud services
are integral to the NSF ACI vision. Clouds are also rapidly becoming an integral
part of the ACI available to science and engineering applications, and provide
complementary capabilities that can have a significant impact on a range of
applications. As a result, this research can have a significant impact on a
diverse set of application domains by identifying new paradigms and practices
that can make effective use of a hybrid ACI to accelerate science. Furthermore,
the results of this research will provide resource providers information about
how to best meet the needs of science and engineering applications and how
current ACI can achieve broader accessibility and higher efficiencies and
productivity. The development of human resources, including the training of
students, researchers and software professions, as well as outreach to
minorities and underrepresented group, is integral to all aspects of this
effort.