* 1339325
* Molecular Dissection of Autophagy in Maize and its Roles in Nutrient Recycling and Stress Protection
* BIO,IOS
* 12/15/2013,11/30/2019
* Richard Vierstra, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 11/30/2019
* USD 1,148,997.00

PI: Richard D. Vierstra (University of Wisconsin -
Madison)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CoPI: Marisa S. Otegui (University of Wisconsin -
Madison)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plants employ sophisticated mechanisms to traffic
and recycle intracellular constituents needed for growth and development,
housekeeping, and survival under nutrient stress. One involves the sequestration
of cytoplasmic material in autophagic vesicles and subsequent delivery of these
vesicles to the vacuole for breakdown or storage. Prior work made substantial
progress toward defining the mechanisms underpinning autophagy through
molecular, genetic, and imaging analyses of a set of essential autophagy-related
(ATG) components in both Arabidopsis and maize. Of relevance to agriculture were
recent findings that autophagy is critical to nitrogen-use efficiency in maize
and the discovery of a novel autophagic route that operates in maize seeds. The
objectives of this project are to: (i) further define the maize ATG system at
the biochemical and genetic levels; (ii) provide an integrated view of how
autophagy impacts maize growth, development, and yield during nitrogen stress by
combining atg mutants with phenotypic, cell biological, proteomic, metabolomic,
and transcriptomic analyses; (iii) identify the cargo degraded by autophagy via
proteomic characterizations of autophagic vesicles; and (iv) define the
molecular mechanism underpinning ATG-independent autophagy during maize seed
protein accumulation. Collectively, this research will provide the first systems
view of autophagy in a crop plant and its role in nitrogen-use efficiency. More
broadly, this research will also generate important reagents, techniques,
mutants, transgenic lines, germplasm, and cargo catalogs that will provide a
much needed foundation to appreciate autophagy in the important crop, maize.
With such knowledge, it should be possible to re-engineer crops that more
efficiently use nitrogen and other nutrients, that better remobilize these
nutrients to areas of new growth and storage, that display improved leaf
senescence and fruit ripening characteristics, and that provide better grain
yields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a broader impact, this project is designed to
provide an interdisciplinary vehicle for training the next generation of plant
scientists using state-of-the-art genetic, proteomic, transcriptomic,
metabolomic, and cell biological approaches to study crop physiology.
Participants include research scientists, graduate students, and several
undergraduates at Wisconsin or attending the UW-summer REU experience hosted by
the Integrated Biological Sciences Summer Research Program, as well as high
school students sponsored by the Wisconsin Youth Apprenticeship Program (YAP) in
Biotechnology. YAP-Biotechnology is designed to expand the workforce in
biological sciences by providing practical training to high school juniors and
seniors through formal technology classes combined with real-life research
experiences. Additional educational impacts involve cell biology workshops
developed by the CoPI, who serves as the supervisor of the NSF-sponsored Plant
Imaging Center, related to the next generation tomographic imaging techniques
that will be refined during this project. Some of these refinements will be
developed through an Introduction to Engineering Design course project organized
by the UW-School of Engineering that will create devices optimized for imaging
maize endosperms. Free and unencumbered public access to the RNA-seq,
metabolomic, and proteomic datasets generated by this project will be
facilitated by deposition of the data at MaizeGDB (http://www.maizegdb.org/) and
the NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO; http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/) public
repositories. Mutant germplasm and stable transgenic lines will be made
available through the Maize Genetics Cooperative Stock Center
(http://maizecoop.cropsci.uiuc.edu).