* 1339424
* BP: The Development, Implementation, and Evaluation of an AP Computer Science Preparatory Sequence for Underrepresented High School Students
* CSE,CNS
* 11/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Alexis Martin, Level Playing Field Institute
* Standard Grant
* Fay Cobb Payton
* 07/31/2017
* USD 633,161.00

The Level Playing Field Institute will design and implement a comprehensive
Advanced Placement computer science preparatory course sequence within its
3-year Summer Math and Science Honors Academy (SMASH) to prepare
underrepresented high school students of color to pursue computer science
degrees in higher education. The project will to provide 345 African American
and Latino low-income, first-generation high school students from schools in the
San Francisco Bay Area and Los Angeles Area the opportunity to engage early (9th
grade) and consistently (three 5-week courses over 3 summers) with computer
science curriculum. This course sequence will adopt the Exploring Computer
Science curriculum and introduce students to the field of computer science,
while making computer science relevant to the cultural background and lived
experiences of students of color. This project aims to: (1) integrate computer
science into the core program components of the SMASH Academy, providing a
3-year AP CS Principles preparatory sequence for all students; (2) examine the
impact of a 3-year computer science sequence on the learning outcomes,
aspirations, beliefs, attitudes, and longitudinal outcomes of underrepresented
high school students; and (3) examine the impact of online AP CS Principles
courses on student outcomes and examine implications for online computer science
courses to address disparities facing underrepresented students and broaden
participation in computer science.