* 1339128
* The Angiosperm Sieve Tube System: Elucidating Gene Regulatory Networks Involved in Phosphate Acquisition & Homeostasis
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* William Lucas, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Anne W. Sylvester
* 07/31/2018
* USD 1,370,850.00

In the coming decades, our global society will face a significant challenge in
terms of achieving agricultural production sufficient to sustain the expanding
population, changing food preferences and increasing production demands for
biofuels. This challenge represents both a need for a substantial increase in
overall food production and, at the same time, sustaining crop yields under
conditions where nutrient and water availability will serve as limiting
conditions. In this regard, phosphorus (P), a major macronutrient requirement
for all plants and animals, will represent a major challenge for increasing
global food production. The basis for this challenge is two-fold. First, soils
contain P in various forms, including inorganic (Pi) and organic phosphates, and
in many agricultural soils, low levels of available P place constraints on
general biomass production and crop yield potential. Modern agricultural
practice has sought to overcome this problem through application of P, in the
form of fertilizer, and this approach has contributed substantially to yield
increases. However, global available P resources are finite and rapidly being
diminished. Second, modern crop species have been bred for increased yield at
the expense of P use efficiency. Thus, to ensure future high (and increased)
levels of agricultural productivity, plant scientists must develop a better
understanding of the molecular events involved in controlling P homeostasis in
plants. Current studies are addressing the mechanisms employed by the root
system of the plant to search and mine the soil environment for the various
available forms of P. In this project, a focus will be placed on identifying the
molecular basis of the internal signaling systems, employed by plants, that
allows for an interactive response between the soil and the root and shoot
organs to optimize P acquisition and allocation to support growth (and yield) in
the presence of limited P availability within the soil. Knowledge generated will
complement work by other research groups that, collectively, will serve as a
pivotal resource for genomics-based breeding programs, with the ultimate goal of
developing agricultural crops with enhanced ability for growth and high yield
potential under reduced Pi fertilizer application. Achieving this goal would
help to ensure that the nutritional needs are met for the peoples of all
countries. All data generated will be accessible through a project website and
through long-term repositories.

Producing sufficient food to sustain an expanding population is challenging
because of the need to do so under conditions where phosphate (Pi)-fertilizer
availability will become a limiting condition. Achieving a solution to these
problems will require the development of crop plants with enhanced Pi use
efficiency. In this regard, it has long been known that Pi uptake by the root
system is controlled by root-to-shoot (xylem) and shoot-to-root (phloem)
signaling. However, the molecular components that function in these vascular
signaling pathways remain poorly understood. This project aims to identify the
nature of these signals that function in coordinating Pi uptake and utilization
by the plant. These studies will involve the utilization of functional genomics,
computational biology, cellular, physiological and protein chemistry approaches,
to address the following objectives: (a) identify the Pi-sensing cells located
within source leaves; (b) determine which Pi-upregulated phloem sap RNA species
move to the root/shoot apex; and (c) identify cells within the root/shoot apex
that receive and respond to these phloem RNA species. This knowledge will
complement ongoing efforts by other groups and establish a foundation for
genomics-based breeding programs aimed at improving plant Pi use efficiency.