* 1339853
* Sustaining Wyoming's Advancing Reach in Mathematics and Science (SWARMS)
* EDU,DUE
* 01/15/2014,12/31/2021
* Farhad Jafari, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 12/31/2021
* USD 1,186,365.00

Sustaining Wyoming's Advancing Reach in Mathematics and Science (SWARMS) is
certifying seventy (70) new mathematics and science teachers over a 5-year
period (2014-2019). SWARMS is a Noyce, Phase I, collaboration project joining
four distinct groups to enhance Wyoming's pool of mathematics and science
teachers. The four groups include: 1) The University of Wyoming (UW) among the
College of Arts &amp; Sciences (A&amp;S), College of Education, and the UW
Science and Mathematics Teaching Center; 2) Northwest College, 3) Military
partners including: UW Office of Veteran Services, Francis Warren Air Force
Base, Wyoming National Guard, and Wyoming Air National Guard; and 4) High-need
partner school districts including: Big Horn, Fremont, Goshen, Laramie, Hot
Springs, Natrona, Uinta, and Washakie. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SWARMS leverages
and extends existing UW collaborations with the Wyoming Department of Education,
community colleges, military partners, and high-need partner school districts.
Responding to Wyoming's critical need to dramatically enhance the number and
quality of science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) teachers in
high-poverty, low-performing schools, SWARMS is expanding the post-baccalaureate
program to engage military veterans and holders of STEM graduate and
undergraduate degrees. SWARMS targets mathematics, chemistry, earth science, and
physics graduates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SWARMS provides Noyce scholarships or
stipends to undergraduates and graduates to support the development of seventy
teachers with strong STEM backgrounds as a result of military experience or
baccalaureate degrees in a STEM discipline, as well as obtainment of a secondary
teaching certificate. SWARMS is iteratively testing new recruitment strategies,
reorienting post-baccalaureate teacher certification classes, nurturing a
community cohort model, and implementing best practices in early career
mentoring programs while targeting a diverse candidate population. Up to twelve
hours of post-baccalaureate work towards certification can be applied to a
master's program in Curriculum and Instruction in UW's College of Education.
These seventy Noyce Scholars are mentored in the first few years of their
teaching careers by previous Noyce Scholars. In addition, they are supported by
yearly cohort meetings, on-site visitations, community-based blog interactions,
face-to-face interactions, and electronic newsletter spotlights and
distribution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 5-year goals of SWARMS include: 1)
Engage and nurture the UW community of scholars as partners in filling the STEM
pipeline's demand for highly qualified science and mathematics teachers in high
need secondary schools; 2) Recruit a diverse group of talented military veterans
and individuals who hold graduate and undergraduate STEM degrees; 3) Prepare 70
highly qualified, Wyoming certified, secondary science and mathematics teachers
to teach rigorous content through inquiry-driven approaches steeped in
integrated STEM; 4) Strengthen and expand innovative programs (post-bac) and
test new recruitment techniques for targeted prospective teachers; 5) Promote
science and mathematics teacher retention in high need schools by developing
learning communities to support cohort groups based on best practices in early
career teacher mentoring; and 6) Study and iteratively build SWARMS for
sustainability, replication, and dissemination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SWARMS,
Sustaining Wyoming's Advancing Reach in Mathematics and Science, is committed to
certifying future mathematics and science teachers of Wyoming in order to
sustain growth and build upon local STEM talent to develop future generations of
STEM-literate youth.