* 1339674
* NSMDS: Computational Design and Synthetic Exploitation of Earth-Abundant-Sourced Photocatalysts for C-X Activation
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2019
* Anthony Rappe, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Katharine Covert
* 08/31/2019
* USD 4,700,000.00

The NSF Division of Chemistry and the Environmental Protection Agency support
the Network for Sustainable Molecular Design and Synthesis focused on the
computational design and synthetic exploration of earth abundant photocatalysts
for carbon (C)-heteroatom (X) activation. This Network combines the efforts of
Professors Anthony K. Rappe, Eric M. Ferreira, Tomislav Rovis and Matthew Shores
at Colorado State University and Professor Niels H. Damrauer at the University
of Colorado-Boulder. These faculty members combine diverse expertise in making,
measuring, and modeling molecules to promote the development of novel, safe,
sustainable and catalytic synthetic procedures. State of the art organic
syntheses employing radical species are widely used in the production of fine
chemicals and pharmaceuticals, but the methods suffer from the need for
stoichiometric and/or rare metal reagents and high temperatures to achieve the
necessary control of molecular structure. The overarching goal of this project
is to supplant these reagents with designed molecular species - sourced from
cheap, earth-abundant metals - that absorb solar radiation and selectively
activate organic feedstocks toward efficient construction of complex molecules.
Knowledge gained from this group's efforts results in new catalytic pathways
that generate less waste via replacement of stoichiometric reagents, use less
energy than current practices, and add value to reaction products. Translation
of research products to the marketplace is facilitated by close interactions
with University technology transfer groups and the pharmaceutical industry.
Research results are integrated into teaching and outreach efforts, ranging from
green chemistry demonstrations for K-12 students, to formal (under)graduate
coursework, to new research opportunities for undergraduate students, to
systems-based training for all junior researchers. Incorporation of sustainable
chemistry practices into day-to-day lab work is a key feature of the program.