* 1339389
* GPF-PG:  Genome Structure and Diversity of Wheat and Its Wild Relatives
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2015,01/31/2019
* Bikram Gill, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* R. Kelly Dawe
* 01/31/2019
* USD 1,585,420.00

Wheat (Triticum aestivum L.) is one of the world's most important food crops and
a staple for billions throughout the world. Hidden within loaves of bread is one
of largest and most complex genomes of important plant species. The size and
complexity of the bread wheat genome, which is more than five times larger than
the human genome, have hindered development of a reference framework that can
serve as a resource for genetic studies and breeding applications. A better
understanding of the wheat genome will also give insight into the structure,
function and evolution of complex, polyploid plant genomes. Advancement of
population-based sequencing methods for assembling plant genomes will have broad
implications throughout the plant genomics community, particularly for species
with limited genomic resources and large, intractable genomes. User-friendly
tools for population sequencing developed through this project will enable
applications of this approach in the broader plant genome community. Through
integrated education and outreach activities, this project will recruit and
train new generations of computational biologists to address complex and
challenging genomics questions. In partnership with the Kansas Foundation for Ag
in the Classroom (KFAC), multi-tiered educational materials on plant genomes and
domestication will be developed and implemented in middle and high school
classrooms across the state. Through KFAC, students will be given access to
advanced material targeting Next Generation Science Standards, including
resource materials on careers in plant science. At the undergraduate level,
internships will be developed to attract non-biology students from
computationally-intensive fields. Interns with diverse social and academic
backgrounds will be challenged with cutting-edge bioinformatics through
coursework and research in U.S. labs followed by summer internships working with
European project collaborators. At the postdoctoral level, scholars working on
this project will gain skills in cutting-edge genomics along with mentoring and
international research experience. To disseminate bioinformatics approaches
developed through this project, annual workshops for bioinformatics training in
population sequencing and genotyping-by-sequencing will be held for graduate and
postdoctoral training.

As an approach for developing sequence resources for crop plants with large
genomes, next-generation sequencing (NGS) can be applied to rapidly generate a
whole genome sequence that is readily assembled into short contigs. These
contigs primarily contain the gene-rich, non-repetitive portions of complex
genomes. However, WGS assemblies have limited utility because these gene-rich
contigs remain unanchored and unordered on the chromosomes. Novel, cost-
effective approaches are needed for anchoring and ordering large, complex
genomes. Through this project, new methods for assembling and ordering complex
plant genomes will be developed and applied to understanding the genomes of
wheat and its wild relatives. NGS will be applied to segregating populations of
diploid, tetraploid and hexaploid wheat species, leveraging linkage information
to develop an ordered whole-genome assembly for each species. This approach
(POPSEQ) uses millions of genetic markers to order the assembled gene space onto
a physical framework. The project will target 1x whole-genome sequence coverage
across multiple diploid (AA and DD genomes), tetraploid (AABB) and hexaploid
(AABBDD) populations to develop high-density genetic maps. These high-density
genetic maps can then be used to anchor sequence contigs and scaffolds, giving
physical context to genome assemblies. Ordered assemblies will be iteratively
improved and made available to the wheat community through MIPS
(http://mips.helmholtz-muenchen.de/plant/genomes.jsp), T3
(http://triticeaetoolbox.org/) and GrainGenes (http://wheat.pw.usda.gov/)
databases. Genetic stocks will be made available through the KSU Wheat Genetics
Resource Center and the USDA-ARS National Small Grains Collection.