* 1339251
* History and future of coastal upwelling modes and biological responses in the California Current
* GEO,OCE
* 11/01/2012,08/31/2013
* Bryan Black, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 08/31/2013
* USD 116,735.00

Climate variability on multiple temporal scales is increasingly recognized as a
major factor influencing the structure, functioning, and productivity of the
California Current Ecosystem (CCE). Yet, despite many long-term and integrative
studies, a detailed understanding of climatic impacts on upwelling and
biological processes is still lacking, compromising our abilities to assess
important concepts such as ecosystem "health" and "resilience." To address these
issues in the central-northern CCE, the PIs have recently collated and analyzed
records of rockfish and salmon growth and seabird reproductive success with
respect to upwelling variability (NSF award #0929017). These diverse, multi-
decadal time series revealed the importance of wintertime upwelling on ecosystem
structure and function, even though upwelling, a principal driver of
productivity in the CCE, is largely a summertime process. This research led to
an unexpected discovery that winter and summer upwelling vary independently of
one another in distinct seasonal "modes", with some biological processes
affected by the winter mode and others by the summer mode. This is of
significance because the summer mode shows a long-term increase (despite inter-
decadal variability) while the winter mode does not.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: In this new project, the PIs will test
the overarching hypothesis that upwelling modes are forced by contrasting
atmospheric-oceanographic processes, exhibit contrasting patterns of low- and
high-frequency variability, and will be differentially impacted by global
climate change with corresponding impacts on biology. To address this hypothesis
the PIs propose a three-tiered approach to better understand seasonal upwelling
modes and their differential impacts on biology of the CCE. First, they will
examine the responses of an entirely new suite of species to upwelling modes,
including Pacific sardine (recruitment), black rockfish (growth), rhinoceros
auklet and Brandt's cormorant (survival), and coho salmon (survival).
Previously, coarsely resolved upwelling indices were used in these analyses, but
the PIs now will integrate winds and temperatures from local buoy data to better
capture climate variability on finer timescales. Second, they will derive a more
mechanistic understanding of seasonal upwelling modes and use this information
in combination with global climate models to forecast upwelling responses under
various climate-change scenarios. Third, preliminary results indicate that tree-
ring data co-vary with the fish and seabirds and are similarly sensitive to a
driver of winter upwelling, the Northern Oscillation Index (NOI). The PIs will
use tree-ring data to provide a 300-400 year reconstruction of the winter NOI to
assess the historical range of variability in upwelling mean and variance. This
study will reveal the past, present forcing, and potential future of upwelling
and its biological consequences in the California
Current.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This study will explore the
history, future, and biological impacts of independent, seasonal climate modes
and their impacts on key species. In so doing, the PIs will develop an
understanding of coupled climate-ecosystem change that will be contributed to
state, national, and international policy-makers, including the California
Cooperative Climate Adaptation Team (CO-CAT)and the IPCC Assessment Report 5.
The PIs will develop and test biological and physical indicators of California
Current ecosystem productivity and will make this information available for
management, specifically fisheries stock and integrated ecosystem assessments.
The project will provide cross-training for 2 post-doctoral research associates,
2 other young scientists, and 1 undergraduate in physical oceanography, marine
ecology, quantitative skills, communication, as well as the business of science,
such as project and fiscal management and fund-raising.