* 1339344
* CER: openHTML, a Scaffolded Web Development Tool to Support Elementary Computational Literacy
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2018
* Erin Knight, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Fay Cobb Payton
* 09/30/2018
* USD 457,901.00

Drexel University, together with partners at Mozilla Foundation and the
University of Nebraska at Omaha, will investigate the impact of beginning web
development experiences on learners' mastery and perceptions of computational
skills and concepts. Using introductory web editors open HTML and Thimble in
both formal and informal settings; they will engage beginners who have little or
no experience with creative computation in constructing their first web pages
and learning HTML and CSS. They will conduct observational studies paired with
testing to understand learners' experiences with web development and identify
activity patterns that signal recurring errors, recoveries, misconceptions and
competencies and will use these findings to identify markers of error and
competency in beginner's code. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Widespread computational
competency is a vital component of a competitive workforce and vibrant economy.
By lowering the barriers to comfort and competence with computing, this project
aims to 1) engage individuals who may not otherwise appear on the computer
science education radar in creative computational activities 2) improve the
tools available to web development educators and learners and 3) extend
scientific knowledge about the development of early computational thinking
skills.