* 1339927
* Improved Modeling and Measurement of the Geographic Spread of Invasive Organisms
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2013,01/31/2018
* Jonathan Thayn, Board of Trustees of Illinois State University
* Standard Grant
* sunil narumalani
* 01/31/2018
* USD 150,000.00

This project investigates the effects of wind and other "directional" factors
that contribute to the spread of invasive organisms like insects. Most
researchers who study insect dispersion discuss factors like wind direction and
human transport, but these factors are rarely included in models because of
their complexity and relative unpredictability. However, circular statistics
calculated from wind data can be used to randomly select dispersal directions
and distances. When repeated many times, these models produce probability maps
showing the likelihood that invasive insects will move to a given location.
Since direction is such an important element of dispersal, since current models
fail to adequately account for directional spread, and since invasive species
promise to be a problem for years to come, this research may be the most
significant advance in species distribution models in recent
years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These maps will help land managers that combat
detrimental invasive species focus their efforts in areas of greater risk,
saving tax money as well as ecosystems and natural resources. While wind are the
initial focus, the methods can also be applied to factors like transport along
roadways, movement toward preferred environments, and other factors that push or
pull organisms to new areas. The results of this research, including derived
datasets, maps, and computer models, will be submitted to data.gov to ensure
their accessibility by other researchers, will be explained through science
articles, and will be shared with land managers, including National Parks
Service personnel who are collaborating on the project. Over the three year
period of this project, roughly 20 undergraduate students will participate in
data collection and nearly 100 will assist in analyzing data during laboratory
exercises during classes. Most of these students will pursue environmental
careers using digital mapping technology, but many will become K-12 teachers who
will share this experience with their students and thereby encourage them to
pursue environmental science careers. The researcher is particularly committed
to increasing female students' participation in this project, since they are
underrepresented in this field nationwide.