* 1339961
* CSUDH Robert Noyce Scholarship Program
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2019
* Terrence McGlynn, California State University-Dominguez Hills Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Lewis
* 08/31/2019
* USD 960,000.00

California State University, Dominguez Hills is offering $10,000 scholarships to
30 juniors and seniors majoring in biology, chemistry, mathematics, or physics
to become science-math teachers in high-need secondary schools in the Los
Angeles Unified School District. Noyce scholarships are increasing the number of
graduates from CSUDH's science-math credential program and offer financial
incentives to attract students, a large percentage of whom are underrepresented
minorities, into teaching because many low-income, first-generation college
students face daunting economic barriers. While holding a job, they attempt a
full course load in science-math, and many experience delays. Noyce scholarships
ease their financial burden and enable them to complete their degrees without
delays caused by financial hardship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CSUDH's Noyce Phase I
was successful in reducing the time to earn a degree for students who entered as
juniors, meeting recruitment goals, retaining all scholars in the program, and
providing high-quality teachers to low-income schools. Thus, the Noyce Phase II
project retains the project structure with enhancements, which include 1) more
focus on recruiting chemistry and physics majors due to the need in LAUSD, 2)
mentoring by Noyce Phase I graduates, Noyce Master Teaching Fellows and Noyce
seniors, 3) more structured clinical experiences for scholars in science-math
teaching in CSUDH's innovative lab school and 4) pre-recruitment of interested
freshmen and sophomores through creative partnerships with community
colleges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Noyce project is operating in cohorts, led by
advisors from the colleges of Education and Natural and Behavioral Sciences.
Scholars are attending monthly cohort meetings in conjunction with a lab school
for peer and faculty support, advising, mentoring, information, and exposure to
teaching experts. Through the cohorts, scholars are linked to academic
resources, financial aid or other assistance they need. Nearly all Noyce
scholars transition into the Transition to Teaching (TTT) accelerated teaching
program, enabling them to earn their credential in one year while holding a
full-time teaching position as a university intern in a high-need LAUSD school.
TTT also provides substantial support in cohorts, leading to high retention. The
Noyce Phase II project leverages 1) the innovative, federally funded TTT,
accelerated credential program, 2) the NSF Noyce Master Teacher Fellows program
and 3) the state-funded undergraduate recruiting program for science-math
teachers. In combination, the Noyce, TTT and TEACH grants are providing three
years of financial support during the last two undergraduate years and one year
of post-baccalaureate teacher training. The evaluation is examining the impact
of the Noyce Scholarship program on: 1) Phase I Noyce scholars in terms of their
performance as teachers, their completion of the teaching requirement and their
retention in the teaching profession; 2) The effectiveness of Phase II Noyce
scholars as measured by their performance in the classroom; 3) The effectiveness
of Phase II Noyce scholars as measured by their impact on student learning; and
4) Departments and the institution.