* 1339609
* EAGER: An Energy-Efficient Autonomous Reactor for Remote Locations to  Create Carbon Neutral Transportation Fuel from Waste Biomass
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Arvind Atreya, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2016
* USD 181,359.00

PI: Atreya, Arvind&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1339609&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
University of Michigan Ann Arbor&lt;br/&gt;Title: EAGER: An Energy-Efficient
Autonomous Reactor for Remote Locations to Create Carbon Neutral Transportation
Fuel from Waste Biomass&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will develop the
science and technology needed to design an energy-efficient, compact,
autonomous, and inexpensive biomass reactor for remote locations that will
thermo-chemically process chipper-size particles (10?15 mm) into liquid bio-oil.
It removes the impediments of drying and particle size reduction [~2 mm in size]
by developing technology that will use chipper-size air-dried particles. It
enables an economically attractive high biomass processing rates that are not
possible with the current technology in a small-scale reactor. It also upgrades
the bio-oil on-the-fly by de-oxygenating it such that it may become a feedstock
in conventional petroleum refineries. Finally, the proposed distributed reactor
technology is important for soil sustainability because the minerals and ash
generated by the reactor are distributed back into the field (or forest) for
sustainable future growth. Removal of excess biomass from the forests also
prevents forest fires and promotes healthy forest
growth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed ideas are drastically different from
the currently dominant approaches in the field. Therefore, the proposed work
will provide data and develop models to provide a convincing proof-of- concept.
Due to the early exploratory stage of this project, it is high-risk but it has a
high-payoff potential.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will provide
invaluable data that will lead to an improved understanding of pyrolysis of
various shape chipper-size biomass particles and their ensembles through
extensive measurements of temperature, evolved chemical species, and mass loss
rate at various heating rates. It will also develop a unified predictive
mathematical model with decomposition kinetics and internal pressure generation
for various shape particles by using oblate and prolate coordinate systems. The
model will also provide a basis for correlating the data that will be used in
reactor design. Two methods are proposed for de-oxygenating (upgrading) the bio-
oil. These are: (i) slow preheating (torrefaction) prior to fast pyrolysis and
(ii) use of a catalyst filter prior to pyrolyzate condensation. Simultaneous
measurements of the chemistry during bio-oil production by GC and LC will
quantify the effectiveness of the two proposed techniques for getting rid of
oxygenates from bio-oil.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research addresses a national
priority area of converting the nation?s sustainably available biomass resources
into liquid fuels. If successful, it will offer a novel method of producing
carbon-neutral transportation fuels while creating numerous new well-paying
jobs. Further, this research will help restore the forest health by removing
hazardous fuel and reduce the danger of forest fires. The United States spends
hundreds of millions of dollars per year to combat wildland fires that cause
billions of dollars worth of damage to private and public property. This
research will also have a great educational impact because energy and
sustainability are very popular subjects among undergraduate and graduate
students at the University of Michigan. While only one graduate student will be
directly supported by the project, we will provide research experience to
undergraduate students by giving them the opportunity to work with the graduate
student and the PI.