* 1339179
* CS 10K: Collaborative Research: Priming the PUMP - Preparing the Upper Midwest for Principles of Computer Science
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2017
* Thomas Gendreau, University of Wisconsin-La Crosse
* Standard Grant
* Janice Cuny
* 12/31/2017
* USD 153,254.00

Marquette University, in collaboration with the University of Wisconsin La
Crosse, proposes the PUMP-CS Project (Preparing the Upper Midwest for Principles
of Computer Science). PUMP-CS will provide a two-track professional development
(PD) sequence for endorsing in-service and pre-service teachers--regardless of
their prior CS-specific knowledge--to teach the Exploring Computer Science (ECS)
or Computer Science Principles (AP CSP) curricula in their classrooms. The first
track prepares in-service teachers to lead 9th- or 10th-grade level ECS, which
integrates an inquiry- and equity-based pedagogy to convey solid CS content
while appealing to a more diverse student population than traditional CS
offerings. The second track includes a methods course, Teaching Computer Science
(TCS), which enables both pre-service and in-service teachers to add a CS-
specific endorsement to their primary certification, while continuing to promote
pedagogical reform. This CS methods course is a "missing link" preventing
teachers from earning the CS endorsement required to teach a course with more
than 25% programming content, (e.g. AP CS or CSP). The planned hybrid/online
format for TCS will allow remote teachers in "density-challenged" regions to
participate in a supportive learning community as they master the content and
methods required. The project team includes members from universities, the
Wisconsin-Dairyland chapter of the Computer Science Teachers Association (CSTA),
officials from the Department of Public Instruction (DPI), and teachers and
administrators from districts across the state. Collectively, they have the
diverse institutional knowledge necessary to drive change in state licensure and
curriculum standards, to match college-level courses at key universities to the
STEM student pipeline, to promote new content and structure for CS teacher
preparation, and to rigorously assess the results of this large-scale
intervention on teacher education and student learning. This proposed work will
lead to regional, sustainable institutional change to improve CS education, and
scalable teacher preparation materials ready for other institutions to adopt,
and its careful assessment will explore deeper questions of when and how CS
teacher preparation can be most effective, and how those lessons can be
leveraged in other STEM teaching fields.