* 1339757
* SI2-SSE:  Collaborative Research:  Software Elements for Transfer and Analysis of Large-Scale Scientific Data
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Gagan Agrawal, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 08/31/2017
* USD 400,000.00

As science has become increasingly data-driven, and as data volumes and velocity
are increasing, scientific advance in many areas will only be feasible if
critical `big-data' problems are addressed - and even more importantly, software
tools embedding these solutions are readily available to the scientists.
Particularly, the major challenge being faced by current data-intensive
scientific research efforts is that while the dataset sizes continue to grow
rapidly, neither among network bandwidths, memory capacity of parallel machines,
memory access speeds, and disk bandwidths are increasing at the same
rate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building on top of recent research at Ohio State
University, which includes work on automatic data virtualization, indexing
methods for scientific data, and a novel bit-vectors based sampling method, the
goal of this project is to fully develop, disseminate, deploy, and support
robust software elements addressing challenges in data transfers and analysis.
The prototypes that have been already developed at Ohio State are being extended
into two robust software elements: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Software Element 1:
GridPFTP (Grid Partial-File Transport Protocol): An Extention to GridFTP: an
extention of GridFTP that allows users to specify a subset of the file to be
transferred, avoiding unnecessary transfer of the entire
file.&lt;br/&gt;Software Element 2: Parallel Readers for NetCDF and HDF5 for
Paraview and VTK: Data subsetting and sampling tools for NetCDF and HDF5 that
perform data selection and sampling at the I/O level, and in
parallel.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project impacts a number of scientific
areas, i.e., any area that involves big (and growing) dataset sizes and need for
data transfers and/or visualization. This project also contributes to computer
science research in `big data', including scientific (array-based) databases,
and visualization. Another contribution will be towards preparation of the broad
science and engineering research community for big data handling and analytics.