* 1339346
* Deducing the Genomic Footprint and Functional Impact of Chickpea Domestication on Nitrogen Fixation
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2018
* Douglas Cook, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Clifford Weil
* 08/31/2018
* USD 3,347,609.00

PI: Douglas Cook (University of California - Davis)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;coPIs:
Varma Penmetsa (University of California - Davis) and Eric von Wettberg (Florida
International University)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collaborator: Abdullah Kahraman
(Harran University, Turkey) &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Legume species are key
components of both natural and agricultural ecosystems. Their importance derives
in large part from their capacity for symbiotic nitrogen fixation with soil
bacteria, enabling them to return vital nitrogen to the soil environment and to
create seed and forage of high protein content. Two decades of molecular and
genomic studies in model systems have revealed the presence of exquisite genetic
pathways that initiate symbiosis, but despite these advances essentially little
is known about genes that regulate symbiotic performance in the natural
environment. Research under this project strives to understand the evolution of
symbiotic performance in the wild progenitors of legume crops and the ways in
which human selection has reshaped this potential during domestication. The
research combines ecology and population genomics with classical molecular
genetics and reverse genetic assays to deduce the functional consequences of
standing variation in wild populations of Cicer reticulatum and its domesticated
counterpart Cicer arietinum (chickpea). Project outcomes will expand our
knowledge of symbiotic nitrogen fixation in novel ways, and will contribute to
an emerging paradigm in plant biology where the intersection of ecology,
genomics and molecular biology empowers the study of gene function in natural
and human-built environments. Importantly, the outcomes should have relevance to
both basic science and to agriculture. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Legumes provide an
estimated 30% of humankind's nutritional nitrogen, while in agricultural systems
crop rotations with legume species provide an important means to maintain soil
fertility. Despite legumes' comparative advantage of N-fixation, nitrogen
fertilizers are often added during legume cultivation and legumes are often
grown under high residual nitrogen following cereal crops. These practices relax
selection on nitrogen fixation traits and contribute in a substantial way to
environmental degradation through nitrogen runoff. Improved understanding of the
processes that regulate N-fixation in natural and agricultural environments will
ultimately enable rationale strategies to mitigate these situations. Of more
immediate impact, researchers on this project are mentoring under-represented
minorities as young biologists by participating in established high school
science programs at UC Davis and the Fairchild Botanical Garden. The project
will provide training for undergraduate students in laboratory science, while
mentoring their academic and professional development. Data and biological
resources generated under this project will be available through public
repositories, including the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI)
and through the Germplasm Resource Information Network (GRIN) of the USDA
Agricultural Research Service. Information will also be provided through a
project-specific web site.