* 1339002
* Workshop: Support to Speakers to Attend IEEE Photonics Society Topical Conference on Non-reciprocal Photonic Devices, Hawaii, July 8-10, 2013
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2013,10/31/2013
* Mo Li, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* john zavada
* 10/31/2013
* USD 18,000.00

Objective: To provide financial support for invited speakers to attend the IEEE
Photonics Society Topical Conference on Non-reciprocal Photonic Devices, to be
held in Hawaii from July 8-10, 2013. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
&lt;br/&gt;This meeting will bring together experts to discuss research
opportunities and to address the challenges associated with non-reciprocal
photonic devices. Non-reciprocal optical devices, including isolators and
circulators, are important in optical communication networks to prevent adverse
backward reflection, interference and feedback. The advantages and disadvantages
of different existing approaches, including both magnetic and non-magnetic
concepts, will be reviewed at this meeting. Members from academia, national
labs, industry, and government labs will be invited to workshop. These areas of
research are of considerable interest to many current programs of the ECCS
division. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: &lt;br/&gt;The meeting aims to
bring together international researchers from academia, government and industry
to assess the current state-of-the-art of non-reciprocal photonic devices. The
advantages and disadvantages of different approaches, including magnetic and
non-magnetic concepts, for non-reciprocity in photonic systems will be
addressed. Participation of junior faculty and members of underrepresented
groups in science and engineering will be fostered based on NSF funds to
partially cover registration and travel expenses. In addition, the workshop will
set broad directions for future research and will impact interdisciplinary
scientific efforts.