* 1339768
* SI2-SSI: Collaborative Research: Building Sustainable Tools and Collaboration for Volcanic and Related Hazards
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Charles Connor, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Rajiv Ramnath
* 09/30/2017
* USD 194,869.00

This project is focused on creating and upgrading software infrastructure for a
large community of scientists engaged in volcanology research and associated
hazard analysis. Specifically, the project will reengineer three widely used
tools (TITAN2D - block and ash flows, TEPHRA and Puff - ash transport and
dispersal) and develop support for workflows that use these tools to analyze
risk from volcanic hazards. Reengineering will encompass modularization so
researchers may easily experiment with different modeling approaches,
incorporation of techniques to make the tools efficient on new computing
architectures like GPUs and many-core chips. The workflows are intended to
tackle the challenges of managing complex and often large data flows associated
with these tools in validation processes and in probabilistic inference based on
the outcomes of the modeling. The tools and workflows will be made available
using the popular vhub.org platform. This project will help provide a standard
well managed hardware/software platform and approaches to standardize the
documentation associated with input data, source code, and output data. This
will ensure that model calculations are reproducible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
wider use of these high fidelity tools and their use in mitigating hazards is
likely to have a significant effect on hazard analysis and management. The
project will also engage in several major workshops and in training activities.
Project personnel will also engage in the Earthcube initiative - popularizing
computational methodologies, online access and dissemination mechanisms through
the VHub platform.