* 1339729
* I-Corps:  Determining Excavator Proximity to Buried Utilities
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2013,09/30/2014
* Vineet Kamat, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 09/30/2014
* USD 50,000.00

An excavator unintentionally hits a buried utility (e.g., gas pipe, water main,
electric cable, etc.) every 60 seconds in the US causing fatalities, injuries,
and property damage, that together cost billions of dollars each year. It is
widely documented that these accidents occur either because excavator operators
do not know where utilities are buried, or because they cannot perceive where
the utilities are relative to the digging excavator. The developed technology
allows excavator operators to persistently see what utilities lie buried in a
digging machine's vicinity, thus helping prevent accidents involving utility
strikes. It also allows the monitoring of working excavator proximity to vicinal
buried assets, thereby creating the capability for real time knowledge-based
excavator operation and control. The technology sought to be commercialized
attempts to transition fundamental knowledge from prior NSF supported research
in georeferenced augmented reality visualization, equipment monitoring, and
geometric proximity interpretation, and integrates them for excavator spatial
awareness and operator knowledge. Commercialization of the developed technology
is critical because accidents involving excavator hits to buried utilities is a
long-standing and significant societal problem that disrupts daily life and
commerce that can lead to fatalities, injuries, property damage, and other costs
each year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will potentially transform
excavator operation and control from a primarily skill-based activity to a
knowledge-based practice, leading to significant increases in productivity and
safety. This is turn will help realize enormous cost savings and reduction of
potential hazards to citizens, improvement in industry competitiveness, and
reduction in life cycle costs of underground infrastructure. Such benefits will
also accrue in fields such as manufacturing, transportation, mining, and ship-
building where the transition from skill-based to knowledge-based processes is
seen to be of value.