* 1339228
* Collaborative Research: A multi-proxy approach to Early Miocene community, landscape, and climate reconstruction, Ethiopian Plateau
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2013,07/31/2014
* Aaron Pan, Don Harrington Discovery Center
* Standard Grant
* Yusheng Liu
* 07/31/2014
* USD 30,221.00

Project Abstract &lt;br/&gt;Collaborative Research: A multi-proxy approach to
Early Miocene community, landscape, and climate reconstruction, Ethiopian
Plateau&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: The Cenozoic rock record contains a
rich and critically important history of varied climates and biotic communities,
and these serve as aids to understanding current and future climatic and biotic
change. While the scales are different, the deep geologic past provides test
cases against which climate models can be compared or from which they can be
created. However, spatial coverage by paleoclimate proxies is best for middle
latitudes, and quite limited for the tropics and subtropics, especially in the
terrestrial realm. This project will investigate a new extraordinary Early
Miocene (22 Ma) site where carbonaceous shales and tuffaceous sediments preserve
lagerst√§tten-quality fossils including abundant compressed leaves, fruits and
seeds with exquisite cuticular features, complete frogs with both skeletal and
soft body parts, fish and large mammal bones. These enable reconstruction of
paleoclimate, pCO2, paleoecology, and significant biogeographic data for African
flora, and perhaps fauna. The objectives of this project are to:&lt;br/&gt;1.
compare Early Miocene and Late Oligocene paleoclimate, paleoecology, and
biogeography using multiple independent proxies.&lt;br/&gt;2. provide pCO2
estimates from pedogenic goethite and stomatal indices.&lt;br/&gt;3. provide
Early Miocene paleoecological and paleoclimatological context for faunal
evolution during an otherwise poorly known, but significant time interval for
Africa. &lt;br/&gt;4. address plant biogeographic questions, e.g. a decline in
palm richness and importance&lt;br/&gt;5. test methods by (a) comparing
&amp;#948;D isotopes from aquatic and terrestrial lipids to test for enrichment
of D due to evapotranspiration, (b) comparing goethite and stomatal index pCO2
data (c) evaluating the consistency of paleotemperature and precipitation
reconstructions using methods based upon leaf physiognomy, overlapping ranges of
plant taxa, qualitative and quantitative paleosol analyses, and multiple isotope
geochemical proxies. &lt;br/&gt;Non-technical Description and Broader
Significance: This grant funds a multidisciplinary team of scientists who will
sample rocks and fossils from the Ethiopian Plateau northeast of Addis Ababa to
reconstruct past climate, vegetation, atmospheric CO2 concentration (pCO2), and
the physical landscape 22 million years ago in an integrated and collaborative
way. Team members, who have collaborated before on rocks from the Plateau that
are 27 million years old, have expertise in the study of plant fossil
identification, insect damage to fossil leaves, the reconstruction of past
climate and ecology, the geochemistry of ancient soils and organic plant
compounds, and geology. The locality preserves extraordinary plant fossils
having cellular detail, smaller vertebrates including frogs with soft tissue
preservation, and large mammal bones. The scientific significance of our work is
that it will resolve currently conflicting data regarding global temperature and
pCO2 between 27 million and 22 million years ago. Marine records show a
significant rise in global temperature between these times, but some records of
pCO2 show a decline and others a rise. Resolution of this conflict by
acquisition of temperature and pCO2 data from one region using multiple
independent sources will tell us if our understanding of CO2, in relation to
global temperature is correct. Furthermore, the modern land connection between
Africa and Eurasia was established about 24 million years ago, so we will be
able to compare the younger plant and animal fossils with those from a time
prior to contact with Eurasia. Africa?s flora and fauna was in a period of
transition at this time, and its documentation is important for understanding
the origins of modern biomes. &lt;br/&gt;Educational outreach includes distance
learning for thousands of K-12 students. This team has a history of blogs,
currently hosted by the SMU Public Affairs office on the main website, and
recently through the NY Times Scientist at Work pages. Students will be an
integral part of this project ? this team has regularly taken students into the
field and will continue to do so. We also plan to host an Ethiopian graduate
student for training in the U.S.