* 1339959
* Clark Science-Math Teaching and Education Partnership (C-STEP)
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2022
* Natalia Sternberg, Clark University
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 08/31/2022
* USD 1,130,705.00

The Clark Science-Math Teaching and Education Partnership (C-STEP) project is a
Phase I Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship effort lead by Clark University in
partnership with the Worcester Public Schools. The project supports twenty
undergraduates and graduate biology, chemistry, mathematics, and physics majors
with scholarships or stipends toward becoming exemplary middle and high school
teachers. The C-STEP draws teacher candidates from two pools: graduate students
who enter the Master of Arts in Teaching (MAT) program having already earned a
baccalaureate degree or served as a professional in a mathematics, scientific or
engineering field and undergraduates majoring in biology, chemistry, physics, or
mathematics who enter the five year Bachelor of Arts/MAT program
(BA/MAT).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A unique focus of C-STEP is the neighborhood-
based community of practice model harnessing personalized mentoring and group
support on collegial mathematics and science teams in an effort to retain these
exceptionally prepared teachers in high-need schools. The C-STEP crosses
traditional school-university-neighborhood boundaries to create a synergistic
space for the development and assessment of powerful curriculum and teaching
practice by integrating the expertise of university mathematics and science
faculty, urban teacher educators, and teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program
interweaves several strong practices and commitments to build the community of
practice approach: a strong intra-institutional partnership between the
University departments of biology, chemistry, mathematics, and physics and the
University's Adam Institute for Urban Teaching and School Practice and Hiatt
Center for Urban Education; a close partnership with a high-need school district
(Worcester Public Schools), including collaboration with a neighborhood-based
set of partner schools; teams of partner school mathematics and science teachers
working together to develop strong practice and serving as a pool of mentors as
well as an induction community; an intensive one-year MAT program with a
corresponding yearlong teaching internship; a five year BA/MAT teacher
preparation pathway; and a neighborhood-based college success academic program
for low-income, prospective first generation college-goers.