* 1339581
* Collaborative Research: SI2-SSE: Modules for Experiments in Stellar Astrophysics
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2014,09/30/2017
* Lars Bildsten, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Rajiv Ramnath
* 09/30/2017
* USD 163,586.00

As the most commonly observed objects, stars remain at the forefront of
astrophysical research. Technical advances in detectors, computer processing
power, networks and data storage have enabled new sky surveys. Many of these
search for transient events at optical wavelengths, such as the Palomar
Transient Factory and Pan-STARRS1 that probe ever-larger areas of the sky and
ever-fainter sources, opening up the vast discovery space of "time domain
astronomy". The recent Kepler and COROT space missions achieved nearly
continuous monitoring of more than 100,000 stars. The stellar discoveries from
these surveys include revelations about stellar evolution, rare stars, unusual
explosion outcomes, and remarkably complex binary star systems. The immediate
future holds tremendous promise, as both the space-based survey Gaia and the
ground based Large Synoptic Survey Telescope come to fruition. This tsunami of
data has created a new demand for a reliable and publicly available research and
education tool in computational stellar astrophysics that will reap the full
scientific benefits of these discoveries while also creating a collaborative
environment where theory, computation and interpretation can come together to
address critical scientific issues. This demand by the stellar community led to
our release of the Modules for Experiments in Stellar Astrophysics (MESA)
software project in 2011. MESA has driven, and will continue to drive with
support from this award, innovation in the stellar community as well as the
exoplanet, galactic, and cosmological communities. Educators have widely
deployed MESA in their undergraduate and graduate stellar evolution courses
because MESA is a community platform with an active support network for leading-
edge scientific investigations. Stellar astrophysics research, and all the
communities that rely on stellar astrophysics, will be significantly enhanced by
sustaining innovative development of MESA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
supports the Modules for Experiments in Stellar Astrophysics (MESA) software
project and user community. MESA solves the 1D fully coupled structure and
composition equations governing stellar evolution. It is based on an implicit
finite difference scheme with adaptive mesh refinement and sophisticated
timestep controls; state-of-the-art modules provide equation of state, opacity,
nuclear reaction rates, element diffusion, boundary conditions, and changes to
the mass of the star. MESA is an open source library that employs contemporary
numerical approaches, supports shared memory parallelism based on OpenMP, and is
written with present and future multi-core and multi-thread architectures in
mind. MESA combines the robust, efficient, thread-safe numerical and physics
modules for simulations of a wide range of stellar evolution scenarios ranging
from very-low mass to massive stars. Innovations in MESA and its domain of
applicability continues to grow, just recently extended to include giant
planets, oscillations, and rotation. This project will sustain MESA as a key
piece of software infrastructure for stellar astrophysics while building new
scientific and educational networks.