* 1339070
* I-Corps:  Commercial potential for diagnostics and a vaccine targeting epidemic Aeromonas hydrophila
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2013,10/31/2014
* Mark Liles, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 10/31/2014
* USD 50,000.00

This I-CORPS team proposal will investigate the further development of
technology that allows the detection and control of the emerging bacterial
pathogen Aeromonas hydrophila in aquaculture farmed catfish. Specifically, this
technology looks at A. hydrophila-specific diagnostic assays that use 1) growth-
based, 2) antibody-based, or 3) DNA-based methods, as well as for a vaccine to
prevent disease in catfish. Researchers used next-generation sequencing to
identify unique genetic elements present in epidemic A. hydrophila. Based on
this knowledge, they have developed growth-based, antibody-based, and gene-
specific diagnostic assays specific to epidemic A. hydrophila, and a vaccine
strain that can be used for disease prevention&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Catfish
farming is an important aquaculture sector in the USA. Beginning in 2009,
epidemic outbreaks of disease due to Aeromonas hydrophila emerged in catfish
ponds, causing the annual loss of millions of pounds of catfish. These losses
have threatened economic sustainability in the catfish industry, and supports
related sectors such as the animal feed industry, restaurants, among others.
Since there are few currently available diagnostic or control products targeting
the epidemic A. hydrophila, the team hypothesizes that these technologies have a
significant impact in the community. These technologies have the ability to
significantly reduce losses due to A. hydrophila that are anticipated to
continue to be in excess of 3 million pounds of food-size catfish per year. By
helping to improve biosecurity, the diagnostic assays can be an important tool
in preventing the spread of this disease to other regions in the United States
(e.g., Mississippi, Louisiana and Arkansas).