* 1339839
* SI2-SSE: BenchLab: Open Community Tools and Infrastructure for Performance Research in Cloud, Mobile and Green Computing
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2018
* Prashant Shenoy, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Alan Sussman
* 09/30/2018
* USD 500,000.00

The emergence of large-scale Internet applications and services has driven a
surge in research on cloud platforms, virtualization, data center architectures,
and green computing. However, realistic performance evaluation of new research
prototypes continues to be a major challenge. Home-grown performance evaluation
tools that are often used by researchers are no longer able to capture the
complexity of today's real systems and applications. To address this drawback,
the project seeks to develop BenchLab, an open, flexible community
infrastructure comprising applications, workloads and tools to enable realistic
performance evaluation and benchmarking by systems researchers. BenchLab is an
open framework where source code and workload datasets are freely available for
modification and use by researchers for their specific experiments. The
framework consists of a suite of server-side benchmark applications and
workloads that represent cloud, mobile web, and green computing environments.
BenchLab employs a modular, extensible architecture that is designed to support
a range of server applications and workloads, with the ability to add support
for newer applications and workloads and retire outdated ones. BenchLab is
designed to be easy to use for experimental systems research "at scale" in
commercial clouds, such as Amazon EC2, or virtualized clusters in laboratory
settings. &lt;br/&gt; BenchLab will provide open tools and workloads for the
research community to enable researchers to run larger and more realistic
performance evaluation experiments that better emulate today's real-word
systems. BenchLab will be incorporated into hands-on lab assignments to teach
students the science and art of experimental performance evaluation.