* 1339616
* NGOs and Nation Building: Impact of NGOs on Haiti's internally displaced people (IDP) camp committees
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2012,01/31/2014
* Mark Schuller, Northern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 01/31/2014
* USD 22,669.00

Dr. Mark Schuller (CUNY) in collaboration with Haitian scholars will undertake
research on NGOs and the "civic infrastructure" that has arisen to assist
displaced peoples in the aftermath of the recent earthquake that rendered one in
six Haitians homeless. The international community responded with a generous
outpouring of aid. Over $1.3 billion was contributed by private U.S. citizens to
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) within six months. Despite this initial
funding, only a fraction of an additional $5.3 billion pledged for assistance
has been received. Furthermore, the situation remains tenuous for the remaining
internally displaced people (IDP) a year and a half following the earthquake.
&lt;br/&gt;The international collaborative team will conduct research on the
impact of official development aid on civic organization and functioning within
Haiti's remaining IDP camps. The research will focus primarily on issues
associated with IDP inclusion and civil society participation in their
relationships with NGOs within these processes. The research will be based on a
"civic infrastructure" frame, specifically asking: &lt;br/&gt;*How do camp
committees function, make decisions, involve resident populations, and
communicate with constituent groups?&lt;br/&gt;*How are vulnerable populations
and their concerns represented by official committees?&lt;br/&gt;*How is
"participation" understood by various stakeholders, and how does it shape
action?&lt;br/&gt;*How do the committees intersect with pre-existing civic
organization, such as kinship ties,neighborhood groups, and faith-based
networks?&lt;br/&gt;*How do NGO policies and approaches to giving aid impact
camp committees and relationships with IDPs? &lt;br/&gt;A mixed methods approach
involving observation and individual and focus group interviews will be employed
on a purposive sample of eight IDP camps, comparing camps with an NGO management
agency with those without as well as looking at gender parity. Proposed research
involves an inter-university collaboration blending ethnography's core strength
with a comparative frame. The significance of the research lies in its attention
to the conditions of the establishment of institutions of civic governance and
civil society after catastrophic destruction.&lt;br/&gt;The research is co-
funded by NSF Office of International Science and Engineering/Americas who
provided funding for faculty and student travel to Haiti.