* 1339756
* SI2-SSI: Collaborative: The XScala Project: A Community Repository for Model-Driven Design and Tuning of Data-Intensive Applications for Extreme-Scale Accelerator-Based Systems
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2018
* Viktor Prasanna, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Alan Sussman
* 09/30/2018
* USD 748,914.00

The increasing gap between processor and memory performance -- referred to as
the memory wall -- has led high-performance computing vendors to design and
incorporate new accelerators into their next-generation systems. Representative
accelerators include recon&amp;#64257;gurable hardware such as FPGAs,
heterogeneous processors such as CPU+GPU processors, highly multicore and
multithreaded processors, and manycore co-processors and general-purpose
graphics processing units, among others. These accelerators contain myriad
innovative architectural features, including explicit control of data motion,
large-scale SIMD/vector processing, and multithreaded stream processing. Such
features provide abundant opportunities for developers to achieve high-
performance for applications that were previously deemed hard to optimize. This
project aims to develop tools that will assist developers in using hardware
accelerators (co-processors) productively and effectively.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project's specific technical focus is on data-intensive kernels
including large dictionary string matching, dynamic programming, graph theory,
and sparse matrix computations that arise in the domains of biology, network
security, and the social sciences. The project is developing XScala, a software
framework for designing efficient accelerator kernels. The framework contains a
variety of design time and run-time performance optimization tools. The project
concentrates on data-intensive kernels, bound by data movement. It proposes
optimization techniques including (a) enhancing and exploiting maximal
concurrency to hide data movement; (b) algorithmic reorganization to improve
spatial and/or temporal locality; (c) data structure transformations to improve
locality or reduce the size of the data (compressed structures); and (d)
prefetching, among others. The project is also developing a public software
repository and forum, called the XBazaar, for community-developed accelerator
kernels. This project includes workshops, tutorials, and the PIs class and
summer projects as various means by which to increase community involvement. The
broader impacts include productive use of emerging classes of accelerator-
augmented computer systems; creation of an open and accessible community
repository, the XBazaar, for distributing accelerator-tuned computational
kernels, software, and models; training of graduate and undergraduate students;
and dissemination through publications, presentations at scientific meetings,
lectures, workshops, and tutorials. The framework itself will be released as
open-source code and as precompiled binaries for several common platforms,
through the XBazaar, as an initial step toward building a community around
accelerator kernels.