* 1339951
* Mercy Intensive STEM Teacher Initiative (MISTI)
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2014,09/30/2022
* Anthony Canger, Mercy College
* Continuing Grant
* Patrice Waller
* 09/30/2022
* USD 1,447,827.00

The Mercy Intensive STEM Teacher Initiative (MISTI), a Track I, Phase I Noyce
Teacher Scholarship Program, is a five year program designed to produce 20
certified high school or middle school math and biology teachers, each with a
major in biology or mathematics and each earning a Masters in Adolescence
Education as well as New York State teaching certification. Partner
organizations include Yonkers Public Schools, the Public Schools of the
Tarrytowns, Ossining Public Schools, and Harry S. Truman High School in the
Bronx, Westchester Community College, Bronx Community College, and Rockland
Community College. Activities specifically designed for this program include
STEM Summer Immersion Camps at the end of the freshman and sophomore years and,
for juniors and seniors, an introduction to teaching that features classroom
observations, peer teaching, pedagogical seminars, workshop development and
presentation at the Mercy College Parent Center. It culminates in a full-year
clinical residency in high-need middle and high schools. Noyce Scholars receive
intensive mentoring at the undergraduate, graduate, and induction levels. The
program puts an emphasis on community building through an online community of
practice; and explicitly integrates STEM subjects through a summer engineering
experience at the Polytechnic Institute of New York University.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The program design is firmly grounded
in the literature on effective practices in teacher preparation and is adding to
that growing body of knowledge through analysis of the outcomes of providing
intensive mentoring, summer research and collaborative learning activities, and
hands-on engineering experiences (a subject not traditionally included in
teacher preparation but one of growing importance in K-12 education). MISTI
project data is informing math and science teacher educators and other
researchers of best practices related to the: 1) recruitment of underrepresented
students into STEM teaching; 2) improving teacher retention in high-need
schools; and 3) clinically rich models of teacher preparation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: By forging formal partnerships with
regional community colleges, this project creates a new pathway for community
college students in and around New York City to become STEM educators. Project
findings are shared with partner colleges and through conference presentations,
workshops, and peer-reviewed literature.