* 1339238
* A Sequence-Indexed Reverse Genetics Resource for Maize: A Set of Lines with Single Ds-GFP Insertions Spread throughout the Genome
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2014,03/31/2019
* Hugo Dooner, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* R. Kelly Dawe
* 03/31/2019
* USD 2,073,995.00

PI: Hugo K. Dooner (Rutgers University)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CoPI: Charles Du
(Montclair State University)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The availability of a mutant
line in which a single gene has been disrupted gives biologists a powerful tool
in understanding the action of that gene. Thus, sequence-indexed collections of
single insertions are critical resources for elucidating gene function in
organisms with sequenced genomes and are deemed essential by the community to
fully exploit the maize genome sequence. It has recently become feasible to
combine high-throughput sequencing with multi-dimensional pooling strategies to
sequence and index hundreds of new insertions at a time. This work will complete
the production of a reverse genetics resource based on the transposon Ds that
will enable the community to generate and build up a single-gene knockout
resource for maize. Specifically, the work will: (1) characterize the
transposition frequency of 78 single Ds-GFP (or Ds*) launching platforms
generated by Agrobacterium transformation during the previous grant period and
map them to the genome. Highly active platforms will be identified and deposited
in the Stock Center to complement the 82 already mapped. These platforms will
allow visual selection of transpositions from many regions of the genome and,
thus, enable researchers to create regional gene knock-out collections; (2)
generate collections of 480 Ds* transpositions each from 24 Ds* launching
platforms located on all 10 chromosomes which, together with the 9 collections
currently at hand, will serve as the foundation for a Ds*-based maize single-
gene knockout resource; and (3) sequence-index these collections by high
throughput MiSeq Illumina sequencing of 3-D DNA pools. To this end, a specific
software package (InsertionMapper) was developed to extract Ds* transposon
junctions from the large amount of sequencing data and map them to the maize
genome.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will integrate high throughput
sequencing at Rutgers with bioinformatic sequence analysis at Montclair State
University, a predominantly undergraduate institution in NJ. MSU students will
annotate all Ds*-adjacent sequences generated by the NextGen sequencer. The
project will provide informatics and molecular biology students at that
institution with the opportunity to participate directly in maize research and
fulfill their independent research requirement for graduation. Students at both
Rutgers and MSU will work in the project as summer interns in the molecular
biology lab and maize genetics nursery of the PI. The PI and coPI are members of
underrepresented groups and have a record of fruitful prior collaborations. They
have collaborated in previous NSF PGRP-funded projects which led to the
development of a bioinformatics tool and the publication of three joint papers.
About a third of the Genomics students participating in the project at MSU are
members of underrepresented minorities. MSU has added the research opportunity
from this project to its outreach campaign to attract and retain minority high
school graduates. This project is relevant to U.S. agriculture in that it deals
with maize, the most important American crop today. It addresses a critical need
in that it will deliver a sequence-indexed reverse genetics resource, considered
essential for researchers to fully exploit the maize genome sequence. All data
will be made available through a web-searchable database of insertion site
sequences (http://www.acdsinsertions.org/) that are cross-referenced to ~10000
seed stocks available from the Maize Genetics Cooperation Stock Center
(http://maizecoop.cropsci.uiuc.edu). All relevant information from this project
will be accessible through http://www.acdsinsertions.org/ and long-term through
MaizeGDB (http://www.maizegdb.org).