* 1339601
* Exemplary Mathematics Educators for High-need Schools
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2020
* Chi-Keung Cheung, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 08/31/2020
* USD 1,602,928.00

This project is supporting two programs at Boston College to address the need
for highly qualified mathematics teachers in high-need school districts. The
Boston College Department of Teacher Education (The Lynch School of Education)
and Department of Mathematics (College of Arts and Sciences), working together
with the non-profit Math for America (MfA) Boston and with colleagues at Boston
University and Education Development Center, are offering a Teaching Fellow (TF)
program and a Master Teaching Fellow (MTF) program. Two highly select groups of
preservice high school teachers (Teaching Fellows) are participating in a five-
year integrated program of study that includes a one-year Master of Science in
Teaching and systematic professional development over a four-year period during
their formative years as new teachers in Boston and Framingham school districts.
The project provides an integrated curriculum that seamlessly interweaves
content, pedagogical content knowledge, and pedagogy. The Teaching Fellowship
program is grounded in research and based on prior successful models of
mathematics teacher preparation that have a high teacher retention rate in urban
districts. Eight experienced teachers (Master Teaching Fellows) from the high-
need school districts of Boston and Framingham are involved in mentoring the
Teaching Fellows and are participating in the mathematics professional and
curriculum development seminars and workshops. With the support of their school
districts, the MTFs, in close liaison with mathematicians and mathematics
educators, are assuming leadership roles in reforming mathematics teaching and
learning. The goals of the project are to: 1) Increase the output of the current
Masters level mathematics teacher preparation program at Boston College by
preparing eight Teaching Fellows (TFs) to become excellent mathematics teachers
for high-need schools; 2) Recruit and support eight outstanding practicing
teachers (Master Teaching Fellow) in mathematics from high-need school districts
to become highly qualified instructional leaders and mentors; and 3) Build a
strong and lasting professional community of mathematicians, mathematics
educators and teachers in the greater Boston area by combining the resources of
Boston College, MfA Boston and the EDC and to develop the long-term
infrastructure neccessary to support this community.