* 1339666
* NRI-Small: A Novel Light-weight Cable-driven Active Leg Exoskeleton (C-ALEX) for Training of Human Gait
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2013,09/30/2018
* Sunil Agrawal, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Reid Simmons
* 09/30/2018
* USD 659,000.00

Motorized exoskeletal orthoses are being actively researched today for gait
training of stroke patients. These machines are typically designed to apply
assistive/resistive forces on the impaired leg to help human subjects to improve
walking, similar to what therapists do during training. While a number of such
machines have been developed and used for gait training, these studies have only
yielded "mixed" results in benefiting stroke patients clinically. The reasons
for these disappointing results are the high inertia of the mechanisms, a mis-
match in constraints between human and machine, and misalignment of the
mechanism joints with the human joints. The proposed work investigates a novel
and ground-breaking design of a cable driven exoskeleton to address these
shortcomings. Based on extensive study of mechanisms and therapeutic control
methods, cables will actuate the moving limbs and will also serve as structural
members in tension. The design will consist of an inertial fixed cuff attached
to the pelvis and three lightweight cuffs on the thigh, shank, and foot of each
leg. This results in an order-of-magnitude reduction in the inertia of the links
and eliminates rigid joints which, in turn, eliminates the mis-match and
misalignment. Yet, the fact that cables can only pull and not push raises many
scientific and design challenges that will be addressed theoretically and
experimentally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Each year, about 700,000
people in the U.S. have an incidence of a stroke and currently there are 4.5
million people in the U.S. living with the after-effects of stroke. This
research can directly impact the quality of life of these individuals with
potentially better rehabilitative equipment and better rehabilitative results
for retraining of their gait. This project will broaden the application of
cable-driven robots to the emerging field of "neuro-rehabilitation" and
"functional learning." This project will also involve close co-operation with
Professor Clement Gosselin's research group at Laval University, who along with
the PI, is credited with fundamental developments to the field of "cable
robots." The project will also encourage undergraduate involvement in research
as well as provide training and examples for a high school teacher/student to
incorporate into the local curriculum. The PI has active links with high schools
through a college-wide NSF-funded RET program. Several high school teachers and
students have worked in the PI's laboratory to identify technologies to improve
quality of life of neural impaired subjects.