* 1339332
* The Genetic Architecture of Tillering in Panicoid Cereals
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2014,02/29/2020
* George Chuck, Oklahoma State University
* Continuing Grant
* R. Kelly Dawe
* 02/29/2020
* USD 3,179,347.00

PI: Andrew Doust (Oklahoma State University - Stillwater)&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;CoPIs: Julie Angle (Oklahoma State University - Stillwater), George
Chuck (University of California - Berkeley), Jennifer Hawkins (West Virginia
University - Morgantown), and Clint Whipple (Brigham Young University -
Provo)&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Tillers are axillary branches that are initiated at
the base of the grass plant and that create the characteristic tufted form of
most grasses. They play important roles in grain yield and biomass accumulation,
and understanding the genetic signals that regulate the number, size and
fertility of tillers is of critical importance for optimizing yield potential in
the world's major food, animal feed and biofuel grass crops. In addition, the
initiation of tillers is important for perenniality in many grasses, and as
such, full knowledge of the tillering pathway will contribute to the development
of perennial biofuel and grain crops. The panicoid grasses are immensely
important for all of these uses, and the full suite of genes that comprise the
tillering pathway and the components that have been selected during
domestication are largely unknown. This project exploits evolutionary variation
and changes during domestication in three panicoid cereals (maize, sorghum and
foxtail millet) and their wild, highly tillered ancestors to uncover the genetic
regulation and evolutionary modification of tillering. Forward and reverse
genetic approaches and transcriptomic analysis in both ancestral and
domesticated backgrounds will provide insight into the gene networks necessary
for growth and development of tillers in panicoid grasses. It is anticipated
that the results from this comparative project will extend to and inform
experiments across a wide range of agronomically important
taxa.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to training postdoctoral associates and
graduate and undergraduate students, this project aims to immerse high school
science teachers from rural schools and from areas serving high proportions of
underrepresented student populations in a research environment that will be
combined with professional development activities. This immersion experience
will help educators gain an explicit view of how scientific knowledge is
generated and will assist with their own curriculum development. They will
implement this new content knowledge and pedagogical skills into their existing
curriculum, mentoring students and preservice teachers in student research
projects, and coaching students in science fair competitions. Scientific
findings and educational outreach experiences will be shared at science and
education conferences and through publication in scientific and practitioner
journals. All data produced in this project will be accessible through a project
website (http://tillering.okstate.edu) and long-term through public repositories
including GenBank, Gramene, MaizeGDB and PLEXdb. Curriculum materials and lesson
plans will be made available as they are produced at
http://tillering.okstate.edu. Germplasm resources will be available upon request
or through the Maize Genetics Cooperation Stock Center
(http://maizecoop.cropsci.uiuc.edu).