* 1339104
* CS 10K: Educational Media to Advance Computer Science (EMACS)
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2016
* Richard Hudson, Twin Cities Public Television
* Standard Grant
* Janice Cuny
* 12/31/2016
* USD 250,000.00

Twin Cities Public TV pilot project--Educational Media to Advance Computer
Science (EMACS)--is a collaboration of Twin Cities Public Television (tpt), the
Department of Computer Science at Carleton College, and the STEM Education
Center at the University of Minnesota. The goal of the pilot project is to
establish the effectiveness of a media-based instructional model to enhance high
school computer science teachers' content and pedagogical knowledge and ability
to teach Advanced Placement® Computer Science Principles (AP® CSP). The EMACS
Pilot will involve students in a media-enhanced exploration of infrastructure
systems to increase their awareness and understanding of real-world applications
of computer science and the importance of computational thinking in everyday
life. Deliverables will include a standards- aligned, media-based supplementary
curriculum module that promotes inquiry-driven investigation of how computer
science is applied to infrastructure systems, a detailed outline of a teacher
professional development (PD) program, a wireframe model of an online
environment for the teacher PD experience, and a formative evaluation on the
appeal and educational impact of the module on students and their teachers.

The alignment of the pilot module with the concepts and computational thinking
practices that comprise the AP CSP course will be facilitated by active
involvement with representatives from the College Board, the AP CSP course
development team, and an external project advisory group. A selection of the
seven "Big Ideas" within that framework (i.e., Creativity, Abstraction, Data,
Algorithms, Programming, Internet, and Impact) will be brought to life through
video and an applied programming activity. The project will employ the graphical
programming environment Scratch, providing a rich platform for building
simulations of infrastructure systems. Building on an award-winning track record
of using video of "real kids doing real science" as a tool to foster interest in
STEM and model scientific processes (e.g., tpt's PBS series DragonflyTV and
SciGirls and related learning and professional development tools), coupled with
the University of Minnesota's research on teacher training and impactful and
integrated STEM learning opportunities for diverse learners, the EMACS pilot
will demonstrate a new approach to support and enhance AP CSP courses. The
formative evaluation of the pilot will demonstrate the potential of the model to
1) engage students and improve their understanding of applications of computer
science, and 2) improve teachers' understanding and ability to teach core AP CSP
principles.