* 1339629
* Collaborative Research: Physical Drivers of Equivalent Temperature Variability
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2013,02/28/2015
* Sara Pryor, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 02/28/2015
* USD 128,072.00

This research project will quantify historical and projected future variability
in equivalent temperature in the eastern United States. Equivalent temperature
is a metric that considers the total energy content of near-surface air by
accounting for both the dry (sensible heat) and moist (latent heat) components.
It therefore aligns well with human heat stress, which increases when
temperature and humidity are simultaneously elevated. Because equivalent
temperature is sensitive to changes in both temperature and humidity, variations
in equivalent temperature can reflect processing occurring across a range of
scales from global to regional. The objective of this project is to diagnose and
attribute historical changes in equivalent temperature to processes occurring at
the regional scale (e.g. changes in humidity resulting from soil moisture
anomalies), the synoptic scale (e.g. changes in temperature and humidity
associated with changes in the atmospheric circulation), and the global scale
(e.g. changes in temperature and humidity associated with changes in radiative
forcing from greenhouse gases). The project will investigate these processes
within coupled atmosphere ocean general circulation models and regional climate
models in the context of developing 21st-century equivalent temperature
projections.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will address research needs
identified in the National Climate Assessment process: to better understand
atmospheric responses to atmospheric composition change and to improve
understanding of atmospheric changes that may threaten human health and well-
being. Equivalent temperature variability has not been previously considered in
terms of multiple scales of influence. Attributing variations in equivalent
temperature to the underlying processes across the spatial scales at which they
act will allow exploration of mechanistic understanding of equivalent
temperature tendencies in the historical record. Downscaling atmosphere ocean
general circulation models using statistical and dynamical approaches with
knowledge of the driving processes will allow the researchers to develop the
best available projections of future equivalent temperature output and to
contextualize those projections within a rigorous understanding of drivers of
historical change. The results of the project will have broad implications for
climate change adaptation and planning, because changes in equivalent
temperature and its components may be critical for both human health and
agriculture this century. Project results will be institutionally archived and
made available to the research community. The project provides support for
multiple graduate students at each institution, and thus contributes to
development of the next generation of geographers and atmospheric scientists.