* 1339844
* SI2-SSE: Multiscale Software for Quantum Simulations in Materials Design, Nano Science and Technology
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Carl Kelley, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Rajiv Ramnath
* 08/31/2017
* USD 500,000.00

The emergence of petascale computing platforms brings unprecedented
opportunities for transformational research through simulation. However, future
breakthroughs will depend on the availability of high-end simulation software,
which will fully utilize these unparalleled resources and provide the long-
sought third avenue for scientific progress in key areas of national interest.
This award will deliver a set of open source petascale quantum simulation tools
in the broad areas of materials design, nano science and nanotechnology.
Materials prediction and design are key aspects to the recently created
Materials Genome initiative, which seeks to "deploy advanced materials at least
twice as fast, at a fraction of the cost." Computational materials design is the
critical aspect of that initiative, which relies on computation guiding
experiments. The outcomes of the latter will in turn lead to follow-up
computation in an iterative feedback loop. Nanoscience, which studies properties
of materials and processes on fundamental scale of nanometers, promises
development of materials and systems with radically new properties. However, the
nanoscale properties are hard to measure and even harder to predict
theoretically. Only simulations that can fully account for the complexity and
variability at that fundamental scale stand a chance of predicting and utilizing
the macroscopic properties that emerge. This truly requires petascale resources
and efficient petascale software tools.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This award will
develop software tools build on the real-space multigrid (RMG) software suite
and distribute them to the national user community. The RMG code already scales
to 128,000 CPU cores and 18,000 GPU nodes. The award will further enhance RMG
through development of new iterative methods with improved convergence,
optimization of additional modules for existing and new petascale computing
platforms, and creation of ease-to-use interfaces to the main codes. Workshops
in RMG usage will be conducted at XSEDE workshops and other meetings of NSF
supercomputing centers. RMG will be distributed through a web portal, which will
also contain user forums and video tutorials, recorded at live user sessions. A
library of representative examples for the main petascale platforms will be
maintained. RMG will enable quantum simulations of unprecedented size, enabling
studies of the building blocks of functional nano or bio-nano structures, which
often involve thousands of atoms and must be described with the requisite
fidelity. The development of petascale quantum simulation software and its user
community will lead to cross-fertilization of ideas both within and across
fields. Students and postdocs trained in this area will have significant
opportunities for advancement and making substantial impact on their own.