* 1339245
* CS 10K: Leading the Way to CS10K: Assessing a Just-in-Time Professional Development Approach for Teacher Knowledge Growth in Computer Science
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2013,12/31/2014
* John Korb, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Janice Cuny
* 12/31/2014
* USD 1,152,669.00

Purdue University, in partnership with Project Lead the Way (PLTW), proposes a
project entitled "Leading the Way to CS10K: Assessing a Just-in-Time
Professional Development Approach for Teacher Knowledge Growth in Computer
Science." The project will (i) develop and implement a high-quality professional
development approach that incorporates face-to-face training coupled with
continuous online just-in-time support at a large-scale; and (ii) assess the
effectiveness of that professional development at improving teachers' Knowledge,
Skills, and Attitudes (KSAs) for teaching computer science. PLTW is a non-profit
organization that has successfully implemented innovative and rigorous STEM
curriculum in over 4,700 schools and trained 10,500 STEM teachers across the
United States. PLTW is introducing a new Computer Science and Software
Engineering (CSE) course, which aligns with the CS Principles framework. The CSE
course aims to develop students' computational thinking and introduce
computational tools that foster creativity. The large network of schools
implementing this new course provides the opportunity to implement and study
professional development for a large number of teachers, including teachers with
little CS background. This large-scale project will establish an evidence-based
professional development program to improve teachers' knowledge to teach
computer science, and it will deliver empirically validated best practices for
providing computer science professional development to teachers, especially
those with limited computer science background.