* 1339469
* Interactions Between Squall Lines and Isolated Supercell Thunderstorms via Storm-Generated Perturbations to the Local Environment
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2018
* Adam French, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 07/31/2018
* USD 317,372.00

The goal of this research award is to determine how quasi-linear convective
systems (squall lines) and supercell thunderstorms interact by modifying their
local environments when the two are in close proximity. A combination of
observational techniques and numerical simulations will be utilized to: 1)
identify common changes to storm structure and intensity that occur as a result
of the proximity between the two storm types, and 2) relate these changes to
specific environmental perturbations induced by the storms themselves. To date
there has been extensive study on the role that background environmental
parameters such as instability and wind shear play in modulating convective
storm organization and intensity, but it is unclear how storm-generated
perturbations to these parameters may influence neighboring convective storms.
This represents an important gap in the knowledge base as widespread severe
weather outbreaks often see multiple storm types (e.g., squall lines and
supercells) evolving in close proximity to one another. Improving our
understanding of how these storms interact will provide forecasters with a
better idea of what to expect when issuing short-term forecasts and severe
weather warnings.

Intellectual Merit: As the forecasting community seeks to improve severe
weather warnings through new programs such as the Warn on Forecast Initiative,
one of the key challenges to overcome is to improve the current understanding of
local-scale environmental heterogeneity and its effect on severe thunderstorm
evolution. The study will address this challenge by examining the role that
localized, storm-induced perturbations to the environment play in modulating
severe storm organization and intensity. The results of the work will be used to
develop conceptual models to help forecasters understand and anticipate the
effects of storm-induced environmental heterogeneity, despite not being able to
observe these perturbations directly. Furthermore, much of what is known about
convective storm dynamics comes from studies of thunderstorms or convective
systems under comparatively "well-behaved" conditions. By investigating how
multiple storms interact, the research will be significant as it will provide a
test as to whether these generalized conceptual models apply when multiple
storms are interacting.

Broader Impacts: The "big picture" goal for this research project is to improve
short-term severe weather forecasts by improving the understanding of how squall
lines and supercell thunderstorms interact. This should lead to more accurate
and specific severe weather warnings, and thus a more effective means of
protecting life and property during severe weather outbreaks. The project will
support two graduate students over the course of the project. In doing so, the
project will further the integration of research and education, engaging the
students and providing them with valuable first-hand research experience.
Results will be disseminated through presentations at national and regional
conferences as well as through peer-reviewed journal articles. Additionally, the
PI plans to incorporate data and examples into his regular coursework at the
South Dakota School of Mines and Technology.