* 1339597
* NSMDS: Molecular Design, Synthesis and Characterization of Green Glycolipid Surfactants
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2013,05/31/2019
* Robin Polt, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Katharine Covert
* 05/31/2019
* USD 4,500,000.00

With this award, the NSF Division of Chemistry and the Environmental Protection
Agency, through a program of Networks for Sustainable Molecular Design and
Synthesis, support Professors Jeanne Pemberton, Walter Klimecki, Raina Maier,
Robin Polt, and Steven Schwartz in establishing the Network for Bio-inspired
Surfactants (NeBiS) at the University of Arizona. This network combines the
scientific expertise of four chemists, an environmental microbiologist, and a
toxicologist to systematically design, synthesize, and characterize a wide array
of new glycolipid surfactants. The recent discovery of a versatile, green
synthesis of glycolipids is being leveraged to explore the synthesis of target
glycolipids identified by computational methods to possess excellent surfactant
properties in solution and at surfaces. The synthetic strategy involves
univariate green metrics as quantitative benchmarks for assessment of
improvements, including the use of renewable reagents from natural resources.
Solution aggregation behavior of surfactants is characterized with a
comprehensive suite of techniques to determine critical micelle concentration
and aggregate shape and size, in part in collaboration with the National Center
for Neutron Research at the National Institute for Standards and Technology
(NIST). The biodegradability of surfactants is determined, and the toxicity
screening of potential candidates is carried out by a variety of chemical and
biological assays. Attractive targets are screened in an in vitro model of
ocular irritation. This effort will provide new insight into surfactant
structure-function relationships and drive advances in molecular design.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Surfactants are compounds that lower the surface tension
of a liquid, the interfacial tension between two liquids or the interfacial
tensions between a liquid and a solid. Surfactants may act as detergents,
wetting agents, emulsifiers, foaming agents and dispersants. These critical,
ubiquitous chemicals are present in many consumer products and industrial
processes, with a multi-billion-dollar market. The toxicity of many conventional
synthetic surfactants as well as their persistence in the environment are
driving regulatory and consumer pressure to develop greener and more sustainable
alternatives.. The ubiquity of surfactants coupled with emerging concerns about
their long-term environmental impacts, present a compelling opportunity for
advances in molecular design and synthesis of green surfactants, particularly
ones based upon renewable materials. While tackling this problem, the Network
for Bio-inspired Surfactants is developing significant education and outreach
activities. This multidisciplinary effort is a platform for the cross-
disciplinary training of a broad spectrum of researchers, from postdoctoral
researchers through high school students. Graduate students are co-mentored
whenever feasible and are required to include a cross-disciplinary component in
their research. Several graduate students participate in semester-long
internships with collaborators at NIST. In addition to engaging high school
teachers and students in research, new curricular materials focused on green
chemistry are being developed with content targeted to undergraduate and high
school levels. Outreach activities target K-12 students through the local
Science Center, and the local community is engaged more broadly to learn about
surfactants and green chemistry through the participation of the investigators
in Science Caf√©s.