* 1339947
* Virginia Teach, Phase II: A Community-Based Approach to Serving Mathematics Students in Need
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2019
* Anderson Norton, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Richardson
* 08/31/2019
* USD 800,000.00

The intellectual merit of this Phase II Noyce project builds on the success of a
previous project, which supported 30 Noyce scholars, with some now entering
their fourth year of professional teaching. This Phase II project is supporting
an additional 25 talented students who are training to become secondary
mathematics teachers in high-need school districts. The Virginia Teach project
expands the number of school district partnerships to better serve high-need
schools in both urban and rural districts. New partnerships with local community
colleges are supporting this goal by helping the project recruit scholars from
the high-need districts in which they may serve. In addition to the scholarship
support that this project provides, it also fosters vibrant clusters of field
experience and professional teaching placements with ongoing support for these
professional communities. The project is continuing to monitor and evaluate
Phase I scholars as well as those being added in Phase II, providing
longitudinal data on the preparation and success of scholars as they enter
professional teaching. Thus, Virginia Teach is conducting research that
contributes to the knowledge base related to recruiting and training teachers to
work with students in high-need districts. Accordingly, this project is
answering questions such as, "What elements of mathematics certification
programs best support undergraduates' transitions from students to
teachers?"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Besides providing well-prepared math teachers
for high-need school districts, the intellectual merit of this project also
derives from the newly forged partnerships with school districts and community
colleges. Such partnerships have resulted in a new, collaborative student
project focused on how to best serve ESL mathematics students. Further, the
partnerships with local school districts have broader impacts through
permanently improving the certification program at Virginia Tech. The
partnerships with local community colleges are expected to lead to permanent
recruitment pipelines. Finally, presentations at mathematics teacher conferences
and publications in peer-reviewed journals are planned in order to disseminate
lessons learned.