* 1339222
* RUI: Comparative Transcriptomic and Proteomic Analysis of Phytochrome Responses in Tomato
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2014,01/31/2021
* Andreas Madlung, University of  Puget Sound
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 01/31/2021
* USD 1,020,208.00

PI: Andreas Madlung (University of Puget Sound)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Senior
Collaborators: Lars Tomanek (California Polytechnical University - San Luis
Obispo) and Lukas Mueller (Boyce Thompson Institute for Plant
Research)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plants respond both to external environmental and
internal signals to optimize physiological processes that allow them to access
water and nutrients from the ground and optimally orient their bodies for
photosynthesis in three-dimensional space. Many developmental decisions are made
within the first hours of emergence of the seedling from the ground. These
decisions are in direct response to the seedling's environment, particularly
with respect to the available light. Both light quantity and quality are sensed
using elaborate light receptor mechanisms, which translate the obtained
information into various growth responses. One of these light receptors is
called phytochrome, which consists of a light-sensing molecule called the
chromophore and an attached protein called the apoprotein. A small family of
genes encodes multiple types of phytochrome apoproteins that can bind to
additional identical or very similar molecules. These protein complexes can bind
to DNA and direct the transcription of genes, thus ultimately allowing for a
multitude of physiological responses in the plant. This project will use a
genome wide approach to directly compare transcriptional and proteomic changes
in tomato seedlings and several phytochrome mutants during early development. It
is expected that this project will reveal novel functions of the lesser-studied
phytochrome genes, and identify new interactions of light-response genes, both
on the transcript and the protein level during early seedling responses to
light.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tomato is both a major agronomic crop and a model
organism for the study of fleshy fruits. Understanding the molecular
underpinnings of light-mediated responses during seedling establishment may in
the future improve breeding or engineering of plants with enhanced structural
integrity, optimized architecture, earlier (or later) flowering, and increased
yield. Work on this project will be conducted primarily by undergraduates, and
explicitly include students currently underrepresented in the sciences through a
collaboration with Heritage University, a minority serving institution in
central Washington. This project will provide these students with research
experiences and training opportunities. Training workshops in molecular biology
will also be held in rural Washington State to enhance educational opportunities
in this remote area. Biological materials generated by this project will be
publically available from the lead institution on request. Raw data will be made
available to the public via appropriate, freely accessible repositories that
include the NCBI Short Read Archive (SRA; http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sra/) and
Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO; http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/) and the Sol
Genomics Network (SGN; http://solgenomics.net/).