* 1339477
* Conference: 2013 Midwest Plant Cell Dynamics Meeting being held June 5-7, 2013 in Madison, WI
* BIO,MCB
* 05/15/2013,04/30/2014
* Simon Gilroy, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 04/30/2014
* USD 5,120.00

Overview:&lt;br/&gt;This is a conference proposal to support a unique scientific
meeting that focuses on the increased use of computational and quantitative to
analyze the dynamics of plant cells. The conference combines keynote speakers,
oral and poster presentations, and workshops from the keynote speakers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit :&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit and
objectives of the meeting are to provide an open, inclusive, and interactive
forum that provides an effective learning environment for all participants,
especially undergraduate and graduate students, and postdoctoral fellows. NSF
funds are requested to increase the breadth of participation to include many
young researchers that have an interest in plant cell biology, students from
different backgrounds such as engineering, math, and computer science will be
actively recruited. The meeting will include oral presentations, posters,
workshop, and time for informal discussions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts :&lt;br/&gt;The specific objectives are detailed below.&lt;br/&gt;1) To
provide a unique forum for scientific exchange for the plant cell biology
community in which we provide an open and inclusive forum for oral presentations
that allow all labs to share research results. Lead PIs will provide brief 5
minute overviews of each research area to define key knowns as well as important
knowledge gaps. Student and post-doc presentations will be geared toward
teaching all participants basic methodology as well as data
interpretation.&lt;br/&gt;Ample time will be devoted for
discussion.&lt;br/&gt;2) To provide an opportunity for a diverse group of
participants to present and discuss their results in evening poster sessions.
&lt;br/&gt;3) To conduct hands on workshop on fundamentals of growth kinematics
(Dr. Wendy Silk,Davis)and multivariate analysis of live cell imaging data (Dr.
Luis Vidali,UMass, Worchester). &lt;br/&gt;4) To provide all participants with
useful research tools and ideas that will allow them to more broadly integrate
math and simulations into their research activities.