* 1339963
* Phase 1:  URI Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2019
* Bryan Dewsbury, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Karen Keene
* 09/30/2019
* USD 1,381,008.00

The University of Rhode Island Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program is
recruiting undergraduate STEM majors and STEM professional career changers who
might otherwise not have considered a career in K-12 teaching and supporting
them through their induction years. Specifically, this project supports 20
undergraduate STEM majors and 5 STEM professionals over 5 years. These scholars
are being prepared to teach elementary, middle, and high school students in
high-need school districts. In addition, 50 freshman and sophomores will be
afforded paid summer internships in STEM education areas. This project
collaborates with five Rhode Island school districts as well as non-profit
organizations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project extends STEM teacher education
in two ways, both having transformative intellectual merit. First, using a model
based on the results of state K-12 science assessments, diverse and highly
effective field placement sites are being selected. Secondly, the Purposeful
Ongoing Mentoring Model is being implemented to train cooperating teachers as
mentors for Noyce Scholars during student teaching. This model is also being
implemented to support Noyce Scholars as new teachers during their first 3 years
of teaching. Evaluative aspects of this project will address the factors
influencing STEM majors and STEM professionals to enter K-12 teaching, factors
influencing their interest in working in urban schools, and factors leading to
successful internships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Besides providing well-prepared
STEM teachers for high-need school districts in Rhode Island, the broader
impacts of this project center on advancing discovery and understanding of
successful recruitment and teacher training in K-12 mathematics and science.
Plans are in place for sharing significant findings via presentations and
publications. This project also has implications for workforce development in
Rhode Island, a state facing a significant economic transition and one in which
STEM training and STEM teaching at the K-12 level are likely to play a
significant future role.