* 1339919
* MSUB Robert Noyce Scholarship Track Phase 1
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2019
* Stuart Snyder, Montana State University - Billings
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Richardson
* 09/30/2019
* USD 1,196,602.00

Montana State University Billings is providing Robert Noyce scholarships and
unique training for secondary science and mathematics teacher candidates to
prepare them to effectively deliver content in a culturally sensitive manner for
high-need and sometimes, reluctant learners. This effort is focused on providing
18 highly qualified teachers (12 undergraduates and 6 career changers) for high-
need rural Montana school districts on or near American Indian reservations,
where data shows low matriculation rates for STEM majors. Six undergraduates
will receive schorships in year 1 and 6 in year 2. Three professionals will
receive scholarships in year 1 and 3 in year 2. Using state science standards
based on practices that embed inquiry-based learning pedagogy, this Noyce
Scholarship Track Phase I project trains teachers to engage secondary students
with methods that keep the students interested and motivated to continue STEM
learning. These training methods have broad applicability to other rural
situations and will develop a stronger pipeline of students from these rural
schools to become STEM majors. The MSUB teacher-training program builds on six
unique courses in mathematics and sciences in combination with a Noyce teacher
cohort seminar that focuses on the needs of reluctant learners. Previous
research suggests that students on or near American Indian reservations need
greater cultural connections with STEM subjects and this program is training
teachers to frame instruction in new ways to help make this connection. This is
an important intellectual contribution from this project. To help ensure that
the Noyce graduates succeed at the beginning of their teaching career, this
project mentors them during their initial years of teaching using specially
trained success coaches and continuing professional development.