* 1339256
* Examining the Factors that Affect the Implementation and Sustainability of Exploring Computer Science (ECS) in School Districts
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Sarah Wille, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Janice Cuny
* 06/30/2017
* USD 984,096.00

The Research and Evaluation Group at CEMSE (Center for Elementary Mathematics
and Science Education) at the University of Chicago will support the CS 10K
effort by contributing to a necessary knowledgebase for CS 10K success through
the following project goals: (1) Informing CS 10K leaders and other CS educators
about the supports and barriers to wide scale high school CS education
implementation and providing strategies for addressing them; (2) Providing tools
for measuring CS program implementation and the supports and barriers that
affect implementation; and (3) Creating products from research findings and
recommendations about implementing and growing CS education. This project builds
on CEMSE's previous NSF work rigorously studying implementation of educational
innovations (new practices and programs) and the factors that affect innovation
implementation and sustainability. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will
accomplish the project goals by examining implementation of the Exploring
Computer Science (ECS) program and identifying the supports for, and barriers to
implementation in several large school districts. Specifically, the project will
rigorously study ECS implementation in Chicago, Los Angeles, and Washington, DC
with a focus on the factors that currently affect ECS use, with particular
attention to how and why these factors vary in the different contexts. The study
will focus three research questions: (1) What is the status of ECS
implementation in each site?; ( 2) What supports and barriers contribute to or
inhibit the implementation and endurance of ECS?; and (3) To what extent do
these supports and barriers differ by location and over time? The team will
employ a mixed-methods research design using data collected through teacher and
student questionnaires; ECS developer, school district personnel, school leader,
and teacher interviews; and student focus groups.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers will work collaboratively with CS 10K project
leaders, CS education advisors, and school and district practitioners to produce
findings and share timely and useful information with involved stakeholders
through publication, presentations, on-line reports, webinars, and in-person
discussions. The study will highlight the challenges to systemic efforts to
increase accessibility, quality and quantity of high school CS education and
offer recommendations to meet those challenges, ultimately helping the K-12 CS
community bring needed programs into schools, and support lasting, systemic
change.