* 1339822
* SI2-SSI: Collaborative Research: Sustained Innovation for Linear Algebra Software (SILAS)
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2016
* Jack Dongarra, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Rajiv Ramnath
* 09/30/2016
* USD 1,427,955.00

As the era of computer architectures dominated by serial processors comes to a
close, the convergence of several unprecedented changes in processor design has
produced a broad consensus that much of the essential software infrastructure of
computational science and engineering is utterly obsolete. Math libraries have
historically been in the vanguard of software that must be quickly adapted to
such design revolutions because they are the common, low-level software
workhorses that do all the most basic mathematical calculations for many
different types of applications. The Sustained Innovation for Linear Algebra
Software (SILAS) project updates two of the most widely used numerical libraries
in the history of Computational Science and Engineering---LAPACK and ScaLAPACK,
(abbreviated Sca/LAPACK)---enhancing and hardening them for this ongoing
revolution in processor architecture and system design. SILAS creates a layered
package of software components, capable of running at every level of the
platform deployment pyramid, from the desktop to the largest supercomputers in
the world. It achieves three complementary objectives: 1) Wherever possible,
SILAS delivers seamless access to the most up-to-date algorithms, numerical
implementations, and performance, by way of Sca/LAPACK programming interfaces
that are familiar to many computational scientists; 2) Wherever necessary, SILAS
makes advanced algorithms, numerical implementations and performance
capabilities available through new interface extensions; and 3) SILAS provides a
well engineered conduit through which new discoveries at the frontiers of
research in these areas can be channeled as quickly as possible to all the
application communities that depend on high performance linear algebra. The
improvements and innovations included in SILAS derive from a variety of sources.
They represent the results (including designs and well tested prototypes) of the
PIs' own algorithmic and software research agenda, which has targeted multicore,
hybrid and extreme scale system architectures. They are an outcome of extensive
and on-going interactions with users, vendors, and the management of large NSF
and DOE supercomputing facilities. They flow from cross-disciplinary engagement
with other areas of computer science and engineering, anticipating the demands
and opportunities of new architectures and programming models. And finally, they
come from the enthusiastic participation of the research community in developing
and offering enhanced versions of existing Sca/LAPACK
codes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary impact of SILAS is a direct function of
the importance of the Sca/LAPACK libraries to many branches of computational
science. The Sca/LAPACK libraries are the community standard for dense linear
algebra and have been adopted and/or supported by a large community of users,
computing centers, and HPC vendors. Learning to use them is a basic part of the
education of a computational scientist or engineer in many fields and at many
academic institutions. Application domains where Sca/LAPACK have historically
been heavily used include (among a host of other examples) airplane wing design,
radar cross-section studies, flow around ships and other off-shore
constructions, diffusion of solid bodies in a liquid, noise reduction, and
diffusion of light through small particles. Moreover, the list of application
partners working with SILAS to enhance and transform these libraries for next
generation platforms expands this traditional list to include quantum chemistry,
adaptive mesh refinement schemes, computational materials science, geophysical
flows, stochastic simulation and database research for "big data". No other
numerical library can claim this breadth of integration with the community.
Thus, there is every reason to believe that enhancing these libraries with state
of the art methods and algorithms and adapting them for new and emerging
platforms (reaching up to extreme scale), will have a correspondingly large
impact on the research and education community, government laboratories, and
private industry.