* 1339893
* SI2-SSI: Particle-In-Cell and Kinetic Simulation Center
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2019
* Russel Caflisch, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 08/31/2019
* USD 4,000,000.00

Computer simulations using the particle-in-cell (PIC) method are widely used for
basic and applied research involving plasma physics applications. For example,
simulations that calculate the self-consistent interaction of charged particles
aid in the development of new accelerator technologies, new radiation sources,
are used in magnetic and inertial fusion research, and help understand the
physics of the solar wind. The Particle-in-Cell and Kinetic Simulation Software
Center (PICKSC) at UCLA will aim to significantly broaden the impact of PIC
simulations by making available and documenting illustrative software programs
for different computing hardware, a flexible Framework for rapid construction of
parallelized PIC programs, and several distinct production programs. This
project will also include activities on developing and comparing different PIC
algorithms and documenting best practices for developing and using PIC programs.
The activities fostered by this project will bring together an interdisciplinary
team of faculty, research staff, post-doctoral scholars, and graduate students.
Important goals of this project include also the development of educational
software for undergraduate and graduate courses in plasma physics and computer
science and will, to build a large community of users through outreach and an
annual workshop. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of the activities
fostered by this project will be significant. A well-documented set of
components and example codes for running on large computers and a set of basic
production codes will allow students and researchers from all levels and many
disciplines to understand the inner workings of optimized PIC and kinetic
simulation software used to model plasmas. It will allow them to build their own
software, or to make independent comparisons against commercially available
codes, against their own codes, and against published simulation data. The
availability of production codes to more researchers will increase the rate of
scientific discovery. The software will allow computer scientists who are
developing tools that allow existing software to use next generation hardware to
compare their performances against highly optimized codes, and will provide new
code developers a test-bed of parallelized and optimized software for
performance comparison. Furthermore, this projet will make state-of-the-art
research software available for education, both for physics and computer science
courses, will help train the next generation of plasma physicists (in many sub
disciplines) and computational scientists. Interactive tools based on simpler
skeleton codes will also be useful for undergraduate and high school education.
Documenting examples of best practices will save graduate students and new
researchers significant time in learning how to best employ PIC simulations.