* 1339385
* Biochemical Genomics: Deciphering the Chemical Factories of Oilseeds
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2019
* John Browse, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* R. Kelly Dawe
* 05/31/2019
* USD 5,299,383.00

PI: John Browse (Washington State University)

CoPIs: Edgar Cahoon and Etsuko Moriyama (University of Nebraska-Lincoln), Chaofu
Lu (Montana State University), Jorg Schwender and John Shanklin (SUNY, Stony
Brook University and Brookhaven National Laboratory), and Jay Thelen (University
of Missouri-Columbia).

The discoveries that result from this basic research project will yield an
understanding of the underlying principles of how pathways evolved for the
synthesis of novel seed oils. The knowledge from this project may enable the
design of a new generation of specialty crops that will become the green
factories of the future through biotechnology. This project will support
numerous, interdisciplinary educational opportunities for young scientists,
graduate and undergraduate students. A video "Plant Oils Uncovered" along with
interactive science experiments will be produced for secondary school students
detailing the major role plant oils play in their life and in society.
Undergraduate students, including those from minority groups, will participate
in multi-disciplinary research projects that bring plant genomics together with
biochemistry to solve complex but exciting challenges. Information and results
will be available to the public through the project website at
http://bioinfolab.unl.edu/oilseeds. All sequences generated in this project will
be accessible through long-term repositories such as GenBank, the Sequence Read
Archive (SRA), and the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO). Proteomic data will be
accessible through public proteomics databases, the Plant Protein
Phosphorylation Database, PRIDE, and through iPlant.

The goal of this project is to make fundamental discoveries about metabolic
networks that govern the accumulation of modified fatty acids, which occur in a
wide range of plant species with hundreds of diverse chemical structures.
Evolution of new enzyme functions, together with the co-evolution of additional
biochemical and cell biological traits, has provided hundreds of potentially
useful chemicals in seed oils, including the hydroxylated, conjugated and
cyclopropane fatty acids to be studied in this project. This consortium will
integrate genomics, proteomics and mathematical modeling to provide a
transformative understanding about the accumulation of modified fatty acids in
plants using three approaches: a) comparative genomics and proteomics to
identify pathway and regulatory components required; b) enzyme assays and
mathematical modeling to define the pathways for synthesis and storage of
modified fatty acids; and, c) using the knowledge generated to reconstruct the
pathways in Camelina, a crop targeted for industrial oil production.