* 1339944
* Spatial Conservation and Investment Portfolios to Manage Climate-Related Risk
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2013,01/31/2019
* Glenn Guntenspergen, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 01/31/2019
* USD 402,537.00

This GSS/DRMS project investigates how the theory of efficient financial
portfolios can be modified, enriched, and harnessed to manage the nature-
conservation risk that climate uncertainty creates. Agencies and conservation
groups cannot know exactly which areas will prove to be the best conservation
sites in a future warmer climate; this creates the risk that land areas
protected today for conservation purposes might not end up being good habitat or
hot spots of biodiversity in the future. Scholars of finance have long used
portfolio theory to manage financial risk faced by an investor through
diversification. Recent research has shown that financial tools could be adapted
to the problem of allocating conservation investments between different parts of
a conservation planning area to reduce future conservation risk from climate
change by spreading conservation lands strategically between multiple areas.
However, adapting the science of portfolio theory from finance to conservation
is a non-trivial endeavor. To advance that science, this project will develop
new spatial conservation-outcome forecasts for the Prairie Pothole Region and
construct spatial data sets suitable for spatial portfolio analysis for two
other previously studied conservation problems (Eastern birds, Appalachian
salamanders). Using the data on those three diverse conservation problems, the
researchers will: identify the kinds of problems for which this spatial
conservation portfolio diversification is most useful; figure out how to develop
a spatial conservation portfolio when information regarding conservation
outcomes is only available for a small number of climate scenarios; develop a
method of portfolio analysis to guide division of investment between land
purchases and management activities that buffer protected areas against warming;
and explore whether portfolio analysis can be used by a decision maker who is
concerned with several different conservation goals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will yield valuable guidance to government agencies and private
conservation groups regarding spatial conservation strategies in the Prairie
Pothole Region - sometimes referred to as 'the Duck Factory' - that reduce the
risk climate change poses to future waterfowl conservation success. More
importantly, this research will develop conservation tools that decision makers
wrestling with a wide range of conservation problems can use themselves with
climate and ecological forecast data they deem to be sufficiently accurate and
that measure the conservation outcomes with which they are most concerned; the
tools will help them to allocate conservation investments across space in ways
that minimize uncertainty in the outcomes of those investments, increasing the
social well-being produced by their expenditures. The grant will train two
graduate students at the University of Illinois in spatial analysis and the
application of portfolio theory to conservation, and support four female faculty
researchers in fields where women are under-represented (two early in their
academic careers.) The project will engage and train a diverse group of
undergraduate students that represent academic backgrounds across economics,
ecology, and geography in a meaningful multidisciplinary research experience.
The results will be distributed through journal articles and conference
presentations; in addition, the researchers will communicate the results to
stakeholders directly through professional contacts in federal agencies and at
major land conservation groups such as The Nature Conservancy, Conservation
International, and the Environmental Defense Fund.