* 1339939
* Recruitment, Preparation, and Retention of Mathematics and Science Teachers: Noyce Scholars II Program at the College of William and Mary
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2018
* Meredith Kier, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 12/31/2018
* USD 959,823.00

The Recruitment, Preparation, and Retention of Mathematics and Science Teachers
project is a Phase II Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship project at the College of
William and Mary (W&amp;M). It supports twenty-seven undergraduate and graduate
majors in biology, chemistry, earth science, mathematics, or physics in
obtaining a teaching credential, as well as the opportunity to earn a Master's
of Arts in Education degree. The program model provides early experiences and
structured mentoring about careers in teaching. It includes out-of-class
opportunities and freshman-to-junior-year education course offerings to recruit
students to teaching, STEM internships in teaching and research for Noyce
Scholars, and courses for Noyce Scholars that supplement W&amp;M's teacher
education program. Three different pathways into the profession of teaching are
supported: a customary four-year baccalaureate program, an integrated "fifth-
year" baccalaureate and M.A. Education Program, and a full-time, 12-month M.A.
Education Program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Noyce Phase II project is testing
a model for the many colleges and universities similar to W&amp;M that face the
dual challenges of low numbers of STEM students entering the teaching profession
and being physically distant from high-need schools. Two issues for many
institutions are: (1) sparking and developing an interest in a career in
teaching in STEM students in the early undergraduate years, and (2) designing
effective strategies for preparing students to teach in high-need schools. In
this project, immersive experiences in high need schools develops familiarity
and provides opportunity for reflection and deeper understanding for
undergraduates at the freshman to junior level. A one-credit course for Noyce
Scholars incorporates research findings from neuroscience and cognitive
psychology to provide evidence-based, practical applications in STEM teaching
and develops the ability of Noyce Scholars to evaluate new approaches to
teaching. A practicum course for Noyce Scholars provides experiences in high-
need settings to develop competencies and confidence of Noyce Scholars to teach
in high need schools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The College of William and Mary in
partnership with the Williamsburg-James City County Public Schools works
together to refine and expand the successful program developed during Phase I in
several significant ways: (a) deepening collaborative engagement among STEM
departments, the School of Education, and the W&amp;M Office of Community
Engagement, which educates and inducts students into practical, hands-on
community service (b) developing a new program for recruiting and mentoring
diverse, qualified students for a teaching career in high-need schools; (c)
continuing to enhance the established teacher education program with special
course offerings in STEM education and in science; (d) expanding experiences for
W&amp;M students in high-need schools and settings; (e) continuing to offer
summer internships for STEM teaching and research; (f) providing student
stipends to cover tuition and fees; (g) continuing to provide follow-up
mentoring and support for teaching in high-need schools; (h) adding financial
support for Noyce Scholars employed in high-need schools during their first two
years of teaching; and (i) implementing a comprehensive evaluation and
longitudinal study, inclusive of forty-three Phase I Noyce Scholars, to provide
a rigorous evidence base for the program and publication.