* 1339009
* I/UCRC:  Center for Excellence in Logistics and Distribution - Phase 2 Missouri Research Site
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2019
* James Noble, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 07/31/2019
* USD 223,995.00

The proposal requests Phase II funding for the University of Missouri-Columbia
(MU) to remain an active site in the Center for Excellence in Logistics and
Distribution (CELDi). The Center for Excellence in Logistics and Distribution
(CELDi) is university-based enterprise providing innovative solutions for
logistics and distribution excellence with our member organizations. CELDi was
founded in 2002, with MU joining as a research site in 2008
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As logistics and distribution become a dominant sector of
the U.S. economy, the MU research site is uniquely positioned to contribute to
CELDi's ability to serve as a think tank and as a driver of the research agenda
in the field. In doing so, MU's researchers are developing new approaches to key
business problems in the logistics and distribution area and applying them to
real-world problems that are experienced by the member organizations on a
frequent basis. MU has a highly successful track record in research areas which
comprise the range of topics addressed by CELDi: Logistics, Supply Chain, and
Distribution / Production Systems. In addressing research issues in these areas,
members of CELDi and the broader academic community will reap the benefits of
intellectual contribution of MU researchers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MU has
achieved broad impact across the spectrum of organizations that have
participated. MU is committed to a diverse faculty representation and to the
inclusion of a diverse student population, and will more aggressively pursue
these diversity efforts over the next five years. MU works with various
companies and government agencies so these organizations are able to operate
profitably and keep people employed in their region. MU has also had an impact
on the lives of working people through its research which results in better and
healthier ways for people to work productively. As the MU research site expands
over the next five years, it will continue to see broad and meaningful impacts
of its research in a wide range of organizations.