* 1339901
* Recruit,Educate,Certify and Obtain New Teachers (RECON)
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2013,12/31/2018
* Lok Lew Yan Voon, Citadel Military College of South Carolina
* Standard Grant
* Tamara Smith
* 12/31/2018
* USD 1,199,639.00

The Schools of Education and of Science and Mathematics, and The STEM Center of
Excellence at The Citadel, in collaboration with the following high-need school
districts - Berkeley County, Charleston County, Colleton County, Dorchester 4
and Hampton 1- are establishing the RECON (Recruit, Educate, Certify and Obtain
New-Teachers) program to provide high-quality mathematics and science teachers
for high-need school districts in the Lowcountry of South Carolina. This Phase I
program is preparing 30 new teachers of mathematics and science teachers for
high needs schools. Each of these teachers graduate with a major in mathematics,
engineering or one of physical or natural sciences. Ten of these teachers come
from the ranks of juniors majoring in chemistry or biology. Twenty come from
STEM (science, technology, engineering and mathematics) career changers who
progress through an Accelerated MAT (Master of Arts in Teaching) program in
Biology or in Mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Noyce
scholarship recipients are benefitting from: scholarships to cover tuition cost
and facilitate attendance by a diverse group of individuals; coursework aligned
with the Common Core that provides the pedagogical skills and content knowledge
necessary to effectively educate students in mathematics and science;
individualized plans of study with ongoing advising and assistance;
university/school system collaboration to ensure placement in appropriate
teaching positions in high-need schools; support programs including
individualized mentoring by school-system educators and university personnel;
and professional development programs through the university's STEM Center of
Excellence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project is growing STEM-
related capacity in South Carolina's Lowcountry as well as the state and nation.
The scholarships are enabling potential educators from low socio-economic
backgrounds and other diverse backgrounds to go to college to pursue their
aspiration of making a difference through education. In addition, having
partnerships across five school districts linked to The Citadel provides
educators with the support they need to more effectively teach the STEM
disciplines. The pedagogical content focus of the proposal enhances the teacher
knowledge and ability of participants to assist K-12 students with diverse
learning needs and backgrounds in pursuing Career Pathways (part of South
Carolina's Education Economic Development Act) options. The project staff and
evaluators are studying the marketing, recruitment, pedagogy and partnerships
with K-12 schools and develop conference, presentations, publications, and other
products to disseminate results of these studies within the scientific,
educational and evaluation communities.