* 1339707
* SI2-SSE: Developing Sustainable Software Elements to Support the Growing Field of Public Participation in Scientific Research
* CSE,OAC
* 11/01/2013,10/31/2016
* Melinda Laituri, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Rajiv Ramnath
* 10/31/2016
* USD 493,076.00

Across the globe, citizen science projects are becoming increasingly poised to
address social and environmental challenges and answer broad scientific
questions. Although rapidly increasing in number, these projects need easy-to-
use software tools for data management, analysis, and visualization to be
successful. This project transforms how citizen science projects unfold locally,
regionally, and globally by creating software that supports the full spectrum of
project activities. It empowers projects to ask and answer their own local
questions while contributing data critical to larger-scale issues. These tools
will allow projects to announce training events; track volunteers; create
datasheets; enter, review, analyze, and visualize data; publish reports;
discover resources; integrate data; and ensure that data are contributed to
repositories (e.g., DataONE, NEON, GBIF, HydroShare, and EOL). Tools will be
made available to citizen science projects and will be delivered as reusable
software elements for use in existing websites; as website features on
CitSci.org; and as Application Programming Interface (API) services and mobile
applications. The tools will expand the national reach, local appeal,
computational abilities, visualization techniques, statistical analysis
capabilities, and interoperability of the nations? cyber-infrastructure. Using
participatory design and agile methods, the project will: (1) develop reusable
software elements that citizen science organizations can embed into their own
websites, (2) harden and expand the functionality and capabilities of CitSci.org
through new website features, and (3) extend the APIs of CitSci.org and develop
associated mobile applications to increase system and tool interoperability. The
target user communities will include citizen science project coordinators. It
will deliver customizable tools and services related to all project activities
and engage projects across a wide array of disciplines. Project coordinators
will be able to customize all tools developed to suit their specific project
needs. Adoption and use of the tools developed will create a cyber-ready
workforce capable of collecting, contributing, and applying high quality
ecological, geophysical, social, and human health related observations to solve
real-world problems. These broader impacts will help the citizen science
community better understand effective models of public engagement to ensure more
impactful application of citizen science to societal challenges.