* 1339875
* Capacity building: Preparing Today's Scientists to Become Tomorrow's Teachers
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* John Larkin, Whitworth University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 08/31/2016
* USD 161,442.00

Preparing Today's Scientists to be Tomorrow's Teachers proposes to build
capacity by developing a large-scale sustainable partnership with seven high-
need school districts, three STEM focused high school programs, the Mobius
Science Center, non-profit programs for youth, and local STEM industries. The
outcomes expected through this partnership are: (1) development of new curricula
for both a STEM track in the awardee institution's existing Master in Teaching
and Evening Teacher Certification programs and also new courses (called Step-Up)
at the undergraduate level to ease the way into graduate level work, (2)
development and implementation of informal science opportunities during the
academic year and summer to encourage freshmen and sophomores to consider
teaching, and (3) design of the infrastructure needed for recruitment,
selection, data base tracking and induction activities necessary to support an
application for a Track 1, Phase 1 Noyce
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The intellectual merit of the
development of a STEM track in the graduate teacher preparation program lies in
a research-based curriculum that spans multiple effective pedagogies from both
formal to informal. Developing skill in multiple pedagogies provides teachers
with the ability to teach well in differing environments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts : The broader impact of multiple
pedagogical experiences, being designed by this capacity building project, will
be highly qualified teachers capable of teaching in a variety of educational
environments and inspiring a new generation of students to pursue STEM.