* 1339884
* Collaborative Research: SI2-SSE: A Petascale Numerical Library for Multiscale Phenomena Simulations
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Dmitry Pekurovsky, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Rajiv Ramnath
* 09/30/2017
* USD 358,917.00

Multiscale phenomena are a grand challenge for theory, simulations and
experiments. It is difficult to understand phenomena at both highest and lowest
scales, as well as all those in between. This challenge shows up in diverse
fields. One of the long-standing problems in cosmology is understanding
cosmological structure formation. In computer simulations of this process the
challenge is increasing grid resolution while retaining the essential physics.
In all-atom molecular dynamics simulations of enzymes the challenge is
simulating systems with a large number of atoms while resolving long-range
interactions and having sufficiently high throughput. Such simulations are
critical in understanding important biological processes and eventually
designing new drugs. Another prime example of multiscale phenomena is turbulent
flows, a rich and complex subject of great relevance to many of the main
technological issues of the day, including climate, energy, and the management
of oil and biohazards. Understanding turbulent flows is critical for design of
new transportation vehicles, improving efficiency of combustion processes and
managing their environment pollution. Here simulations have been historically
limited, and remain so, due to extremely high computational cost, even using the
high-end computational systems available to researchers today. Reducing this
cost, and efficiently using the computational resources, often requires
specialized expertise, as well as significant development time and cost many
research groups cannot afford. This project will develop a powerful suite of
critical software components to provide tools for performing simulations of
multiscale phenomena. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The suite will implement state-of-
the-art techniques for reducing communication cost, which has become the most
important contributing factor to the total simulation cost, especially at larger
scales. It will provide a flexible set of features that will make it usable in a
great number of codes across the disciplines. In particular, the library will
include user-friendly interfaces for Fourier transforms, spectral and compact
differentiation in three dimensions, in addition to widely used communication
routines (transposes, halo exchanges). This combination of emphasis on scalable
performance and richness of features makes this suite unique among other
libraries in existence today. Given the extraordinary challenge of simulations
of multiscale phenomena, this library will provide a realistic path towards the
Exascale. The suite will be available under an open source license. User
outreach will be undertaken through the project website, mailing list, user
surveys and presentations.