* 1339003
* Atmospheric and Geospace Science Post-Doctoral Fellowship Program Workshop; Boulder, CO; April 21-23, 2013
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Karyn Sawyer, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Bernard Grant
* 12/31/2013
* USD 6,236.00

The Joint Office for Science Support (JOSS) will provide support to the Division
of Atmospheric and Geospace Sciences for the NSF Post-Doctoral Fellows workshop
to be held at the National Center for Atmospheric Research, Boulder, CO, April
21-23, 2013. The organizers are Linda George and Eve Grunfest, Program Directors
at NSF and Chris Davis, Advanced Study Program Director at NCAR. The target
audience includes Principal Investigators (PIs) with fellowships awarded through
the AGS Fellowship Program (NSF 11-521) as well as current NCAR ASP Postdoctoral
Fellows, approximately 35 fellows. The meeting will be held at Center Green and
at the MESA lab. The intellectual merit of this workshop is based on its
threefold purpose: 1. Familiarize Fellows with NSF - AGS and other programs at
NSF and NCAR facilities; 2. Familiarize Fellows with the research of other
Fellows in order to promote interdisciplinary research activities; and 3.
Provide professional development opportunities, including a workshop on power
dynamics in professional workplaces; a panel on career opportunities post post-
doc; an introduction to working across disciplinary boundaries with social
scientists. The broader impacts expected as a result of this workshop are
increased awareness among the audience of emerging atmospheric and geospace
senior scientists of interdisciplinary research challenges and opportunities,
possible career trajectories and workplace power dynamics and an improved
understanding of NSF funding opportunities.

JOSS is providing logistic support by scheduling meeting spaces, providing
webcasting for the meeting with NSF Program Officers in DC, providing transport
between hotel and meeting spaces and to NCAR facilities and arranging for travel
and fees for invited speakers.