* 1339198
* Maize Artificial Chromosomes
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2014,01/31/2021
* James Birchler, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 01/31/2021
* USD 2,334,169.00

The overall goal of this project is to artificial chromosome technology in
plants. Artificial chromosomes have the potential to stack genes of benefit to
agriculture and basic plant genomics studies on an independent chromosome that
can be made to specification. Procedures to add new genes to pre-existing
artificial chromosome platforms will be developed that can continue to make
amendments in perpetuity. Secondly, methods will be tested that allow much
larger numbers of genes to be added to a minichromosome in a single increment
than is currently possible. Thirdly, the combination of artificial chromosomes
with haploid breeding to introduce the minichromosomes into multiple new
varieties more efficiently will be developed. Fourthly, a test of pollen
selection to maximize the transmission of artificial chromosomes from one
generation to the next will be conducted. Artificial or engineered
minichromosomes have the potential to provide a pre-determined site of transgene
integration into a plant genome rather than the random nature of plant
transformation that is currently used. The targeted insertion will avoid the
potential mutagenic effect and gene silencing that often results from
uncontrolled integrations. Moreover, the potential now exists that many
different genes determining several plant characteristics can be transformed at
once onto a minichromosome that can be further modified and that is independent
of the normal chromosomes. With the use of artificial chromosomes it should be
possible to introduce whole biochemical pathways to add new properties to plants
that would facilitate maximizing the ultimate yield or to use plants as
factories for the inexpensive production of useful proteins or metabolites. For
basic studies, artificial chromosomes provide the means to generate chromosomes
to specification that will facilitate the study of chromosome behavior and gene
expression among other subjects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The amount of arable land
on earth has been static for some time but the global population continues to
increase. If the world standard of living is to remain as is or improve, the
amount of food produced by agricultural endeavors will need to increase over the
coming decades. Many new developments will be needed to address this issue but
novel means of manipulating plant genomes is thought to be a major contributor
to this effort. The development of plant artificial chromosome platforms and
their enhancement might help with this problem. The procedures developed should
be easily adapted to other plant species and thus can serve as a model system
for transfer to them. Training will involve diverse undergraduate and graduate
students in plant genomics and biotechnology. Information about this project and
its outcomes can be accessed at the project website
(http://maizeminichromosomes.missouri.edu) and MaizeGDB. These include detailed
information about project objectives, results, participants, publications as
well as biological resources produced such as vectors and maize lines and the
protocols used to generate them. In addition, links to YouTube videos
illustrating the techniques involved in the project will be accessible through
the project website, MaizeGDB and ResearchGate (http://www.researchgate.net/).