* 1339508
* EAGER:  Fundamental Issues in International Data Placement for Data-Intensive Applications, a Laboratory Approach
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Philip Papadopoulos, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 08/31/2017
* USD 299,999.00

Researchers in an expanding number of scientific disciplines, ranging from
astronomy to medicine and from economics, to botany, would like to move large
volumes of data across institutional and national boundaries. Placing data at
different locations expands data processing capacity, facilitates collaborative
analysis and accelerates translation of gained insight into scientific
discoveries. Yet, we have little understanding of how a complex ensemble of
interrelated factors affect the cost, performance, and resource consumption of
these data movements. Factors include the number and size distributions of files
in a data set, performance characteristics of the source and destination
file/storage systems, time-of-day/week fluctuations of the network carrying
capacity between sites, availability of IPv6 paths. This project will explore
models that capture both the characteristics and interplay of facets that are
involved in placing data at locations separated by local, national, or
international networks. Exploratory work will take place to establish
organizational and functional foundations for an international data placement
laboratory (iDPL) to support at-scale end-to-end data placement
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The iDPL will be constructed with
international partners and is intended to be an extensible facility. The UCSD
and UW-Madison team bring together extensive experience in software tools
(HTCondor, Open Science Grid, Rocks Clustering), high-performance campus-area
networks (Quartzite and Prism@UCSD), storage systems (Data Oasis), and engaged
science communities. The iDPL core software architecture is to treat data
placement experiments as workflows and then use HTCondor?s DAGMan and Metronome
continuous testing framework to author, instantiate and manage experiments.
Synthetic data sets will be offered to facilitate diagnostics. Whenever
possible, international networking providers will be engaged to correlate
infrastructure view of the network with user
experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broad and long term impact is to lay the
groundwork for a persistent, data and information sharing vehicle that can be
easily expanded beyond the initial international group of institutions