* 1339181
* BP: Broadening Participation by Building the Capacity of Afterschool Computer Science Educators: Reaching African American and Latina Women with the Build IT Curriculum
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2016
* Marie Bienkowski, SRI International
* Standard Grant
* Kamau Bobb
* 09/30/2016
* USD 657,948.00

SRI will investigate the potential of a computer science curriculum, Build IT
that successfully encourages African American and Latina girls' interests and
pursuits in computer science, to encourage these girls? educators to pursue
computer science learning and careers. Preliminary data suggest that Build IT
may increase IT education and career pursuits among the educators, who are
primarily women of color in their 20s and 30s. SRI will conduct a mixed-methods
study in both the Girls Inc. network of affiliates throughout the United States
and the California School-Age Consortium (CalSAC) network of afterschool
programs in California to understand (1) under what conditions do Build IT
educators pursue computer science learning and careers, (2) what types of
computer science learning and careers do Build IT educators indicate interest in
and pursue, and (3) to what extent is there a relationship between educators'
computing interests and pursuits, their implementation of Build IT, and youth
outcomes for Build IT. To address these research questions, the team will
conduct a study of Build IT and other STEM educators in the Girls Inc. and
CalSAC networks gathering data on their STEM backgrounds, implementation
practices, and their IT career plans. The team will examine the impact of the
Build IT educators' IT interests and career plans on youth outcomes.

This research is important for practitioners, researchers, and policymakers
interested in encouraging underrepresented populations to pursue STEM learning
and careers in general and computer science learning and careers, specifically.
While there is some evidence that teaching STEM programs may encourage
afterschool educators to pursue further STEM experiences, there is a gap in the
research on the role that teaching such an afterschool computer science
curriculum can play to activate or reactive young women from African American
and Latina backgrounds in pursuing computer science and the effect that these
educators? pursuits can have on girls' computer science learning and career
interests. This research will inform practice and research on programmatic
designs and implementation environments that encourage underrepresented
populations of both learners and educators to pursue computer science. Through
Girls Inc. and CalSAC, the Build IT curriculum and research findings and
practices can reach hundreds of thousands of middle school girls and thousands
of afterschool educators who are predominantly female and from African American
and Latina backgrounds.