* 1339412
* Structural Variation of Diploid and Polyploid Plant Genomes
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2018
* Thiruvarangan Ramaraj, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Anne W. Sylvester
* 05/31/2018
* USD 1,490,891.00

PI: Joshua A. Udall (Brigham Young University)&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;CoPIs:
Thiruvarangan Ramaraj (National Center for Genomic Resources) and Louisa A.
Stark (University of Utah)&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Cotton has one of the narrowest
germplasm pools of any domesticated plant. Although crosses between G.
barbadense and G. hirsutum can be made, introgression in either direction has
been difficult. Identification of structural rearrangements between the two
polyploids will provide the basic information that can be used to develop an
improved method of chromosome and trait introgression between the two species
for crop improvement. With regard to outreach and training, the project will
incorporate physical mapping concepts and plant genomes into the award winning
educational websites "Learn.Genetics" and "Teach.Genetics" developed by the
University of Utah. These sites will contain learning and teaching content for
the concepts of genome sequencing, physical mapping, and polyploidy of plant
genomes. In addition to the training of students and postdoctoral fellows, a
research experience that includes physical map analysis will be provided at
Brigham Young University for biology and genetics high school
teachers.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Structural rearrangements of plant genomes
contribute to speciation and phenotypic variability. Traditionally, structural
rearrangements are identified through extensive comparative sequencing of plant
genomes. In this project, structural variation will be investigated in diploid
and polyploid genomes using physical maps. Because generating a physical map for
a single species is expensive and time-consuming, strategies to compare physical
maps between multiple species within a phylogenetic framework have not been
developed. Specific objectives are to: 1) assess and validate the use of next
generation optical mapping technology to rapidly create physical maps of four
different species of diploid and polyploid cotton; 2) create additional physical
maps that represent the genome diversity in the approximate 40 different species
of the cotton family; and, 3) use these maps to develop novel comparative
mapping strategies to place structural rearrangements identified in a
phylogenetic context. All project outcomes will be made available to the public
through a project website. Sequence data will be accessible through long-term
repositories such as Genbank, the NCBI's SRA, and Phytozome. Data will also be
available long-term through CottonGen (http://www.cottongen.org/), a community
genomics, genetics and breeding database for cotton.