* 1339471
* Workshop: Spring 2013 Future Internet Architecture investigator meeting
* CSE,CNS
* 05/15/2013,04/30/2015
* David Clark, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 04/30/2015
* USD 63,812.00

This award supports a Future Internet Architecture (FIA) principal investigator
(PI) meeting in March 2013. The PIs will discuss two topics; the first is of
possible environments in which each of the NSF-funded projects might be deployed
and demonstrated. The funded projects are expected to produce a running
prototype that can be used to gain operational experience with the ideas as they
are reduced to practice. This meeting will bring together the investigators from
the various projects and experts representing various possible demonstration
environments. The second topic of the workshop is the challenge of evaluation of
proposed architectures. The meeting will include a series of discussions around
different aspects of architecture evaluation, as the projects position
themselves to evaluate their designs.

Intellectual Merit:

The discussions of demonstration environments, which will bring together outside
experts and project leadership, will contribute to a shared understanding of the
problems and issues that various user communities face as they incorporate
networking technology into their domains. The discussions of evaluation will lay
the groundwork for a methodical study of the question as to how to evaluate
architectural proposals and argue that one or another design is 'better', or
more fit for purpose. The field of computer science today has no agreed method
or approach to the evaluation of design proposals in a complex, multi-
dimensional requirement space.

Broader Impacts:

The broader goal of the NSF FIA effort is enhancing the relevance and impact of
the NSF-funded network research, intellectual enrichment of the network research
community, and the contribution of new concepts and thought leadership to the
future of the Internet. The FIA effort, and the workshops in particular, are a
means to train a cohort of academic network researchers in the practice of long-
range architectural thinking. The program has the potential to contribute to a
future Internet that is materially more secure, robust, economically viable, and
fit for the needs of society than the Internet of today. The results of this
workshop, which will be posted on the FIA website for public dissemination, will
be a contribution to this broader goal.