* 1339239
* MCA-PGR: Genetic and Genomic Approaches to Understanding Low-K Tolerance in Rice
* BIO,IOS
* 12/15/2013,05/31/2018
* Sheng Luan, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Clifford Weil
* 05/31/2018
* USD 1,893,967.00

PI: Sheng Luan (University of California, Berkeley)

CoPI: Peggy Lemaux (University of California, Berkeley)

Key Collaborators: Rod Wing (University of Arizona)and Bin Han (National Center
for Gene Research, Chinese Academy of Sciences)

Plant growth minimally requires sunlight, CO2, water, and minerals. While
sunlight and CO2 are abundant, water and minerals are major limiting factors for
crop production. Although extensive research effort has been directed to
studying water use efficiency and drought tolerance, much less effort has been
expended on understanding the mechanisms of plant nutrient use efficiency and
tolerance to low-nutrient status in the soil. Not knowing how to increase
nutrient use efficiency in crops resorts to heavy use of fertilizers, a practice
that endangers environment and sustainable agriculture. The overall goal of this
project is to provide a comprehensive understanding of the gene networks
responsible for high potassium (K)-use efficiency in cereal crops using genome-
wide approaches. Rice is chosen as a model because of its rich genetic and
genomic resources and its ease of transformation. The specific objectives are as
follows: (1) to characterize the biological roles of all K-transporters encoded
in the rice genome. As K+ is not metabolized, effective uptake and distribution
of K+ hold the key for high K+ use efficiency in plants. Dissecting the roles of
all K-transporters in rice will generate a "road map" of K+ movement throughout
a cereal crop and provide possible ways to improve efficiency; (2) to identify
genetic loci and individual genes associated with low-K tolerance in rice. Rice
landraces display dramatic natural variations in low-K tolerance and such
variations can be linked to genes using sequencing-based association mapping
that would speed up the identifications of QTLs; (3) to conduct RNA-seq-based
comparative transcriptome analysis and identify genes involved in low-K response
and adaptation. By comparing transcriptomes of "highly tolerant" and "highly
sensitive" landraces to the low-K condition, differentially expressed genes
between the two phenotypic groups will be identified and their relevance to
phenotypic variations will be scored; and (4) to integrate the datasets from
Objectives 1-3 to assemble a gene regulatory network. This transformative
knowledge will lay the foundation for marker-assisted classical breeding as well
as genetic engineering approaches to improve K-use efficiency in cereal crops
and reduce the use of fertilizers in crop production. A number of broader
impacts to society and education will be achieved. Rice is one of the most
important food crops, feeding more than half of the world's population.
Understanding the mechanisms of low-K tolerance in rice will provide a knowledge
base for breeding rice varieties (and other cereals) that produce high yield
with minimal fertilizer use, protecting environment and contributing to
sustainability of agriculture. This project integrates undergraduate and
graduate education into all aspects of the research. Outreach activities will be
undertaken that include training of underserved high school and community
college students through collaboration with Biotech Partners and STEM program to
introduce these students to modern biology techniques and knowledge with the
goal of increasing their interest in science careers. All sequence data and
annotations will be accessible through the Rice Genome Annotation Project
(http://rice.plantbiology.msu.edu/). All sequences generated from expression
profiling will be deposited at GenBank, the Plant Expression Database
(http://www.plexdb.org/) and PlantGDB (http://www.plantgdb.org/).