* 1339130
* Translational Dynamics of Leaf and Chloroplast Development in Maize
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2021
* Thomas Brutnell, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 05/31/2021
* USD 3,819,958.00

PI: Alice Barkan (University of Oregon)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CoPI: Thomas P.
Brutnell (Donald Danforth Plant Science Center)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will use genetic and genomic approaches to develop "a genome to systems-
level understanding of plant-environmental interactions" by exploring how
regulated translation contributes to the differentiation of the dimorphic
chloroplasts in C4 plants and to maintaining photosynthetic homeostasis under
shifting light conditions that compromise photosynthetic efficiency. The focus
on maize, a C4 crop plant, is especially pertinent, as C4 photosynthesis likely
evolved to reduce photorespiration, resulting in plants that use nitrogen and
water more efficiently. Thus a deeper understanding of the regulatory networks
driving C4 differentiation will aid in the enhancement of native C4 plants and
in engineering C4 traits into C3 crops. With regard to outreach and training,
the project will offer educational opportunities for high school, undergraduate
and postgraduate students. A laboratory course for University of Oregon
undergraduates will be integrated with the large-scale identification of
mutations underlying defects in chloroplast biogenesis. A program in St. Louis
will engage secondary school students in hands-on analysis of photosynthetic
mutants in foxtail millet. Undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral students
will gain mentored research experience involving cutting-edge genetic, genomic,
and molecular approaches. Finally, the project will develop tools and resources
for the broader plant genomics research community that include (1) ~6000 new
sequence-indexed Mu insertions which can be accessed via MaizeGDB and an in-
house search interface (http://teosinte.uoregon.edu/mu-illumina/); (2) a gene
identification service for putative Mu-tagged alleles; (3) functional
annotations and associated mutant stocks for ~100 maize genes that are essential
for photosynthesis; (4) improved genome annotations to be made available through
community browsers; and (5) large-scale translatome and transcriptome datasets
for the elucidation of coexpression modules and associated functional
inferences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chloroplasts are subcellular organelles in
plants that house the machinery for photosynthesis and numerous other essential
metabolic processes. Chloroplasts acquire different forms and functions in
different cell types, as exemplified by the dimorphic chloroplasts in the bundle
sheath and mesophyll cells of C4 plants. They are dynamic organelles that adapt
rapidly to changes in the external environment in a manner that optimizes
photosynthetic performance while minimizing photo-oxidative damage. This project
will elucidate the biogenesis, differentiation, and environmental adaptation of
chloroplasts by employing state-of-the-art methods and an extensive collection
of non-photosynthetic mutants. Maize is chosen as the experimental organism
because it is a C4 plant with dimorphic chloroplasts, it offers a rich
collection of chloroplast biogenesis mutants, and the maize leaf blade is an
excellent experimental system for describing the developmental progression
through which meristematic cells differentiate into photosynthetically-competent
leaf cells. The specific objectives of the project are to (1) use a large-scale
forward genetic strategy to assign molecular and physiological functions to ~100
genes in maize that are required for photosynthesis; (2) use a state-of-the-art
ribosome profiling strategy to define the translatome dynamics underlying the
installation of the photosynthetic apparatus and the distinct proteomes in
bundle sheath and mesophyll cells; (3) provide a comprehensive description of
the progression of mitochondrial and plastid gene expression during the
differentiation of photosynthetic leaf tissue; and (4) discover how regulated
translation in the cytosol and chloroplast contribute to maintaining
photosynthetic homeostasis under shifting light conditions.