* 1339403
* CS 10K: IDoCode: A Sustainable Model for Computer Science in Idaho High Schools
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Louis Nadelson, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Janice Cuny
* 08/31/2018
* USD 1,046,143.00

Boise State University (BSU), in cooperation with local high schools and the
Idaho Technology Council (a state-wide organization of industry, research,
educators, investors, and government), proposes to develop and implement a
comprehensive program -- IDoCode -- that will provide high quality CS
preparation for high school teachers. Its primary goal is to significantly
increase the number of teachers prepared to teach CS in the state of Idaho, and
its secondary goal is to increase the number of Idaho high school graduates that
are motivated to pursue a CS degree and career. The project leverages two
existing degree programs at Boise State: the IDoTeach program (a UTeach
replication program designed to increase the number of secondary math and
science teachers in the state of Idaho and its surrounding region) for
preservice teachers, and the Master of Science in STEM Education for in-service
teachers. IDoTeach will prepare teachers to teach the AP CS Principles
curriculum, creating CS pathways in both programs. The resulting CS prepared
teachers will be further supported through face-to-face workshops, mentoring
programs, support from industry, professionals, and online resources. BSU along
with local industry partners will work to recruit inservice teachers and high
school students (potential preservice teachers) to the programs. The project
will create a blueprint for states such as Idaho to provide high quality CS
preparation high school teachers.