* 1339990
* Noyce at Montclair: Preparing the Effective Elementary Mathematics Teacher
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2016
* Steven Greenstein, Montclair State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 07/31/2016
* USD 225,803.00

The project, Noyce at Montclair: Preparing the Effective Elementary Mathematics
Teacher (PE2MT), is a Capacity Building project designed to increase the number
of elementary teachers with a strong preparation for teaching mathematics. It
draws on shared resources and ongoing collaborations between faculty in the
College of Science and Mathematics and the College of Education and Human
Services. An enhanced degree program leading to a bachelor of arts in
mathematics with a concentration in K-5 teaching is being developed.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The enhancing feature of the degree
program is an integration of coursework and the following: (a) academic support
for advanced content courses, (b) enriched methods and specialized content
courses, (c) early and ongoing field experiences, (d) undergraduate research
experience, and (e) in-service induction support. These experiences are designed
to support pre-service teachers' steady progression through a set of challenging
mathematics courses, to develop their mathematical knowledge for teaching, and
to inform their beliefs about mathematics and what it means to know and teach
it. Students will be recruited from within the university and also from among
students completing associates degrees at local community
colleges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broad Impact: This project is developing a
program that prepares teachers not only to engage students within high-needs
classrooms and cultivate their STEM interests, but also for additional
department-, school-, and district-based opportunities such as mentoring other
teachers, modeling lessons, collaborative planning, conducting professional
development, attending and presenting at conferences, and making contributions
to the development of curriculum, assessment, or policy. The local
infrastructure being developed to support this program will subsequently be in
place to support the development of additional STEM elementary degree programs
at Montclair and can serve as a model to other colleges and universities. All
program and curricular materials developed to support and sustain this program
will be made available to interested colleges, universities, school districts,
and policymakers.