* 1339436
* EAGER: Solid-state thermal switching
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Patrick Hopkins, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jose Lage
* 08/31/2016
* USD 233,815.00

CBET-1339436 Hopkins

With an exploding population and rapid advances in power consuming technologies,
the planet faces a critical roadblock in the continued advancement and future
sustainability of the human race. In general, research focused on clean energy
solutions has not led to viable, world-wide implementable replacements of non-
renewable, environmentally toxic sources. Therefore, a disruptive and
transformative paradigm shift must take place to further energy efficiency. In
response, the proposed EAGER project will develop the foundation of this new
regime by designing thermally powered devices. In principle, a thermally powered
device can be driven from otherwise rejected heat to reduce the net energy
wasted by society. The goal of this proposed initiative is therefore to develop
the fundamental electrical, thermal and material physics and engineering to use
thermal stimuli to generate usable electrical current and power. In turn, this
project will advance the fundamental understanding of heat transport in complex
oxides, further the thermal response in thin films and across interfaces when a
material is undergoing a structural or phase transition, and define new
thermophysical properties of materials based on external electrical of thermal
stimuli. The final result of this project will be the demonstration of both an
electrically driven thermal switch and a thermally driven electrical switch.
This program will discover effective methods to harness and store this waste
heat. As the physics, materials and devices that will be developed in this
proposed program will be based on and/or powered from recycled thermal energy,
these materials and devices are referred to as thermal devices.

This project includes both scientific and engineering relevance along with major
societal implications focused on clean energy technologies and increasing energy
efficiency. The advancement of the thermophysics governing heat flow in complex
oxides will open up a new class of materials for thermal engineering.
Furthermore, the study of the phase transitions in these materials will greatly
impact current logic and energy technologies. The proposed thermal devices,
which will be experimentally realized in this project, will revolutionize the
means to recycle wasted energy. The United States consumes approximately 100
quadrillion Btu (100 quads) of energy per year, where only 43% goes to useful
work while 57% (or 57 quads/yr) is exhausted into the environment as wasted
heat. As this proposed work will focus on thermally driven devices, this will
offer an impactful, transformative solution to utilize this waste heat to drive
devices and store energy. This proposed work will lay the foundation for the
design and development of a wide array of applications and devices that will not
rely on non-renewable resources or generate toxic emissions. By using already
wasted heat as the driving source of the proposed thermal devices, this proposed
EAGER project will directly benefit the energy efficiency in both the United
States and abroad.