* 1339443
* STEM Student Travel Grants for Bioelectronics Training. To be Held in  Baltimore, MD, November, 3-6, 2013
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* H. Troy Nagle, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* GEORGE HADDAD
* 05/31/2014
* USD 29,575.00

ECCS - 1339443 STEM Student Travel Grants for Bioelectronics Training Nagle, H.
Troy North Carolina State University





The objective of this proposal is to request Travel funds for graduate students
to attend a Bioelectronics Tutorial Track in the emerging field of
bioelectronics and to attend the 2013 IEEE Sensors Conference which is being
held in Baltimore, MD. The tutorial will be held on Nov.3 and will involve
leading experts in the field and will offer four interrelated tutorials , two in
the morning and two in the afternoon. A motivational luncheon speaker will also
be included. Travel expense reimbursements of $1000 will be made to each
awardee. Travel expenses up to $1,000 will be awarded. The awardees will be U.S.
citizens or permanent residents who are not currently supported by an NSF ERC.
The students will also attend the IEEE Sensors conference where many of the
leaders in the field will be delivering lectures and presenting papers. This
will be an excellent opportunity for the students to get exposed to one of the
major emerging programs in science and engineering, will expose the student to
many of the leaders in the field and will have an impact on their decision to
continue In graduate studies. We will need all the manpower we can generate over
the next few years in this field and this is an excellent way for getting them
on board. There is no doubt that many of them will be leaders in the future.
Bioelectronics is fundamental to interfacing of engineering and biology and
advances in this field will lead to the solution of many of the problems facing
our society including genetic medicine, health care, environmental sensing,
structural monitoring and homeland security. Thus advances in this field will
have a tremendous societal impact. Prof. Nagel has proposed an excellent program
for this tutorial and conference attendance and I strongly support funding. The
budget is reasonable and the great majority of funds will go towards supporting
the students. A small amount is allocated for support staff which is needed to
administer the program which is supposed to include travel plans and other
arrangements for 20 students. I therefore highly recommend support of this
request Funding of $29,575 will be provided by: ECCS-07010007-7564 (George
Haddad) George Haddad Program Director (CCSS/ENG)