* 1339060
* Learning to Attend, Attending to Learn: Neurological, Behavioral, and Computational Perspectives
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2014
* Rachel Wu, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Laura Namy
* 06/30/2014
* USD 34,706.00

Attention and learning are two of the most important aspects of cognition. While
studying attention and learning separately has its benefits, it is also
misleading. In the past few years, there has emerged a new wave of research
demonstrating that attention constrains learning and that learning guides future
attention. The studies in these two areas span disparate fields (developmental
psychology, cognitive neuroscience, behavioral neuroscience, computational
modeling). Although researchers are asking the same questions across different
fields, in general, they do not attend the same conferences, rarely cite each
other, and in most cases do not even know about each other's work. This 2-day
workshop will bring together these diverse researchers to catalyze further
interaction and promote innovative collaborative research. The workshop also
will include moderators, who will encourage constructive critiques and
discussion of theoretical and methodological limitations for the different
approaches.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This workshop will solidify, stabilize, and
grow this critical research area (especially for a new generation of
researchers) and thereby promote a more nuanced, ecologically valid, and
biologically informed understanding of attention-learning interactions and
mechanisms. Research on attention and learning interactions is crucial for
understanding a wide range of developmental processes, including infants'
development of social skills, children's memory, perceptual-motor skill
acquisition, and learning in school. It is also increasingly apparent that
developmental disabilities originally thought to be attention-based, such as
ADHD, interact heavily with learning difficulties, though the exact mechanisms
are still unclear.