* 1339211
* Elucidating the Gene Networks Controlling Branch Angle and the Directional Growth of Lateral Meristems in Trees
* BIO,IOS
* 12/15/2014,11/30/2019
* Kenong Xu, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 11/30/2019
* USD 1,556,406.00

This project will uncover genes and gene networks that underpin how apical
control influences branch growth in trees. Deciphering this poorly understood
yet fundamental aspect of plant biology will shed light on the evolution of tree
species and have important implications for forest ecology and growth dynamics.
In a practical sense, the work will help transform the orchards and tree
plantations of the future through the development of tree varieties suitable for
high density planting- achieving productivity improvements analogous to those
accomplished for cereal crops over the past half century. Commercial planting of
these improved varieties will lead to more efficient land space utilization,
reduction of chemical inputs, and increased industry profitability and
sustainability. To integrate education and research and broaden participation,
the project will provide research training in plant genomics for undergraduate
and high school students from underrepresented minority groups. In addition, the
project will organize and hold a series of workshops on plant architecture and
biotechnology solutions that will educate growers and agricultural industry
personnel about specific benefits biotechnology has to offer tree crops.
Finally, the project will develop and hold short courses on a novel sequence-
based mapping and gene identification method using pooled genomes or pnomes for
fellow scientists working on trees and other horticultural crops. All data
generated in this project will be accessible to the public through the NCBI
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov) Short Reads Archive databases and/or the Genome
Database for Rosaceae (http://www.rosaceae.org/).

Trees can adopt a wide variety of architectural forms. Architectural plasticity
plays important roles in forest ecosystems, agriculture, and landscape
aesthetics. Tree architecture is a consequence of numerous developmental traits
that include branching pattern, branch number, branch length, and branch angle.
These traits are largely a function of two key developmental processes: apical
dominance and apical control. Apical dominance is a well understood process that
inhibits lateral bud outgrowth through signals emanating from the shoot apex.
Intensive studies have revealed the signals and the underlying molecular
mechanisms that operate in herbaceous plants such as Arabidopsis and pea. In
contrast, apical control is the process by which the apex influences the overall
tree structure upon successive years of growth and development in woody species.
Although some progress has been made from a physiological perspective, the
genetic and molecular mechanisms of apical control are largely unknown. The
overarching goal of the project is to develop detailed knowledge about how trees
adopt specific architectural forms, specifically with regard to apical control
of the lateral branch angle and directional growth. Using a combination of
genome-scale studies to elucidate key gene networks and molecular pathways
coupled with innovative whole tree imaging technologies that will enable non-
destructive structural phenotyping, the project will address the following
questions: 1) What gene expression networks differentiate the shoot apical
meristem from lateral meristems? What changes take place when a lateral shoot
meristem transitions to becoming the apical meristem? How are these expression
networks altered in branch angle mutants including pillar/columnar tree forms
and weeping types? 2) What is the genetic and molecular basis for these mutant
tree forms in peach and apple? What are the identities of the mutated genes? 3)
With regard to the identified genes, what protein-protein interaction networks
are they associated with? Through which pathways do they exert their effects on
tree form?