* 1339916
* Developing Tomorrow's STEM Educators
* EHR,DUE
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2019
* Patricia Grove, College of Mount Saint Vincent
* Standard Grant
* Karen Keene
* 12/31/2019
* USD 868,618.00

This Noyce project at the College of Mount Saint Vincent (CMSV) supports 16
undergraduate science or math majors who elect to pursue a teaching career. This
institution is located in New York City and has a history of excellence in
serving Hispanic and other minority and low-income students. The intellectual
merit derives not only from leveraging existing academic programs and student
support resources but also from developing two new components of STEM/Teacher
Education program at the college. Specifically, summer courses and a new 4-year
pathway for STEM/TE transfer students are being added. Plans are in place to
give students early exposure to teaching, strategies for working in high-need
schools, mentoring by master teachers and college faculty, professional
development workshops, research opportunities in science, and educational action
research. Structured, supervised, and supported field experiences, as well as
in-depth exposure to the inner workings of high-need schools helps Noyce
scholars transition into teaching and persist in the profession.

This project has several broader impacts. First, the project increases the
number of students from traditionally underrepresented groups that enter STEM
teaching fields. The College's attention to the values of diversity, inclusion,
and experiential/reflective learning have the potential to create a model that
benefits other programs serving highly diverse student populations. Second,
changes and improvements made to the teacher education program as a result of
this project impact many more than just the 16 Noyce scholarship recipients.
Third, development of a seamless, 4-year STEM/TE pathway should enable many more
students transferring from community colleges to complete a STEM degree with
teacher certification in the shortest possible time. The plan is to sustain this
program so that through time, many STEM majors become highly trained and
inspirational mathematics and science teachers to diverse students in New York's
high-needs schools. Plans are in place to document and share best practices and
lessons learned with other institutions with similar characteristics via
conferences and pedagogical publications.