* 1339793
* Collaborative Research: SI2-SSI: The Community-Driven Big-CZ Software System for Integration and Analysis of Bio- and Geoscience Data in the Critical Zone
* CSE,OAC
* 12/01/2013,11/30/2017
* David Valentine, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Rajiv Ramnath
* 11/30/2017
* USD 433,911.00

The Critical Zone (CZ) science community takes as its charge the effort to
integrate theory, models and data from the multitude of disciplines collectively
studying processes on the Earth's surface. The Critical Zone is Earth's
permeable near-surface layer - from the atmosphere at the vegetation's canopy to
the lower boundary of actively circulating groundwaters. The Critical Zone was a
term coined by the National Research Council's Basic Research Opportunities in
the Earth Sciences (BROES) Report (2001) to highlight the imperative for a new
approach to thoroughly multi-disciplinary research on the zone of the Earth?s
surface that is critical to sustaining terrestrial life on our planet. In
January 2013, 103 members of the CZ community met for the CZ-EarthCube Domain
Workshop (NSF Award #1252238) to prioritize the CZ community's key science
drivers, key computational and information technology ("cyber") challenges and
key cyber needs. They identified that the central scientific challenge of the
critical zone science community is to develop a "grand unifying theory" of the
critical zone through a theory-model-data fusion approach. Work participants
unanimously described that the key missing need of this approach was a future
cyberinfrastructure for seamless 4D visual exploration of the integrated
knowledge (data, model outputs and interpolations) from all the bio and
geoscience disciplines relevant to critical zone structure and function, similar
to today?s ability to easily explore historical satellite imagery and
photographs of the earth's surface using Google Earth. This project takes the
first "BiG" steps toward answering that need.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall
goal of this project is to co-develop with the CZ science and broader community,
including natural resource managers and stakeholders, a web-based integration
and visualization environment for joint analysis of cross-scale bio and
geoscience processes in the critical zone (BiG CZ), spanning experimental and
observational designs. Our Project Objectives are to: (1) Engage the CZ and
broader community to co-develop and deploy the BiG CZ software stack; (2)
Develop the BiG CZ Portal web application for intuitive, high-performance map-
based discovery, visualization, access and publication of data by scientists,
resource managers, educators and the general public; (3) Develop the BiG CZ
Toolbox to enable cyber-savvy CZ scientists to access BiG CZ Application
Programming Interfaces (APIs); and (4) Develop the BiG CZ Central software stack
to bridge data systems developed for multiple critical zone domains into a
single metadata catalog. The entire BiG CZ Software system will be developed on
public repositories as a modular suite of fully open source software projects.
It will be built around a new Observations Data Model Version 2.0 (ODM2) that is
being developed by members of the BiG CZ project team, with community input,
under separate funding (NSF Award #1224638).