* 1339737
* SI2-SSE: Peer-to-Peer Overlay Virtual Network for Cloud Computing Research
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Renato Figueiredo, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Alan Sussman
* 08/31/2018
* USD 494,107.00

Modern cloud computing systems use virtual machine technologies to deliver
unprecedented flexibility to users, enabling businesses and individuals to cost-
effectively deploy computing and storage capacity on-demand, at scale, across
multiple infrastructures distributed geographically. While the ability to deploy
virtual machines for cloud computing is widely supported, researchers face
increasing challenges in prototyping and deploying experimental research systems
that span across multiple cloud providers. In particular, providing end-to-end
network connectivity among distributed virtual machines in today's Internet
environment (where nodes are often constrained by firewalls and network address
translators) requires significant investment of time in development, testing and
maintenance of code needed solely to provide connectivity. This project
addresses these connectivity challenges in cloud computing by developing an
open-source scientific software element that allows researchers and users of
clouds to seamlessly create virtual networks on demand for distributed virtual
machines. To this end, the project creates software-defined virtual networks
that support the standard Internet Protocol (IP) and use tunneling of virtual
network packets over Peer-to-Peer (P2P) links among virtual machines for
scalable and resilient messaging. In addition to the core IP-over-P2P virtual
networking, the software provides a framework for configuration, management and
monitoring that enables easy deployment of user-defined overlays for inter-cloud
research experiments. The open-source software developed in this project enables
advances in the state-of-the-art of research of cloud computing systems and
applications. Complementary to research and development activities, this project
delivers educational modules, tutorials, software packages, and pre-configured
virtual machine images that allow non-expert users to deploy their own virtual
networks over private, commercial and public clouds. Because cloud computing
technologies are increasingly pervasive and of growing importance to the economy
and society, the broader impacts of this project can reach Internet users at
large who benefit from the ability to seamlessly interconnect cloud virtual
machines across multiple providers. In particular, leveraging online social
networking technologies, the virtual network software software enables
individuals and small groups to easily create social virtual private networks
connecting personal computers and multiple cloud resources.