* 1339873
* SI2-SSI: Sustaining Globus Toolkit for the NSF Community (Sustain-GT)
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2018
* Steven Tuecke, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Alan Sussman
* 09/30/2018
* USD 1,439,888.00

Science and engineering depend increasingly on the ability to collaborate and
federate resources across distances. This observation holds whether a single
investigator is accessing a remote computer, a small team is analyzing data from
an engineering experiment, or an international collaboration is involved in a
multi-decade project such as the Large Hadron Collider (LHC). Any distributed
collaboration and resource federation system requires methods for authentication
and authorization, data movement, and remote computation. Of the many solutions
that have been proposed to these problems, the Globus Toolkit (GT) has proven
the most persistently applicable across multiple fields, geographies, and
project scales. GT resource gateway services and client libraries are used by
tens of thousands of people every day to perform literally tens of millions of
tasks at thousands of sites, enabling discovery across essentially every science
and engineering discipline supported by the NSF. As new, innovative techniques
and technologies for collaboration and scientific workflows are developed, and
as new computing and instrument resources are added to the national
cyberinfrastructure, these technologies and other improvements must be added and
integrated into GT so that it can continue to provide an advanced and robust
technology for solving scientific research problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Sustain-GT project builds on past success to ensure that GT resource gateway
services will continue to meet the challenges faced by NSF science and
engineering communities. These challenges include: multiple-orders-of-magnitude
increases in the volume of data generated, stored, and transmitted; much bigger
computer systems and correspondingly larger and more complex computations; much
faster networks; many more researchers, educators, and students engaged in data-
intensive and computational research; and rapidly evolving commodity Web and
Cloud computing environments. With the help of a new User Requirements Board,
Sustain-GT will respond to community demands to evolve the GT resource gateway
services with superior functionality, scalability, availability, reliability,
and manageability. Sustain-GT will also provide the NSF community with high
quality support and rapid-response bug fix services, as is required to sustain a
heavily used, production system like GT.