* 1339785
* SI2-SSE: Development of Cassandra, A General, Efficient and Parallel Monte Carlo Multiscale Modeling Software Platform for Materials Research
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2013,05/31/2018
* Edward Maginn, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Rajiv Ramnath
* 05/31/2018
* USD 395,133.00

The properties of materials are the result of the interactions between the atoms
that make up these materials. These properties can now be predicted with great
accuracy, even for materials that have not yet existed in nature, by using
advanced computational methods to study how the constituent atoms of the
materials interact with one another and their environment. This field relies
upon the existence of sophisticated software packages that enable researchers to
conduct these simulations. There are two general approaches for simulating bulk
materials: molecular dynamics and Monte Carlo, each of which is appropriate for
certain problems. There are many molecular dynamics software packages available
but almost no general purpose Monte Carlo codes. This project seeks to develop
an efficient, general-purpose open source Monte Carlo code called
Cassandra.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To do this, the academic Monte Carlo code
developed in the PI's group will be extended and enhanced. The code will be
capable of simulating any type of molecule in bulk and heterogeneous
environments. The code will contain a wide range of advanced features, making it
useful for a range of problems. By providing a general purpose code to the
research community and establishing a mechanism whereby users can add their own
features and extend the code, this project will have a broad impact on the
research community. It will enable non-experts to use Monte Carlo simulations to
study new problems. It will enable experienced molecular modelers to utilize and
contribute features to a single optimized and validated code, thereby
alleviating the time and expense associated with developing specialized codes
for individual applications. Because the code will be used in teaching and
workshops, materials will be made available to educators to use the code in the
classroom when teaching courses such as thermodynamics, molecular modeling and
statistical mechanics.