* 1339032
* Collaborative Research:  The Role of Wind in Estuarine Dynamics
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Malcolm Scully, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 05/31/2014
* USD 250,188.00

Intellectual Merit: The physical workings of an estuary depend on the outcome of
a contest between forces acting to stratify its waters, and forces acting to
destroy this stratification. For six decades, the destructive force has been
identified as the tides, which generate turbulence through ebb and flow over the
rough bottom. In recent years, a new player has emerged: wind blowing over the
estuary. Research has shown wind to be an effective mixer, even to the point of
de-stratifying the water column. More recently, it has been found that this
mixing takes place, not solely as a one-dimensional vertical process, but also
through straining of the density structure in the longitudinal and lateral
direction of the estuary. The driving hypothesis for this project is that, in
addition to driving strong circulations along and across the estuary, it can
also be a major contributor to the mixing providing the energy for the classical
two-layer estuarine circulation, at least in estuaries with long fetches and
weaker circulation. This project has been designed to investigate the role of
wind in estuarine dynamics and to test these hypotheses. In order to examine
this role, the response of the estuary to an applied wind stress must be
described in three-dimensional detail, detail that has not been provided
heretofore. In addition, this response must be clearly identified, separate from
the underlying circulation of interest?the slower, steadier estuarine flow.
Finally, this description must be scalable to the broad class of estuaries.
Achieving this detail and understanding requires an extensive and intensive
program of observation and analysis in combination with numerical models that
have the ability to separate, dissect, integrate, and scale the multiple
circulation and mixing components. The observational program in the Chesapeake
Bay will involve an intensive array of instrumentation, the most novel of which
is a high-resolution tower equipped with velocimeters and temperature-salinity
recorders that will enable direct measurements of the stress profile. A dense
array of buoys will be instrumented with meteorological sensors to measure local
structure in the wind field. Finally, a scheme of multi-ship, towed-vehicle
sampling is designed to provide detailed spatial pictures of the density
structure with a sufficiently high repetition rate to resolve changes over a
tidal cycle. A partnership with the meteorologists responsible for weather
forecasting in the Chesapeake Bay region will aid both the observation and
analysis of this complex, interactive system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: The circulation and enclosed nature of estuaries make them highly
productive fisheries, fisheries threatened by the effects of human alteration of
the landscape. Estuaries worldwide are in various states of degradation, the
chief cause of which is excess nutrients delivered from agricultural runoff and
municipal sewage. These nutrients over-enrich the waters and lead to oxygen sags
in the lower layers, sags that deprive living resources of the ability to use
this valuable habitat. In estuaries such as Chesapeake Bay and Long Island
Sound, these sags can proceed to hypoxia and even anoxia, the total depletion of
dissolved oxygen. Costly programs are planned and underway to restore the health
of our nation's estuaries. These management programs will need to rely on an
accurate description of the physics of estuarine circulation if they are to be
successful. In addition, the public will need to be informed of both the problem
and the efforts toward solutions if they are to provide the political and
economic support necessary. To that end, this research project will engage with
education and outreach efforts, especially with the COSEE Coastal Trends program
and with the Horn Point Laboratory Scientist-Educator Program, and will involve
a scientist-educator, who will head a team of undergraduates to develop a
teaching module related to the role of estuarine circulation (including wind
mixing) in the Chesapeake Bay's Dead Zone. Finally, this proposal will provide
training to two graduate students pursuing PhD degrees and a Postdoctoral
fellow.