* 1339804
* SI2-SSI: Collaborative Research: Scalable, Extensible, and Open Framework for Ground and Excited State Properties of Complex Systems
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2020
* Sohrab Ismail-Beigi, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 09/30/2020
* USD 1,380,247.00

Computer simulation plays a central role in helping us understand, predict, and
engineer the physical and chemical properties of technological materials systems
such as semiconductor devices, photovoltaic systems, chemical reactions and
catalytic behavior. Despite significant progress in performing realistic
simulations in full microscopic detail, some problems are currently out of
reach: two examples are the modeling of electronic devices with multiple
functional parts based on new materials such as novel low power computer
switches that would revolutionize the Information Technology industry, and the
photovoltaic activity of complex interfaces between polymers and inorganic
nanostructures that would enhance US energy self-reliance. The research program
of this collaborative software institute aims to create an open and effective
scientific software package that can make efficient use of cutting-edge high
performance computers (HPC) to solve challenging problems involving the physics
and chemistry of materials. By having such software available, this software
initiative will have multiple broad impacts. First, the community of materials
scientists will be able to study next-generation problems in materials physics
and chemistry, and computer science advances that enable the software will be
demonstrated and made accessible for both communities which will help cross-
fertilize further such collaborative efforts. Second, the capability of
simulating and engineering more complex materials systems and technological
devices could play a role in helping the US continue is competitive edge in
science, technology, and education. Third, through training of young scientists,
direct outreach to the broader scientific community through workshops and
conferences, and educational programs ranging from secondary to graduate levels,
the power, importance, and capabilities of computational modeling, materials
science, and computer science methodologies that enable the science will be
communicated to a broad audience. Finally, by enabling the refinement of
existing materials systems as well as discovery of new materials systems, the
resulting scientific advances can help broadly impact society via technological
improvements: in terms of the two examples provided above, (a) the successful
design of new electronic device paradigms helps significantly advance the
digital revolution by permitting the introduction of smaller, more efficient,
and more capable electronic circuits and information processing systems, and (b)
successful creation of inexpensive, easy-to-fabricate, and durable photovoltaic
materials and devices can lead to cleaner forms of energy production while
reducing reliance on fossil fuels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical goal is to
greatly enhance the open software tool OPENATOM to advance discovery in
nanoscience and technology. OPENATOM will be delivered as a open, robust and
validated software package capable of utilizing HPC architectures efficiently to
describe the electronic structure of complex materials systems from first
principles. In terms of describing electronic ground-states, OPENATOM will be
enhanced by features such as improved configurational sampling methods, hybrid
density functionals, and incorporation of fast super-soft pseudopotential
techniques. In addition, the team will incorporate the many-body GW-BSE approach
for electronic excitations that permits accurate computation of electronic
energy levels, optical absorption and emission, and luminescence. Ultimately,
such an extensible software framework will permit accurate electronic structure
computations to employ effectively future HPC platforms with 10,000,000 cores.