* 1339593
* Bayesian Models of Social Behavior Using Online Resources
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2015
* Katherine Heller, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Sushil K Prasad
* 12/31/2015
* USD 78,500.00

This is a "Starter Award" for continuation of research begun under a CI TraCS
Postdoctoral Fellowship. The Abstract from that fellowship is reproduced
here:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;People spend a great deal of their lives socializing,
or interacting with other people. On a typical day a person might collaborate on
a project with their work colleagues, play softball with their teammates, and
converse with their family. Social interactions are inherently part of most of
our activities, therefore, understanding social interactions is a fundamental
part of understanding human behavior. As the amount of time people spend online
rapidly grows, social interactions which were once limited to in-person
meetings, letters, and telephone calls, are increasingly occurring through the
use of online resources such as email, Facebook, and online chats. Social and
cognitive scientists who strive to understand human behavior can analyze online
interactions to illuminate social behavior in this new setting, and benefit from
the wealth of data that it provides. However, social interactions are extremely
complex, so analyzing and modeling them is not easy in any setting.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fortunately Bayesian probabilistic methods offer rich,
flexible, generative models for data, which can be used to model complex, highly
structured, social interactions. In general, Bayesian methods provide a
principled framework for reasoning about an uncertain world. Bayesian latent
variable models allow us to reason about, or discover, the potentially quite
complex, unobserved structure that underlies what we do observe. This research
develops methods which discover the unobserved structure necessary to model
complex social interactions which occur online, explore group interactions,
evaluate how context effects social interactions, and explore social influence.
This work has the potential to improve science (e.g. by improving long-distance
collaborations), commerce (e.g. by identifying whom businesses should inform
about their products), and society at large (e.g. by improving social
networking).