* 1339199
* Collaborative Research: Gauging the Mission Creep Potentials of Homeland Security "Fusion Centers"
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2013,04/30/2014
* Torin Monahan, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 04/30/2014
* USD 109,478.00

Collaborative Research: Exploring Homeland Security Fusion
Centers&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the United States, the Department of
Homeland Security (DHS) has supported the creation of 'fusion centers' to share
data across government agencies as well as across public and private sectors.
This collaborative project will begin to document and evaluate the information
sharing practices of fusion centers. Specifically, the research will focus on
variations in data sharing across fusion centers. The research questions are (1)
What types of data sharing are occurring with, or are enabled by, fusion
centers? and (2) What factors contribute to the data-sharing practices of fusion
centers? Using qualitative methods, research will be conducted through document
analysis of government and media sources, observational studies at government-
sponsored security conferences, and a minimum of 40 semi-structured interviews
with representatives of government agencies, private companies, and civil
society organizations. The intellectual merit of this project is its
contribution to an understanding of the implications of new organizational and
technological developments for the provision of national security. This study is
theoretically valuable because it will contribute to scholarship on surveillance
and society, the privatization of security, and the politics of technological
systems. In addition to producing refereed articles and conference
presentations, this research will provide an important empirical piece to a
larger international project called "The New Transparency" which is facilitating
multi-national and cross-cultural comparisons of the global security industry.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this project include an increased
awareness of the roles, contributions and implications of fusion centers.