* 1339237
* Joint NSF/ERA-CAPS: Mechanisms of Natural Variation in Maize Herbivore Resistance
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2014,03/31/2018
* Georg Jander, Boyce Thompson Institute Plant Research
* Standard Grant
* Clifford Weil
* 03/31/2018
* USD 766,292.00

PI: Georg Jander (Boyce Thompson Institute for Plant
Research)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Senior Personnel: Tiffany Fleming (Boyce Thompson
Institute for Plant Research)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ERA-CAPS collaborators:
Matthias Erb (University of Bern, Switzerland), Monika Frey (Technical
University of Munich, Germany), Inge Fomsgaard (Aarhus University, Denmark), and
Jurriaan Ton (University of Sheffield, United
Kingdom)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Maize (Zea mays), the world's most productive
grain crop, is attacked by more than 90 species of insect herbivores. Although
there is wide variation in maize resistance to herbivory, very little is known
about the underlying genetic basis of these differences among maize cultivars.
Genetic mapping, transcript profiling, insect bioassays, and biochemical
approaches will be used to identify maize herbivore resistance genes. A
particular focus area of this project will be the identification of biosynthetic
and regulatory genes contributing to the production and transport of
benzoxazinoids, a class of secondary metabolites with important defensive
functions in maize, wheat, rye, wild barley, and other grasses. Research
involving maize benzoxazinoid metabolism will provide a tractable model system
for studying these agriculturally and ecologically important plant metabolites.
Genetic mapping using a panel of diverse maize inbred lines will identify novel
genes contributing to aphid and caterpillar resistance. Given the wide array of
pests and pathogens against which maize plants protect themselves, there are
likely to be interactions among the identified defense pathways. Defensive
synergies and tradeoffs will be detected by comparing the genomic locations and
biochemical functions of the identified maize genes that contribute to natural
variation in herbivore resistance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will lead
to the identification of previously unknown maize genes that influence plant-
herbivore interactions. Potential metabolic limitations and tradeoffs in maize
defense against different classes of insect herbivores will be documented. It is
anticipated that these expected results will open up new opportunities for using
molecular breeding and transgenic approaches to improve herbivore resistance in
maize, the most important agricultural crop in the United States. Research
conducted through this project will help to train a new generation of students
and postdocs for future careers in academia, industry, or government service.
International research exchanges with the European ERA-CAPS
(http://www.eracaps.org/) companion project entitled "Biosynthesis, transport
and exudation of 1,4-benzoxazin-3-ones as determinants of plant biotic
interactions (BENZEX)" will enhance the training of students and postdocs.
Experiments involving maize-herbivore interactions will be fully integrated into
an established education and outreach program at the Boyce Thompson Institute.
Undergraduate students from throughout the United States will be recruited to be
part of a ten-week summer internship program. In one-week training sessions,
biology teachers from under-resourced schools will develop new plant science
modules for their classes. Experimental kits for conducting caterpillar-feeding
assays in local science classrooms will not only provide students with hands-on
research experience, but also generate new information about the mechanisms of
maize defense against insect herbivory. All data and resources generated through
this project will be publicly accessible. A major output of this project will be
a publicly available toolkit for studying the role of benzoxazinoids in maize
defense against herbivores and pathogens. Seeds of near-isogenic lines and
mutants will be deposited in the Maize Genetics Cooperation stock center, DNA
clones will be available upon request and assay methods will be published in
scientific journals. All DNA sequences will be deposited in public databases
such as the NCBI SRA, Gramene, and MaizeGDB. Metabolite and metabolomics data
will be deposited at METLIN (http://metlin.scripps.edu/). Education and outreach
materials will be published and available for use via the Boyce Thompson
Institute website (http://bti.cornell.edu/education/).