* 1339599
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Integrative role of ancestor veneration in the multiethnic Middle Sican state (AD 950-1100): A perspective from food practices
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2014
* Izumi Shimada, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2014
* USD 25,200.00

Under the guidance of Dr. Izumi Shimada, Go Matsumoto will undertake four
separate analyses of archaeological materials excavated in 2006 and 2008 at the
site of Sicán in the mid-La Leche Valley, northern Peru. The site was the
capital of a multiethnic, theocratic state that flourished between AD 950 and
1100 and was reserved primarily for funerary and ceremonial purposes. Therefore,
it provides a unique opportunity to investigate the role of mortuary practice in
the social development and maintenance. The excavations targeted the ceremonial
core of the capital, which consists of a large rectangular plaza and surrounding
platform mounds with elite cemeteries, and documented material traces of
preserving and caring the dead bodies as well as other contemporaneous
activities within the plaza. The four analyses proposed by Mr. Matsumoto will
focus on the food preparation and consumption among others and explore its
nature and relation to the mortuary practice. Mr. Matsumoto hypothesizes that
central to the Sicán religion was ancestor veneration, and that it served to
consolidate this plural society through attendant feasting activities.

In traditional as well as modern societies shared beliefs and practices serve to
create group identity and promote integration among often disparate social
elements. Practices relating to religion and burial play such a role. Thus this
study has present day relevance because it directly addresses issues of social
cohesion and factors which promote social solidarity and effective function.

When explaining why ancestor veneration was practiced, archaeologists have
emphasized its economic merits for the cult followers and argued that it helped
them demand their rights for limited lands and resources on the basis of their
continued occupancy. Contrarily, they have paid little attention to the
ideological aspect of ancestor cult, which has been well documented by
ethnographers. Mr. Matsumoto focuses on the latter aspect and explores the role
of ancestor veneration as a form of ideology for social integration and
differentiation through commensal hospitality among the dead and the living of
intracultural variability such as social identity and status. Furthermore, many
previous studies of mortuary contexts have uncritically invoked ancestor
veneration without sufficient empirical support to the point that it was once
decried by a British archaeologist that there were too many ancestors. In
contrast, Mr. Matsumoto will take a meticulous look at both archaeological
contexts and materials to better characterize ancestors and their veneration
with reference to ethnological and ethnohistorical resources, and demonstrate
how one should approach ancestor veneration and what evidence one would need in
order to more appropriately define it in archaeological record.

New findings from this study will enhance the local identity and appreciation of
prehispanic predecessors literally as remote ancestors. Recent DNA analyses
revealed a genetic link between the Sicán and the present people of the area.
The contribution of this study will not be confined to the local level. The
"Sicán Deity" that represents the Sicán religious art has long been an important
icon directly linked to the national identity of modern-day Peru (e.g., the
company logo of the national flag carrier and the first of 24 designs for the
new coin series). In spite of such a national-level recognition and visibility,
however, the nature of the prehispanic religion that created this image is yet
to be fully understood. This study will help to orient people's interests not
only toward the aesthetics of the representative image, but also toward a better
understanding of the Sicán religion and its significance in the Peruvian
prehistory. For these purposes, the data and results will be actively made
public in different languages in various settings, professional and non-
professional.