* 1339783
* GeoPRISMS Office Support
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/2013,11/30/2017
* Jeroen Ritsema, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Candace Major
* 11/30/2017
* USD 1,219,960.00

GeoPRISMS program that conducts interdisciplinary activities that integrate the
Earth and Ocean Sciences communities. The overarching themes of research are 1)
the origin and evolution of the continental crust; 2) fluids, melts and their
interactions; 3) tectonic-sediment-climate interactions; 4) geochemical cycles;
and 5) plate boundary deformation and geodynamics. The guiding principles to
study these main themes are 1) the use of interdisciplinary communities; 2) the
study of active systems; 3) use of experiment, theory and computation; 4)
crossing the shorelines; and 5) use of focus sites. Research at the main
initiatives (Rift Initiation and Evolution; Subduction Cycles and Deformation)
combine large scale amphibious deployments and smaller marine or terrestrial
field studies at Cascadia, Eastern US, Alaska-Aleutians, East Africa and New
Zealand. The field studies are augmented with thematic and global studies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funds are provided for the GeoPRISMS Office including
deliberations of a Steering and Oversight Committee and an Education Advisory
committee. The Office will provide structure for the GeoPRISMS community to
facilitate community planning, organizes planning and synthesis meetings, and
supports the community management structure by organizing meetings of the
steering and educational committees. The Office will also support education and
outreach activities, provides direct links between the GeoPRISMS community and
national infrastructure facilities (such as EarthScope), and facilitates
international collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;The
office will provide a central vehicle for the dissemination of the planning,
execution, and documentation of the main scientific projects. The Office will
also provide outreach to scientists working in hazards and economical resources
and promote teaching, training, and learning through its education and outreach
activities that include a distinguished lecturer program, mini-lessons and
webinars, a student and community forum, a postdoctoral fellowship program, and
graduate student symposia that are held during GeoPRISMS workshops.