* 1339465
* Inland Migration of Crevasses on the Greenland Ice Sheet
* GEO,OPP
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2015
* Gordon Hamilton, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Renee Crain
* 04/30/2015
* USD 77,304.00

The surface of the Greenland Ice Sheet experienced unprecedented melting during
the 2012 summer, capping a decade of summers with above average melt extent and
duration. Melting covered ~97% of the ice sheet during its 2012 peak and lasted
almost two months longer than the 1979-2011 average. This sustained intensified
melt has led to down-wasting of the surface, and has also played a role in
accelerated ice flow by supplying runoff to enhance subglacial sliding.
Altogether, melting has accounted for about half of the ice sheet's increased
contribution to sea level rise in the last decade. Reports of surface cracks
appearing at hitherto crevasse-free locations on the ice sheet have coincided
with the intensified melt. These cracks can act as nascent pathways for the
delivery of surface meltwater to the ice sheet bed, which might promote the
inland propagation of accelerated ice flow and may lead to additional surface
cracking. Their occurrence also constitutes a potential hazard to safe logistic
operations (aircraft landing, surface traversing). Cracks appeared at Raven
Camp, Greenland, during the peak melt event in 2012 and led to a temporary halt
in U.S. military aircraft training activities. New cracks also appeared on the
route used by the Greenland Inland Traverse (GrIT) in northwest Greenland and
may severely impact future traversing activities. Two hypotheses have been
proposed to explain the occurrence of the cracks: one invokes the sudden
drainage of a firn aquifer beneath Raven and the resulting subsidence of the
overlying firn to form the cracks; the other hypothesis involves the downstream
acceleration of ice flow leading to an increase in strain rates and the
formation of true crevasses. If the second hypothesis is correct, crack sizes
and their frequency of occurrence are likely to increase in the future. This
proposal will test those hypotheses by carrying out global positioning system
(GPS) surveys of ice motion and strain rate, and a detailed assessment of
crevasse distributions through time using very high-resolution satellite
imagery. Improved predictions of the ice sheet's response to future climate
forcings as well as the ability to make informed long-term planning decisions
about logistic activities in Greenland require an understanding of the processes
responsible for the appearance of new surface cracks and an assessment of the
likelihood that their distribution will increase with time.