* 1339500
* Collaborative Research:   RINGS - RISR INvestigation of the Geospace System
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2016
* Joshua Semeter, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Ruth S. Lieberman
* 07/31/2016
* USD 341,839.00

A collaborative multi-instrument investigation of the high-latitude geospace
system will be carried out, motivated by the completion of the Resolute Bay
Incoherent Scatter Radars RISR-N and RISR-C, the first ever ISRs deployed to the
geomagnetic polar regions. Initial results from RISR-N have revealed an
unexpectedly structured and dynamic plasma environment. In order to understand
these new measurements and to fully exploit this new diagnostic capability, an
experimental campaign is proposed that will synthesize RISR observations with
data from the collocated optical sensors (Fabry-Perot Interferometer and Optical
Mesosphere Thermosphere Imager), the PolarDARN HF (high frequency) radars, the
THEMIS and NORSTAR camera networks, and the global ISR network (in particular,
Sondrestrom, the Poker Flat Incoherent Scatter Radar (PFISR), and the European
Incoherent Scatter Radar (EISCAT)). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
leverage the new diagnostic information provided by RISR to foster collaborative
studies of the high latitude geospace system. The guiding questions of the
investigation arise from this systems view: 1. What governs the internal
structure and HF propagation characteristics of plasma density patches? 2. How
do auroral processes affect structure and composition of the polar ionosphere,
and what are the global-scale implications? 3. What are the important
interactions between the plasma and neutral gases at polar latitudes? 4. How do
the aforementioned processes control the distribution of plasma on high-latitude
flux tubes? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide a wealth of
information on the ionospheric boundary for modelers to enhance our
understanding of the ionospheric boundary. The investigation of plasma
structuring mechanisms will have implications for communications and Global
Navigation Satellite System (GNSS) signal propagation. The investigation of
plasma-neutral interactions will shed light on how the lower atmosphere drives
the global geospace system. The research will be carried out through an
8-institution international collaborative (4 from the U.S., 2 from Canada, 2
from Japan). The project will contribute to training the next generation of
geophysicists, and the team will include three early career investigators.