* 1339300
* Massachusetts Exploring Computer Science Partnership (MECSP)
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2019
* Joyce Malyn-Smith, Education Development Center
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 09/30/2019
* USD 1,261,524.00

The Education Development Center, Inc. (EDC) proposes the Massachusetts
Exploring Computer Science Partnership (MECSP) in response to NSF's call for
projects that will help develop the knowledge base and partnerships needed to
catalyze the CS 10K Project. EDC and its partners -- Advanced Math and Science
Academy (AMSA) charter school, University of Massachusetts (UMass), Boston?s
Broadening Advanced Technological Education Connections (BATEC) program, and the
Massachusetts Technology Leadership Council (MassTLC) -- propose to design and
implement MECSP. The overarching goal of the partnership is to broaden computer
science (CS) education across MA through the expansion of the Exploring Computer
Science (ECS) course in high schools. MECSP will build an effective multi-sector
collaboration for the ECS course and professional d evelopment (PD) model,
building a cadre of Teacher Leaders who prepare other teachers to engage greater
numbers and a greater diversity of students in CS education and the workforce.
In order to achieve the project outcomes, the project will implement the ECS
course statewide in MA, and build a statewide infrastructure with the capacity
to sustain that implementation. The infrastructure will include three regional
ECS PD Hubs, an online professional learning community, the leveraging of
existing statewide CS initiatives through co-sponsored activities, and the
engagement of industry representatives of the technology business community
directly with teachers and students to help them to understand the value of CS
and CS careers to the MA and national economy. EDC, its partners and advisers
bring extensive expertise in capacity building, teacher professional
development, broadening participation in STEM, and successful public-private
sector collaborations; the PIs have a long and successful history of working at
the intersection of STEM education and workforce development.

MECSP's focus on reaching students from underrepresented populations ensures
that it has great potential to address significant equity issues within CS and
to expand access to college preparatory CS courses for a diverse population of
MA students. MECSP will also have an impact beyond Massachusetts, serving as a
model for education-business partnerships that can help meet pressing STEM
workforce development needs. Finally, connecting with key national organizations
and leaders will ensure that lessons learned within Massachusetts are shared
with a national community of stakeholders engaged in efforts to diversify CS and
other STEM fields.