* 1339709
* NSF Expeditions in Computing PI Meeting
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2015
* Jason Cong, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 04/30/2015
* USD 99,999.00

The PI meeting will showcase the NSF Expeditions in Computing program and
provide an opportunity for Expeditions PIs and program directors to interact
with each other, the NSF, and industry guests. The meeting will last three days
and include an overview of existing Expeditions projects, panels on topics of
large project management, outreach, and opportunities in additional NSF
programs. The schedule will include ample time for one-on-one interactions
including a poster session on the final day. In addition, the meeting will
coincide with the CISE advisory board meeting to give the board members a chance
to learn more about CISE's flagship program, interact with the research teams,
and provide feedback and suggestions to the showcased research projects or the
expedition program in general.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;This meeting will highlight the three goals of the Expeditions
program: to catalyze far-reaching research explorations motivated by deep
scientific questions or hard problems in the computing and information fields,
and/or by compelling applications that promise significant societal benefits; to
inspire current and future generations of Americans, especially those from
under-represented groups, to pursue rewarding careers in computer and
information science and engineering; and to stimulate significant research and
education outcomes that, through effective knowledge transfer mechanisms,
promise scientific, economic and/or other societal benefits. This is the first
Expeditions PI meeting and will also serve to provide direct feedback to the NSF
on the success of the Expeditions program as well as suggestions for the future
of the program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;The meeting will
provide opportunity for researchers from disparate disciplines to interact and
learn new models for conducting and managing large basic research projects. The
meeting will also serve as a venue for connecting with potential industry
partners for technology transition. One key aspect of the discussions will be an
overview of each team's outreach activities and the benefits and challenges of
large, coordinated outreach and education efforts compared to individual
efforts. In addition, teams will be encouraged to bring students to the meeting
to participate in presentations and discussions.