* 1339246
* Comparative Functional Genomics of Nectaries and Nectar in the Dicots
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2020
* Libuse Brachova, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* R. Kelly Dawe
* 01/31/2020
* USD 1,814,628.00

PI: Clay J. Carter (University of Minnesota-Twin
Cities)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CoPIs: Robert W. Thornburg and Basil J. Nikolau
(Iowa State University) and Marshall W. Hampton (University of Minnesota-
Duluth)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collaborators: Martin Heil (CINESTAV, Irapuato,
Mexico) and Patrick von Aderkas (University of Victoria,
Canada)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One-third of all crop species produce floral nectar
and are dependent on animals for reproduction. Moreover, crops such as cotton,
bean, pea, apple, cherry, peach, and blueberry, all produce extrafloral nectar
to attract mutualistic predatory insects, which protect plants from herbivores.
U.S. pollinator-dependent crops alone have an annual value of nearly $25
billion, and extrafloral nectar represents one of the few defense mechanisms for
which stable effects on plant health and fitness have been demonstrated. This
project will employ genomics technologies to study the molecular mechanisms
involved in the synthesis and secretion of nectar components across species and
nectary types. If successful, this project will provide significant new insight
into these processes and the plant-animal interactions mediated by specific
nectar components that will allow targeted studies to improve overall
pollination efficiency, enhance biological control of pests that attack crops,
and have the potential to greatly impact apiculture. With regard to outreach and
training, the project will provide interdisciplinary research training for
students and postdoctoral associates. Project graduate students at Iowa State
University will also serve as GK12 Fellows in GK12 Symbi program
(http://www.gk12.iastate.edu/). Supported by NSF, the Symbi program is a
partnership between ISU and middle schools and high schools that serve primarily
under-represented students in the Des Moines Public School District. GK12
Fellows will serve as "resident scientists" who will work with teachers to
develop innovative, hands-on and engaging science activities for select middle
school or high school science students. Finally, the project will also provide
research experiences for high school students from Cornell High School (Cornell,
Wisconsin).&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The central hypothesis driving the project is
that the genetic programs underlying nectar synthesis, secretion and function
are at least partially conserved between diverse species and nectary types. To
address this hypothesis, the project will apply comparative genomics approaches
to the characterization of the (i) synthesis, (ii) secretion and (iii)
biological function of nectar components across a diverse set of core eudicots,
including Brassica sp., cotton, tobacco, squash, Lima bean, and acacia. The
specific objectives and approaches include:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Comparative
expression profiling of nectaries throughout the secretory process. Both the
floral and extrafloral nectary transcriptomes and proteomes of the respective
species will be examined at several time points throughout the secretory
process;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. Comparative metabolomics of nectars. Nectar
metabolites will be comprehensively characterized through a non-biased GC-GC/MS-
MS and LC/MS-MS approach;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. Comparative and functional
analysis of nectar proteins. Specific arrays of proteins have been reported in
several nectars, which confer both protective and attractive properties. Thus,
the proteomes of both floral and extrafloral nectars will be defined and
functionally characterized across species.; and, &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;4.
Informatics, database building &amp; initiation of mechanistic studies. Mining
of global expression data from actively secreting vs. inactive nectaries will
allow the identification of genes and cellular processes central to the basal
pathways for active nectar secretion across species. Metabolomic data will be
linked to activities identified from expression data to assess their impacts on
nectar production and composition. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All validated data will
subsequently be integrated into an existing public online database
(www.nectarygenomics.org), with subsets of data also being made available to the
public at the National Center for Biotechnology Information
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/) and the iPlant Collaborative
(www.iplantcollaborative.org).