* 1339445
* Togiak Archaeological and Paleoecological project
* GEO,OPP
* 07/15/2014,12/31/2016
* Anna Prentiss, University of Montana
* Continuing Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 12/31/2016
* USD 306,916.00

The Togiak Archaeological and Paleoecological Project (TAPP) is a long term
study of paleoecology and Yup'ik Eskimo village history, demographics,
subsistence, technology, and social change in northern Bristol Bay, Alaska. The
project is centered on the Old Togiak archaeological site, where previous
investigations in the early 1960s identified stratified house mounds of the
Thule phase, dated to the last 1000 years. With excellent preservation of faunal
remains, house features, and a wide variety of stone, bone, antler, ivory, and
wooden tools, the site offers abundant potential to address research questions
associated with village evolution, and subsistence strategies. In the long term,
the project will test alternative hypotheses linking climate change and resource
access to patterns of village occupation and foraging strategies. The proposal
is appropriate to the EAGER funding mechanism because the geophysical
investigation will require significant exploration and analysis before a well
constrained and defensible protocol can be established for a full research
project. In addition, laboratory studies emphasizing extensive radiocarbon
dating are needed to construction of an initial paleoecological model, and
preliminary evaluation of subsistence behavior over time. This preliminary data
and analyses are critical for envisioning the direction of a full research
effort. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is important to other archaeological
investigations because it will set out the protocols and create models of
complex mound sites and as such provide an economical way for investigating
these complex archaeological sites. The research will also provide insights into
issues of critical importance concerning the relationship between climate and
shifting resource exploitation strategies and the evolution of social
complexity. Another issue critical for this project is that the Old Togiak Site,
which is a uniquely large mound site in South Western Alaska, is at risk of
being destroyed in the next few years by beach erosion, ice damage, and
subsistence digging. In addition, the project team will utilize the first year
of the project to consult extensively with the Togiak community about the design
of the second year's field research. This process will provide a model for
Alaska Native community consultation and inclusion in archaeological research.