* 1339955
* FULL STEM: Creating dedicated science and math teachers for a sustainable future
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2019
* Sofia Windstam, SUNY College at Oswego
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Camacho - Walter
* 09/30/2019
* USD 1,200,000.00

FULL STEM, a Type 1, Phase 1 Noyce project, is a five year teacher preparation
program leading to the production of 33 new science, technology, engineering or
mathematics (STEM) teachers prepared to teach in high needs schools. Noyce
Scholars graduate with a major in a STEM field and a Master of Science for
Teachers (MST) in Adolescence Education degree or a Master of Arts in Teaching
(MAT) degree in a STEM field. The program includes: teaching internship
opportunities for undergraduates; two undergraduate courses in science and math
learning including a field specific teaching component specifically designed for
the needs of the Noyce Scholars; National Council for Accreditation of Teacher
Education (NCATE) certified and clinically rich MST and MAT programs; extensive
mentoring by teacher-scholars prior to and throughout the masters programs. The
project supports teachers during their early years of teaching by providing
continuing mentoring by teacher scholars, workshops to address challenges
encountered by new teachers, online resources for discipline specific teaching,
and a discussion board for continuous interfacing with other teachers and Noyce
personnel. The program is a partnership between SUNY Oswego College of Liberal
Arts and Sciences and School of Education faculty, eighteen local community
colleges (Onondaga, Jefferson, Cayuga, Tompkins County, Monroe, Hudson, Mohawk
Valley, Broome, Clinton, Columbia-Greene, Corning, Finger Lakes, Genesee, Hudson
Valley, Jamestown, Adirondack, North Country, and Niagara County), Syracuse and
Oswego school districts, Beaver Lake Nature Center, Rice Creek Field Station,
and Rosamund Gifford Zoo. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This
program, by recruiting STEM undergraduates or holders of STEM degrees, and
providing them with financial support to complete their masters degrees in
teaching in an environment that supports their development into highly qualified
dynamic teachers, is helping high need schools offer enriched STEM experiences
to the many worthy students they serve. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
The program can be emulated by other institutions with strong science and math
teacher education programs. The interaction between the College of Liberal Arts
and Sciences and the School of Education models the type of collaboration needed
to produce STEM teachers who combine a love of their discipline with strong
pedagogy skills.