* 1339748
* Collaborative Research: Mapping the Solidarity Economy in the United States
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Maliha Safri, Drew University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 08/31/2016
* USD 42,149.00

This project will measure, map and analyze economic forms of production,
consumption, exchange, finance, and governing of common resources that pursue
social and environmental sustainability associated with the broad range of
activities known as "the solidarity economy." Organizations participating in the
solidarity economy are considered to be those that prioritize ethical commitment
to cooperation, democratic participation, ecological resilience and social
inclusion. Examples of organizations in this group include worker cooperatives,
such as Cooperative Home Care Associates in the Bronx and Isthmus Engineering
and Manufacturing in Wisconsin; consumer cooperatives, such as REI and Lancaster
Farm Fresh; community land trusts, such as the Champlain Housing Trust in
Vermont; credit unions; food cooperatives; and other enterprises, such as
Wikipedia and local bike-sharing programs. This interdisciplinary research
project will gather information about the solidarity economy in the United
States, with its core hypothesis being that the U.S. solidarity economy has
substantial and often unrecognized impacts on local communities in terms of
increasing economic activity, employment, well-being, and overall socio-
environmental sustainability. The investigators will use mixed methods from
geography, economics, and other social sciences, including geographic
information system-based analyses, surveys, in-depth interviews, and economic
impact modeling. They expect to produce the first estimate of the spatial
distribution, economic output, and locally significant influences associated
with the solidarity economy in the U.S., both nationally and at local levels in
Philadelphia, New York City, and Massachusetts. The project will make available
a website for research, education, and participatory mapping of the solidarity
economy, and it will generate a guide to enable replication of the analysis
across the country by researchers, community groups, and policymakers.

This project will establish the groundwork for the solidarity economy as a new
object of geographic, economic, and social research in the U.S., and it will
develop methods for analysis of its nature and influence. The mapping and
measurement of the role of the solidarity economy will help identify place-based
strategies for local economic development. Project findings will contribute to
efforts to create more socially and environmentally sustainable economic
institutions that produce equity alongside jobs, goods, and services. With local
community members participating in the project as researchers along with senior
researchers and both graduate and undergraduate students, the project is
expected to yield new insights regarding the efficacy with which solidarity
economy organizations generate solutions to the pressing social problems of
inequality, unemployment, and ecological unsustainability.