* 1339216
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant:  MISSISSIPPIAN ARCHAEOLOGICAL RESEARCH
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2013,05/31/2014
* Casey Ryan Barrier, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2014
* USD 14,503.00

When the first Europeans explored deep into the interior of the present-day
American South, they traveled among and interacted with several groups of Native
Americans who shared a culture that archaeologists refer to as "Mississippian."
It was roughly 500 years earlier in the American Bottom region of southwestern
Illinois, a rich stretch of floodplain of the Mississippi River near the city of
Saint Louis, where Mississippian culture first developed. The American Bottom is
home to the famous archaeological site of Cahokia, a U.S. National Historic
Landmark and UNESCO World Heritage Site. Between the 11th- and 12th-centuries AD
Cahokia grew into the largest and most complex pre-Columbian town in what is now
the United States. Supported in large part by an increasing economic focus on
maize agriculture, the actions of Cahokians and their neighbors ushered in new
forms of social, political, and economic complexity that would help shape the
histories of Native groups in the U.S. Midwest and South for centuries to come.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under the direction Dr. Robin Beck, PhD candidate Casey
Barrier will continue research that provides new information about early
Mississippian developments in the American Bottom. Barrier's work at the
archaeological site of Washausen in Monroe County, Illinois, has demonstrated
that the inhabitants of this site constructed one of the earliest Mississippian
towns in the region. Located approximately 24 miles south of Cahokia, the town
of Washausen was constructed during the 10th- and 11th-centuries AD. Unlike
Cahokia, Washausen was occupied for only a handful of generations. Because of
this, the archaeological remains preserved at the site provide a unique
historical "snapshot" in time that portrays local ways of life during the
critical period of initial Mississippian cultural developments. Barrier's
research at Washausen has integrated high-tech, geophysical survey methodologies
and archaeological excavations that has produced data showing the locations of
distinct residential neighborhoods, public courtyards, and a central public
plaza and monumental earthen mounds. During these excavations, both
undergraduate and graduate students were able to be trained in current
archaeological field methodologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will
allow Barrier to continue collaborations with scientific specialists to provide
new information about the earliest Mississippian societies. Excavations at
Washausen produced well-preserved archaeological remains that will be analyzed
to address research questions about new forms of social and political-economic
relations, the composition of residential neighborhoods, the reliance on maize
agriculture and locally available animal and plant foods, the historical
importance of large-scale public festivals, and Washausen's interactions with
their Cahokian neighbors. Specifically, paleobotanical, zooarchaeological, and
soil mircomorphological analyses will produce rich, comparative datasets for
this site and region. Coupled with better chronological controls afforded by
radiocarbon dating of recovered organic remains from secure archaeological
deposits, these analyses will provide significant new insights about the
historical transformations that took place at one of the earliest Mississippian
towns in the Americas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this dissertation
research will be presented in subsequent publications, and will be of
significance to other Mississippian researchers, as well as scholars working on
similar research questions about complex societies in other world regions. These
results will also be presented publicly to audiences at academic conferences,
but also at lectures for the public. Barrier will continue training
undergraduate students in the laboratory, and provide them opportunities to
collaborate with other scientific specialists.