* 1339027
* NSF Workshop on Frontiers of Additive Manufacturing Research and Education; Arlington, Virginia; 11-12 July 2013
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/2013,04/30/2016
* Ming Leu, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Steve Schmid
* 04/30/2016
* USD 49,465.00

This grant provides funding to support a workshop on Frontiers of Additive
Manufacturing Research and Education. The objective of this workshop is to
provide a forum for disseminating information and sharing ideas about the
frontiers of additive manufacturing research, education, and technology
transfer. Additive manufacturing, also known as 3D printing, is a suite of
computer automated technologies to fabricate three-dimensional structural and
functional parts from metallic, plastic, ceramic, biological, and composite
materials. The workshop will discuss the current state-of-the-art and future
potential of additive manufacturing, analyze the gaps between the future
potential and the current status, and identify what needs to be done in the
areas of research, education, and technology transfer in order to close the
gaps. This workshop is distinct from previous additive manufacturing related
workshops in its objective and format. Besides the planned agenda to discuss the
need for future additive manufacturing research and technology transfer efforts
and to inspire educational innovations in this area, the workshop itself is
largely educational in nature.

The workshop will help realize the full potential of additive manufacturing
technology. The ideas coming from the workshop will be helpful to decision
makers in setting priorities and strategies of research and education at
government agencies, academic institutions, and industrial companies. The
identified research and education needs will help close the gaps between the
future potential and the current state-of-the-art of additive manufacturing
technology. The workshop will increase the level of interest in manufacturing
research in general and additive manufacturing in particular. It will foster the
development of transformational approaches in Science, Technology, Engineering,
and Mathematics education and in technology transfer models. The networking
function of the workshop will allow establishing new collaborations among
workshop participants.