* 1339954
* UT3 Noyce Scholarship Plus
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Robert Mendenhall, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 09/30/2017
* USD 299,972.00

This project is studying the scholars from the Phase I project UT3 (UToledo.
UTeach. UTouch the Future) Noyce Scholarship Program. UT3 prepared 40 STEM
professionals to become science and math teachers in middle and secondary
school, culminating with Ohio Alternative Educators License (OAEL), a fast track
license developed by the state to address an expected teacher shortage. Full
licensure is earned after two years of novice, mentored full time teaching. The
State of Ohio revised their licensure structure and requirements and eliminated
the OAEL as of January 2012. As a result, the last cohort from UT3 was enrolled
in the university's one-year Licensed Alternative Master's Program (LAMP), a one
year residency program that culminates in full licensure. This change provided
the project information for comparing the two pathways to
licensure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project's primary goal is to study the data
that compares the LAMP program with the OAEL program. It is modifying and
expanding the original plan to better fit the university's redesigned program
and allow for the collection of more detailed information to provide insight as
to the unique process the scholars have experienced from recruitment through
employment. The project is investigating why some scholars are more successful
than others in obtaining a teaching position and what qualities and strategies
are essential in the process of obtaining a teaching position and, once
employment is secured, the development of teaching practice through the novice
stage (first three years). The project is examining the effects the scholars
have on their students and is expanding the evaluation to compare scholar
outcomes based upon program participation LAMP vs. OAEL.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An
in-depth examination of the UT3 program is providing insight as to the process
STEM professionals engage in as they transition to teaching. This project is
studying recent STEM education graduates as they seek employment in the teaching
profession at a time when teaching positions are competitive, as they retool
through the completion of additional coursework, and as the novice teachers
experience their first three or more years of full time teaching. This study is
also comparing professionals who have taken different paths to reach their goal
of teaching.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Findings are being shared with the
University's teacher preparation program and the broader community with the goal
of improving teacher preparation for the non-traditional student. The result is
a program that provides a vibrant system of supports for the new teachers
entering the challenging, ever changing teaching job market. As scholars are
placed in high needs districts, the effects on children from underrepresented
groups as a result of learning from high quality STEM teachers who have been
STEM professionals is being documented. Project findings are shared with other
STEM teacher preparation programs and with K-12 school districts as the data
provides a rich description of the journey from teacher recruit through
professional teacher. Findings also inform policy makers as to the strengths and
weaknesses of alternative teaching licensure programs.