* 1339209
* Plant Genome Engineering using DNA Replicons
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2018
* Daniel Voytas, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Anne W. Sylvester
* 05/31/2018
* USD 1,102,010.00

PI: Daniel F. Voytas (University of Minnesota - Twin
Cities)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Senior personnel: Colby G. Starker (University of
Minnesota - Twin Cities)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In plants, genome engineering
promises to advance basic research by linking DNA sequences to biological
function. Further, genome engineering will enable plants' biosynthetic capacity
to be harnessed to produce the many agricultural products required by an
expanding world population. If successful, the outcome of this research project
will be protocols and reagents for highly efficient plant genome engineering
that will be deposited in public repositories to provide unrestricted access.
With regard to outreach and training, the project will conduct annual workshops
to teach scientists how to use DNA replicons and CRISPR/Cas9 reagents to
efficiently create targeted genome modifications. Undergraduate and graduate
students will also be trained in plant molecular biology. Graduate students will
have the opportunity to study in laboratories around the world, and thereby
become part of the global effort to implement genome engineering for the
advancement of plant biology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent advances in genome
engineering make it possible to precisely alter an organism's genetic blueprint.
Applications of the technology are expansive, ranging from correcting genetic
defects in humans (gene therapy) to understanding gene function in model
organisms. In plants, genome engineering promises to not only advance basic
plant research but also enable the biosynthetic capacity of plants to be
harnessed to produce the many agricultural products required by an expanding
world population. In this project, methods will be developed to efficiently
engineer plant genomes. One focus is to overcome a primary barrier for
implementing this technology, namely the challenge in delivering genome
engineering reagents to plant cells. Here, geminiviruses - plant DNA viruses -
will be developed as vectors for reagent delivery. Because they have DNA
genomes, geminiviruses are ideally suited to deliver the molecules needed to
create targeted sequence alterations, including the sequence-specific nucleases
that stimulate targeted genome modifications and the DNA templates that
incorporate sequence alterations into the genome. Geminivirus-based replicons
will first be optimized using tobacco as a model to undertake a variety of
genomic modifications, including targeted mutagenesis, gene replacement and gene
insertion. The replicons will then be used to carry out a similar spectrum of
modifications in the closely related species, tomato and potato, with the intent
of developing new crop varieties in these species with valuable traits. In
addition, a newly described class of sequence-specific nucleases - the
CRISPR/Cas9 system - will be assessed for its utility for plant genome
engineering. CRISPR/Cas9 reagents will be optimized for expression and activity
in plants, and protocols will be developed to modify single and multiple plant
genes simultaneously.