* 1339842
* MTeach Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2014,06/30/2024
* Thomas Cheatham, Middle Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,427,300.00

The Noyce Phase I project at Middle Tennessee State University (MTSU) is
supporting 43 junior and senior chemistry, geoscience or biology majors each for
two years, as they are educated to become secondary teachers. In addition 80
freshman or sophomore students are supported as they explore a teaching career
through a 2-credit course and an summer intern experience in informal learning
settings, that allows them to see, through early field experiences, what
teaching is like and the reward and satisfaction that can come from teaching. By
partnering in meaningful ways with Volunteer State Community College and
Columbia State Community College, MTSU is ensuring that students from those
schools arrive at MTSU fully-equipped to be competitive for Noyce Scholarships.
The Noyce Project is tightly woven into a newly initiated UTeach replication
model at MTSU called MTeach. The Noyce Scholars experience and practice hands-
on, inquiry-based teaching under the guidance of master teachers and quality
mentors as the Scholars gain deep content knowledge in their STEM majors and
strong pedagogical instruction specific to those content areas. Newly hired
Noyce Scholar Teachers are supported through immersion in an education community
that includes workshops designed to maintain the transformative teacher
preparation culture they enjoyed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Noyce project is
guided by a view of science education that seeks the highest good for the
greatest number for the longest time. Similarly, the project assumes that in
today's knowledge and information age, it is not essential that everyone be able
to do science, but that it is essential that everyone needs to understand
science and how it is done in order to make informed decisions in the
increasingly complex world. The foundational framework is provided by the UTeach
model for STEM teacher education and leverages the institution's commitment to
establishing MTeach. Close collaboration by education and STEM faculty is
ensuring highly-qualified teachers are produced, with respect to both STEM
disciplinary knowledge, teaching pedagogical knowledge, and understanding of how
students learn.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MTSU and its partner 2-year schools are
collaborating with Metropolitan Nashville Public Schools, Grundy County Schools,
Cannon County Schools, Warren County Schools, and Ruther County Schools to meet
needs from recently established guidelines stipulating that all Tennessee high
school graduates complete three years of science including either chemistry or
physics. The project is leveraging an ongoing Noyce project in Physics/Math, as
well as a Noyce Master Teaching Fellows Program.