* 1339348
* Joint NSF/ERA-CAPS: Host Targets of Fungal Effectors as Keys to Durable Disease Resistance
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2019
* Roger Innes, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Clifford Weil
* 03/31/2019
* USD 2,500,000.00

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------

PI: Dan Nettleton (Iowa State University)

Senior Personnel: Roger Wise (USDA-ARS), Adam Bogdanove (Cornell University),
Roger Innes (Indiana University), Fredy Altpeter (University of Florida), Adah
Leshem (Iowa State University) and Jaquelyn Jackson (Tuskegee University)

ERA-CAPS Collaborators: Patrick Schweizer [Leibniz Institute of Plant Genetics
and Crop Plant Research (IPK), Germany] and Pietro Spanu (Imperial College,
United Kingdom)

Crop loss caused by disease remains one of the greatest agricultural challenges
in both developed and developing countries. Obligate fungal pathogens, i.e.,
pathogens that require their host to survive, are a major threat to crop
production worldwide. Effector proteins secreted by these pathogens suppress
host defenses to promote nutrient acquisition and colonization. However, the
molecular mechanisms by which these effectors manipulate these processes are
poorly understood. This project aims to fill this knowledge gap by identifying
the networks of interacting host and pathogen proteins in the well-characterized
barley-powdery mildew, host-microbe system. Previous joint NSF-BBSRC funded
research identified a collection of novel effectors secreted by the powdery
mildew fungus, Blumeria graminis f. sp. hordei, that contribute to pathogen
virulence. This group of effectors will be used to identify host target
proteins, using yeast two-hybrid screens, with the goal of identifying proteins
that are targeted by multiple effectors. These host targets, as well as key
effectors, will be evaluated for their roles in host immunity by silencing via
RNA interference (RNAi) and by overexpression in a bacterial type III delivery
system. Those that impact host immune regulation will be further characterized
using TAL effector nuclease (TALEN) mutagenesis or RNAi-mediated gene silencing
in stable barley transgenics. Among the fungal effectors identified and
characterized thus far is a predicted metalloprotease (BEC1019) that is required
for virulence, suppresses host defenses and is evolutionarily conserved among at
least 96 other diverse fungi, including economically important plant pathogens,
animal pathogens, and free-living non-pathogens. As a proof of concept, barley
will be engineered with a newly discovered system that will activate defense
responses upon detection of BEC1019 activity, which is predicted to confer
resistance to a wide range of fungal pathogens.

Deciphering the molecular functions of evolutionarily conserved fungal effectors
and understanding the host genes that respond will elucidate plant defense
mechanisms and promote broadly applicable disease control strategies. All
research objectives will be incorporated into training and mentoring
opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students, postdocs, and K-12
teachers. International research exchanges with the European ERA-CAPS
(http://www.eracaps.org/) companion project, "Functional characterization and
validation of nonhost components in Triticeae species for durable resistance
against fungal diseases (DURESTrit)", will enhance the training of students and
postdocs. An inquiry-based Research Experience for Teachers on "Inheritance of
Traits and Genes in Barley" (iTAG Barley) will be disseminated to serve
underrepresented groups in secondary schools, community colleges, and 1890 land-
grant institutions, providing hands-on training in genetics as it applies to
agriculture and human health. Public access to project data will be fostered
through a project website, the PLEXdb (www.plexdb.org) on-line database for gene
expression for plants and plant pathogens, as well as NCBI-GEO
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/), Ensembl Genomes
(http://ensemblgenomes.org/), and GrainGenes (wheat.pw.usda.gov). Thus, this
project will promote research, education, and dissemination to a broad audience,
while developing a new generation of agricultural and computational scientists.