* 1339414
* Collaborative Research:   RAPID--Focused Investigations of Relativistic Electron Burst Intensity, Range, and Dynamics (FIREBIRD) II
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2015
* David Klumpar, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Irfan S. Azeem
* 08/31/2015
* USD 148,536.00

This is a short-term (less than one-year) effort to conduct initial operations
and data analysis for the original FIREBIRD mission and to construct a second
set of FIREBIRD cubesats to be launched in August 2014.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Focused Investigations of Relativistic Electron Burst
Intensity, Range, and Dynamics (FIREBIRD) is a space weather NSF CubeSat project
that was selected for funding through the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act
in 2009. It is CubeSat mission consisting of two identical 1.5U satellites that
will measure relativistic electron precipitation with unprecedented temporal
resolution in a high inclination low-Earth orbit to resolve the spatial scale
size and energy dependence of electron microbursts from the Van Allen radiation
belts. FIREBIRD is a collaborative effort between the University of New
Hampshire (UNH) and Montana State University (MSU) and is scheduled for launch
in October 2013 as a secondary payload under NASA's Educational Launch of
Nanosatellites program. Support for initial mission operations and science
analysis to secure the immediate and full success for FIREBIRD as well as the
opportunity to develop an identical pair of spacecraft (FIREBIRD II) at a
fraction of the cost of the original FIREBIRD award while the present workforce
and expertise is in place are the subject of this RAPID proposal.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The so-called "killer" electrons in the radiation belt can
produce deep dielectric discharging in spacecraft components, a significant
concern for satellite health and operations. Microbursts are thought to be a
significant loss mechanism for relativistic electrons but remain poorly
understood, thus rendering space weather predictive models of Earth's radiation
belts incomplete. The FIREBIRD project is design to address important questions
about the physical process that generates relativistic microbursts. FIREBIRD II
providing an additional pair of satellites that collect microburst observations
at the same time greatly enhances the capability to assess the global impact of
microbursts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to addressing
fundamental space physics research and space weather applications, the FIREBIRD
and FIREBIRD II projects also contribute to the training and education of a
diverse population of university students. Students at MSU and UNH will have
major responsibility for the design and implementation of the instruments and
the spacecraft while at the same time being mentored by professionals in each
expert area. The impact is that the fruits of this investigation will continue
strongly for years, if not decades, as the twenty or more students who "cut
their teeth" on this science mission become practicing scientists and engineers.