* 1339835
* SI2-SSE: E-SDMS: Energy Simulation Data Management System Software
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2018
* K. Selcuk Candan, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Sussman
* 09/30/2018
* USD 499,699.00

The building sector was responsible for nearly half of CO2 emissions in US in
2009. According to the US Energy Information Administration, buildings consume
more energy than any other sector, with 48.7% of the overall energy consumption,
and building energy consumption is projected to grow faster than the
consumptions of industry and transportation sectors. As a response to this, by
2030 only 18% of the US building stock is expected to be relying on the current
energy management technologies, with the rest either having been retrofitted or
designed from the ground up using smart and cleaner energy technologies. These
building energy management systems (BEMSs) need to integrate large volumes of
data, including (a) continuously collected heating, ventilation, and air
conditioning (HVAC) sensor and actuation data, (b) other sensory data, such as
occupancy, humidity, lighting levels, air speed and quality, (c) architectural,
mechanical, and building automation system configuration data for these
buildings, (d) local whether and GIS data that provide contextual information,
as well as (e) energy price, consumption, and cost data from electricity (such
as smart grid) and gas utilities. In theory, these data can be leveraged from
the initial design and/or retrofitting of buildings with data driven building
optimization (including the evaluation of the building location, orientation,
and alternative energy-saving strategies) to total cost of ownership (TCOs)
simulation tools and day-to-day operation decisions. In practice, however,
because of the size and complexity of the data, the varying spatial and temporal
scales at which the key processes operate, (a) creating models to support such
simulations, (b) executing simulations that involve 100s of inter-dependent
parameters spanning multiple spatio-temporal frames, affected by complex dynamic
processes operating at different resolutions, and (c) analyzing simulation
results are extremely costly. The energy simulation data management system
(e-SDMS) software will address challenges that arise from the need to model,
index, search, visualize, and analyze, in a scalable manner, large volumes of
multi-variate series resulting from observations and simulations. e-SDMS will,
therefore, fill an important hole in data-driven building design and clean-
energy (an area of national priority) and will enable applications and services
with significant economic and environmental impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key
observations driving the research is that many data sets of urgent interest to
energy simulations include the following: (a) voluminous, (b) heterogeneous, (c)
multi-variate, (d) temporal, (e) inter-related (meaning that the parameters of
interest are dependent on each other and constrained with the structure of the
building), and (f) multi-resolution (meaning that simulations and observations
cover days to months of data and may be considered at different granularities of
space, time, and parameters). Moreover, generating an appropriate ensemble of
simulations for decision making often requires multiple simulations, each with
different parameters settings corresponding to slightly different, but
plausible, scenarios. Therefore, significant savings in modeling and analysis
can be obtained through data management software supporting modular re-use of
existing simulation results in new settings, such as re-contextualization and
modular recomposition (or "sketching") of building models and if-then analysis
of simulation traces under new parameters, new building floorplans, and new
contexts. In developing the energy simulation data management system (e-SDMS),
the research addresses the key data challenges that render data-driven energy
simulations, today, difficult. This requires (a) a novel building models,
simulation traces, and sensor/actuation traces (BSS) data model to accommodate
energy simulation data and models, (b) feature analysis and indexing of sensory
data and simulation traces along with the corresponding building models, and (c)
algorithms for analysis and exploration of simulation traces and re-
contextualization of models for new building plans and contextual metadata. This
research will therefore, impact computational challenges that arise from the
need to model, analyze, index, visualize, search, and recompose, in a scalable
manner, large volumes of multi-variate series resulting from energy observations
and simulations. E-SDMS consists of an (a) eViz server, which works as a
frontend to e-SDMS, an (b) eDMS middleware for feature extraction, indexing,
simulation analysis, and sketching, and an (c) eStore backend for data storage.
To avoid waste and achieve scalabilities needed for managing large data sets,
e-SDMS employs novel multi-resolution data partitioning and resource allocation
strategies. The multi-resolution data encoding, partitioning, and analysis
algorithms are efficiently computable, leverage massive parallelism, and result
in high quality, compact data descriptions.