* 1339156
* Polyploidy and Plasticity in the Crop Brassicas
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Eric Lyons, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 07/31/2019
* USD 2,179,716.00

Rapid global changes are placing unprecedented pressure on plants in
agricultural and natural landscapes. This project explores a poorly understood
area of plant biology: how genome and biological complexity are related and how
that relationship can be manipulated to design responses such as increased
tolerance to abiotic and biotic stresses for agricultural applications. The
future promises rich synthetic biology applications, if the next generation of
scientists is appropriately trained. To address this gap, this project will
provide research training in systems biology and predictive modeling for
postdoctoral fellows, and graduate and undergraduate students. This team will
partner with computer scientists, modeling experts, and journalism students to
provide a vision of integrated systems biology for the new century. All research
and outreach activities proposed are integrated with recruiting and mentoring
students from underrepresented groups. This project will expose trainees and
other students through daily dialogues, joint seminars, team-taught courses, and
other venues. In addition, this project will develop novel computational and
genomic methods that will start to integrate genotype with phenotype, thus
transforming comparative biology. Access to all data, computational tools and
resources generated in this project will be provided to the broader research
community through long-term repositories and through CABBAGE: Community Assets
for Brassica Biology And Genome Evolution, a web portal that will be integrated
with the cyberinfrastructure developed by the NSF-supported iPlant
Collaborative. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Brassica crops have tremendous
morphological and chemical diversity and are ideal for studying domestication
and other economically important plant processes. The goal of this project is to
explore the relationship between polyploidy (the merger and doubling of two
genomes) and plasticity using the crop Brassicas. By integrating comparative
genomics, networks, and genetic models, this project confronts the key question
"Did a whole genome triplication in the crop Brassicas facilitate their
domestication and adaptability?". This project leverages the systems biology and
-omics resources of Arabidopsis to focus on two hypotheses regarding how whole
genome triplication (WGT) affected the Brassicas. The first is whether
polyploidy in the crop Brassicas are associated with global alterations to the
metabolic and gene expression networks, possibly allowing faster growth through
duplication of core, high-flux, enzymes. The second is whether polyploidy and
subsequent domestication by human farmers altered the networks related to biotic
stress in the crop Brassicas. The specific objectives are to: (1) map post-
polyploid duplicated genes using comparative genomics (across species of
Brassica and Arabidopsis) and identify post-polyploid changes in gene co-
expression and metabolism; (2) search for signatures of selection and recent
adaptations to biotic stress during the parallel domestications of Brassica
oleracea (broccoli, cabbage, cauliflower, Brussels sprouts, and kohlrabi) and B.
rapa (turnips, Chinese cabbage, Pak Choi, and oilseeds); and (3) survey gene
expression and glucosinolate levels in F1 hybrids of B. oleracea morphotypes to
identify functional elements in genetic response to stress. Analyses of genome
organization and gene expression will improve the current understanding of the
genetic basis of metabolic innovation. Analyses of transcriptome and metabolic
data will identify the types of variation selected during domestication and
describe the resulting changes to metabolism, growth, and biotic stress
response. Further, this project will describe the evolution of gene expression
patterns in Brassica and test genome-scale models of metabolic networks in
Brassica, which will be refined with glucosinolate measurements.