* 1339185
* Genomic Approaches to Unravel Virulence and Resistance Determinants of Vector-transmitted Viruses in Tomato
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Diane Ullman, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Clifford Weil
* 07/31/2019
* USD 1,640,161.00

PI: S.P. Dinesh-Kumar (University of California-
Davis)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CoPIs: Robert Gilbertson, Diane Ullman, and Ilias
Tagkopoulos (University of California-Davis)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tomato is the
second most important vegetable crop in the world. Tomato production in the US
and worldwide is threatened by two devastating insect-transmitted viruses -
tomato spotted wilt virus (TSWV) and tomato yellow leaf curl virus (TYLCV).
Management of these viruses is difficult and often relies heavily on the use of
insecticides to control the vectors. Insecticidal control is often ineffective,
has negative human health and environmental effects, and can lead to selection
of insecticide-resistant forms of the vectors. In tomato, the Ty1 locus for
TYLCV and the Sw5 locus for TSWV are major genetic resistance sources, and both
have been introgressed into commercial tomato varieties. However, very little is
known about the mechanisms involved in Ty1- and Sw5-mediated resistance. This
project will provide new insights into the nature of and interplay between
mechanisms of plant resistance and susceptibility to infection by insect-
transmitted viruses. These studies will provide insights into whether similar or
different pathways are targeted by RNA (TSWV) versus DNA (TYLCV) viruses during
infection and/or host defense. The project will then use the results from these
studies to optimize and validate a new approach called miRNA-induced gene
silencing (MIGS) that can be used to assess gene function in tomato. If
successful, the outcomes of this project will likely lead to a new generation of
antiviral strategies against these viruses. The project will also provide a
10-week training program every year for undergraduate students from Sacramento
City College and high school students from Davis Senior High
School.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The genetic resistance mediated by Sw5 and Ty1 loci
introgressed from wild tomato relatives into cultivated tomato provides the best
source of protection against TSWV and TYLCV, respectively. The investigators of
this project hypothesize that Sw5- and Ty1-mediated recognition of TSWV and
TYLCV trigger early and discernable transcriptional changes that involve common
and specific immune signaling networks. In addition, infection of these viruses
on susceptible tomato genotypes induces transcriptional changes that promote
virus virulence. To gain insights into the transcriptional changes, the
investigators will use RNAseq approach to identify differentially expressed
transcripts during TSWV and TYLCV resistance and susceptible responses in
tomato. Computational methods will be used to analyze RNASeq data to identify
key common and specific genes that are differentially regulated during TSWV and
TYLCV resistance and susceptible interaction. The project will optimize and
validate the MIGS approach for gene function studies in transgenic tomato by
targeting known candidate genes. The optimized MIGS approach will be used to
evaluate function of selected differentially expressed genes during TYLCV and
TSWV resistance and susceptible interactions in tomato. Results from the project
will likely provide insights into designing new generation of strategies to
control not only TYLCV and TSWV but also other important plant pathogens. All
data and biological resources will be accessible to the public. All RNAseq data
will be deposited and available through GEO. All MIGS vector and candidate
target gene constructs will be available upon request and through Addgene
(https://www.addgene.org/) and ABRC (http://www.biosci.ohio-
state.edu/~plantbio/Facilities/abrc/abrchome.htm). Seeds from transgenic tomato
lines will be available through the Tomato Genetics Resource Center at UC Davis
(http://tgrc.ucdavis.edu/).