* 1339936
* Noyce-CalTeach Scholarship Program @ UCSD Phase II
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2019
* Jeffrey Remmel, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Richardson
* 09/30/2019
* USD 799,972.00

This Track 1, Phase II project involves the Education Studies (EDS) and the
Division of Physical Sciences (PS) of the University of California at San Diego
(UCSD) in a partnership with three area community colleges; each of whom have
articulation agreements with the university to transfer selected education
courses so that incoming community college students are not at a disadvantage
upon transfer and can enter the Noyce Program at an appropriate level. The
partners in this project include: Grossmont, San Diego Mesa and Southwestern
community colleges, the San Diego Unified School District, the San Diego Science
and Engineering Festival and the following partners from the prior Phase 1
project: Grossmont Union High School District, Sweetwater Union High School
District, Gompers Charter School, High Tech High Charter, the Preuss School
Charter, and Guajome Park Academy Charter. As in the Phase I project the
scholarships are concentrated within the last two years (the senior year and
fifth year) of the students' academic work, with additional funds targeted to
support internships for juniors. There are 11 internships set aside for
community college transfer students and transitional summer fellowships for
incoming community college transfer students that include fieldwork in K-12 STEM
classrooms with UCSD faculty. The project is designed to produce 50 teachers and
support 50 internships over the course of the five years of its existence.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many of the features this Phase II project introduces are
designed to build community and make the transition to in-service teaching as
seamless as possible. These include: institution of a Science Ambassador Program
for pre-Scholar students which offers internships and opportunities to assist
during the annual San Diego Festival of Science and Engineering, to tutor and
mentor at other times and to assist with science fair projects; explicit
targeting of community college STEM students for transfer to UCSD and applying
to the Noyce program; formal inclusion of mentoring of pre-service teachers by
Noyce Master Teachers; and involvement of the campus student group, Teachers for
Change, which pursues outreach both on- and off-campus.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: The success of the Phase 1 project
(original goals for scholars were met and 94% of the students supported are now
teaching), the experience of the team, and the solid planning based on the
outcomes from Phase 1 are all part of this project's intellectual merit.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The strong partnership with area community
colleges and a pro-active plan for merging community college students into the
program, having them work alongside their counterparts from UCSD during their
internship is an indicator of a very proactive outreach for recruiting and
retaining these students.