* 1339492
* III: Travel Grant: International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging
* CSE,IIS
* 04/15/2013,03/31/2014
* Bahram Parvin, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 03/31/2014
* USD 16,000.00

IEEE International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging (ISBI): from Nano to Macro
Student Travel Awards 2013, PI: Bahram Parvin, U.C.
Riverside&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project provides NSF Student Travel
Fellowships to graduate students and Ph.D. candidates in computational
bioimaging or closely related areas to attend and participate in the 2013 ISBI
conference organized jointly by the IEEE Signal Processing Society (SPS) and
Engineering in Medicine and Biology (EMB) in San Francisco, California from
April 7 to 11, 2013. ISBI emphasizes methodologies that have the potential to be
applicable to multiple imaging modalities and to imaging at different scales.
Topics include multi-scale physiological analysis and modeling of biological
processes. The meeting aims to facilitate cross fertilization of computational
techniques between different imaging modalities and scales, with applications
ranging from the nano and molecular imaging, via electron and optical
microscopy, to macroscopic imaging via small animal imagers and whole body
clinical systems. Special efforts will be made to attract women and members of
groups that are underrepresented within image-based modeling of biological
systems and integrative biology. The NSF student travel award recipients will be
able to attend the plenary and contributed talks, grand challenges and tutorials
that are part of ISBI 2013 as well as interactions with leading researchers in
the world. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The International Symposium
on Biomedical Imaging provides a forum where top-notch students interact with
leaders in the field and engage in intellectual discussions with other
superlative students in a wide array of bio-imaging and related disciplines.
Students are able to view presentations on topics related to their own fields of
academic study and to participate in didactic interactions. Without the NSF
support, many students would be less likely to attend the conference, thus
missing an introduction to the world of knowledge available at such professional
meetings. In addition, the meeting provides a forum for recognizing the talents
of women and minorities in the field of multi-scale image-based modeling and
bioengineering. Ultimately, the forum provides the means for Graduate students
and Ph.D. candidates to improve the quality of dissertation research and make
better informed decisions for advancing their career
objectives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The International Symposium on
Biomedical Imaging promotes not only education within the image-based modeling
and visualization of biological systems, but fosters the next generation
engineers, modelers, and computer scientists by providing a unique opportunity
for the students to meet and network with the leading scientists in the world.
It also provides students an opportunity to participate in grand challenges and
to learn about the state of art computational methods for solving complex
problems in image-based modeling and analysis, and hypothesis generation from
"big data", which are being generated through several national initiatives. For
the first time, ISBI is enjoying a rapid growth in grand challenges, and this
process will be an extraordinary exposure for students. Grand challenges set the
bar for performance and elicit technological advancement and sophistication for
the next generation researchers.