* 1339462
* Collaborative Research: Interaction Potential and the Social and Economic Vibrancy of Metropolitan Regions
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2013,02/28/2017
* Steven Farber, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 02/28/2017
* USD 119,214.00

This research project will examine how urban spatial structure affects social
interaction potential (SIP), the ability for people to make face-to-face
contact. The project's primary goals are to determine which elements of the
urban spatial structure restrict or support SIP and to quantify the degree to
which SIP affects social and economic vibrancy. The researchers will develop a
new metric for measuring SIP and will use it to discover how SIP varies within
and between metropolitan regions, to determine how spatial structure influences
these measurements, and to quantify the intra- and inter-regional socioeconomic
outcomes attributable to SIP. The SIP metric will quantify the opportunities for
social interaction using the time-geographic concept of joint-accessibility, the
ease with which two people can be at the same place and time given a set of
constraints. Using large, readily available sample travel behavior data, the
metric will be computed for all metropolitan regions in the United States with
populations greater than one million people. The role of regional-scale spatial
structure on social interaction opportunities has seen only limited attention in
the literature, yet understanding the complexities of this relationship will
greatly advance basic knowledge of how the geography of urban regions can foster
vitality in an increasingly competitive, globalized
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research requires intensive computation and
will apply massively parallel computational resources to enhance basic knowledge
about urban social and economic processes. The output of these computations will
show how elements of the urban spatial structure relate to SIP and will enable
tests of whether SIP is statistically associated with indicators of social and
economic vibrancy. The project will provide new perspectives regarding how
spatial aspects of the human environment affect regional societies and
economies. It will help assess whether urban spatial structure can be used to
make cities more innovative, integrated, interactive, and inclusive. In
addition, time geography, a method originally developed to explore individual-
level time-space trajectories, will be used to investigate regional-scale
outcomes, thus expanding and potentially transforming how time geographic
methods can be applied in urban analyses. This project will provide new
information, insights, and methods that may enhance the socioeconomic vibrancy
of metropolitan regions through better land-use and transportation policy. The
project also will provide education and research opportunities for graduate and
undergraduate students.