* 1339160
* The Development of a Shared Software Platform for the Scientific Study of Social Exclusion
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2013,05/31/2016
* Kipling Williams, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* kerry marsh
* 05/31/2016
* USD 59,998.00

The effect of ostracism -- being ignored and excluded, also known as social
exclusion -- has attracted substantial research interest in the last twenty
years. Research has shown that being ostracized is painful and distressing, and
leads to a variety of consequences. Regions of the brain that are associated
with physical pain are activated when an individual is ostracized for as little
as two minutes. Ostracized individuals suffer a loss of belonging, lowered self-
esteem, a sense of helplessness, and existential invisibility. These thwarted
needs lead to poor decision-making, depression, diminished self-regulation,
heightened aggression, and greater susceptibility to social influence. Young
children who have endured ostracism are at risk in their adolescence;
adolescents exposed to ostracism show greater vulnerability to risky sex and
drug usage. The most widely used research tool to study ostracism is a virtual
online platform created by Dr. Kipling Williams and his students in 1998. This
freely available program allows for the experimental manipulation of inclusion
and ostracism by the other "players" in the game. These players are actually
programmed by the experimenter to include the participant or not. This program
can also be used to observe and test hypotheses related to discrimination, by
tracking which computerized player the participant engages. This platform has
been used test hypotheses by researchers from nearly all subfields of
psychology, as well as from pediatrics, psychiatry, medicine, and neuroscience
as this software platform is particularly well suited for use in fMRI studies.
Well over 20,000 participants have participated in research using the platform
worldwide. There are now over 150 published articles by researchers using the
platform, and the demand is growing. The current platform, however, is limited
in its scope and application, and is in dire need of upgrading. The current
computer program is not easily accessible to all researchers, does not work on
all operating systems and web browsers, and the options for variations and
manipulations available to researchers is limited. With NSF support, Dr.
Williams and his colleagues will substantial upgrade the platform to develop the
program's functionality. As a result, in addition to its prior uses, the new
program will be expanded to become a useful tool for examining group-level
effects of social exclusion, as well many other requested variations for use by
researchers in other labs. The proposed upgrade will make the computer program
easier to access on multiple computer platforms and devices, and easier to
create variations of interest to researchers. Current demand suggests that an
improved version will aid researchers in understanding the impact of ostracism,
discover downstream negative consequences, and devise effective interventions
that will aid in functional coping. In sum, this proposal provide all scholars
interested in studying ostracism with a larger set of options, both technical
and psychological, for doing so.