* 1339649
* Collaborative Research: SI2-SSI: Open Gateway Computing Environments Science Gateways Platform as a Service (OGCE SciGaP)
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2018
* Borries Demeler, University of Texas Health Science Center San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Rajiv Ramnath
* 09/30/2018
* USD 600,065.00

Science Gateways are virtual environments that dramatically accelerate
scientific discovery by enabling scientific communities to utilize distributed
computational and data resources (that is, cyberinfrastructure). Successful
Science Gateways provide access to sophisticated and powerful resources, while
shielding their users from the resources' complexities. Given Science Gateways'
demonstrated impact on progress in many scientific fields, it is important to
remove barriers to the creation of new gateways and make it easier to sustain
them. The Science Gateway Platform (SciGaP) project will create a set of hosted
infrastructure services that can be easily adopted by gateway providers to build
new gateways based on robust and reliable open source tools. The proposed work
will transform the way Science Gateways are constructed by significantly
lowering the development overhead for communities requiring access to
cyberinfrastructure, and support the efficient utilization of shared resources.

SciGaP will transform access to large scale computing and data resources by
reducing development time of new gateways and by accelerating scientific
research for communities in need of access to large-scale resources. SciGaP's
adherence to open community and open governance principles of the Apache
Software Foundation will assure open source software access and open operation
of its services. This will give all project stakeholders a voice in the software
and will clear the proprietary fog that surrounds cyberinfrastructure services.
The benefits of SciGaP services are not restricted to scientific fields, but can
be used to accelerate progress in any field of endeavor that is limited by
access to computational resources. SciGaP services will be usable by a community
of any size, whether it is an individual, a lab group, a department, an
institution, or an international community. SciGaP will help train a new
generation of cyberinfrastructure developers in open source development,
providing these early career developers with the ability to make publicly
documented contributions to gateway software and to bridge the gap between
academic and non-academic development.