* 1339798
* SI2-SSE: Collaborative Research: Software Elements for Transfer and Analysis of Large-Scale Scientific Data
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2013,04/30/2018
* Rajkumar Kettimuthu, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 04/30/2018
* USD 99,995.00

As science has become increasingly data-driven, and as data volumes and velocity
are increasing, scientific advance in many areas will only be feasible if
critical `big-data' problems are addressed - and even more importantly, software
tools embedding these solutions are readily available to the scientists.
Particularly, the major challenge being faced by current data-intensive
scientific research efforts is that while the dataset sizes continue to grow
rapidly, neither among network bandwidths, memory capacity of parallel machines,
memory access speeds, and disk bandwidths are increasing at the same
rate.&lt;br/&gt;Building on top of recent research at Ohio State University,
which includes work on automatic data virtualization, indexing methods for
scientific data, and a novel bit-vectors based sampling method, the goal of this
project is to fully develop, disseminate, deploy, and support robust software
elements addressing challenges in data transfers and analysis. The prototypes
that have been already developed at Ohio State are being extended into two
robust software elements: an extention of GridFTP (Grid Partial-File Transport
Protocol)that allows users to specify a subset of the file to be transferred,
avoiding unnecessary transfer of the entire file; and Parallel Readers for
NetCDF and HDF5 for Paraview and VTK, data subsetting and sampling tools for
NetCDF and HDF5 that perform data selection and sampling at the I/O level, and
in parallel.&lt;br/&gt;This project impacts a number of scientific areas, i.e.,
any area that involves big (and growing) dataset sizes and need for data
transfers and/or visualization. This project also contributes to computer
science research in `big data', including scientific (array-based) databases,
and visualization. Another contribution will be towards preparation of the broad
science and engineering research community for big data handling and analytics.