* 1339881
* Collaborative Research: SI2-SSI: A Comprehensive Ray Tracing Framework for Visualization in Distributed-Memory Parallel Environments
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Charles Hansen, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Rajiv Ramnath
* 09/30/2017
* USD 282,225.00

Scientific visualization plays a large role in exploring the scientific
simulations that run on supercomputers; new discoveries are often made by
studying renderings generated through visualization of simulation results. The
standard technique for rendering geometry is rasterization and the most commonly
used library for performing this is OpenGL. Many visualization programs (VisIt,
Ensight, VAPOR, ParaView, VTK) use OpenGL for rendering. However, recent
architectural changes on supercomputers create significant opportunities for
alternate rendering techniques. The computational power available on emerging
many-core architectures, such as the Intel Xeon Phi processors on TACC?s
Stampede system, enable ray-tracing, a higher quality technique. Further, as the
amount of geometry per node rises, ray-tracing becomes increasingly cost
effective, since its computational costs are proportional to the screen size,
not the geometry size. Finally, the software implementation for OpenGL can not
be easily mapped to non-GPU multi-core and many-core systems, creating a
significant gap; if not closed, visualization will not be possible directly on
large supercomputers. This confluence of new, more capable architectures, the
increase in geometry per node, and concerns about the durability of the
established rendering path all motivate this work. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
address these trends, this research uses a two-pronged approach. First, the
research will replace the OpenGL pathways that are commonly used for
visualization with a high-performance, open-source ray tracing engine that can
interactively render on both a CPU and on accelerator architectures. This new
library will support the OpenGL API and will be usable immediately by any
OpenGL-based visualization package without additional code
modi&amp;#64257;cation. Second, this research will provide a direct interface to
a high-performance distributed ray tracing engine so that applications can take
advantage of ray tracing capabilities not easily exposed through the standard
OpenGL interface, such as participating media and global illumination
simulation. These features will enable the open science community to easily
create photo-realistic imagery with natural lighting cues to aid in analysis and
discovery. It will further expand the capacity of existing cyberinfrastructure
to provide interactive visualization on standard HPC resources.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work has the potential to revolutionize in situ
visualization capabilities by unifying the (potentially hybrid) architecture
that efficiently run both simulation and visualization. Communicating with
underrepresented groups will be a major component of outreach efforts through
the PCARP, MITE and Women in Engineering programs. In addition, the project team
will disseminate this work to the general public through NSF XD program, the
VisIt visualization toolkit and by exhibiting at forums such as IEEE
Visualization, IEEE High Performance Graphics and ACM Supercomputing.