* 1339356
* Illinois State University (ISU) Initiates Teacher Education in Computer Science (TECS)
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2019
* Anu Gokhale, Board of Trustees of Illinois State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 09/30/2019
* USD 700,046.00

Illinois State University (ISU) proposes a project -- Teacher Education in
Computer Science (TECS) -- which will create an innovative structure for
preparing in-service and future high school teachers to teach Computer Science
(CS). Although the Illinois State Board of Education (ISBE) has established
standards for a CS Endorsement, currently there are no CS Teacher Education
programs in the state. This project will create a state-approved program of
study at ISU so that upon its completion, teaches will be well-positioned to
pass the certification exam for the CS Endorsement. The TECS curriculum will
mesh with existing ISU Mathematics and Technology teacher education major
requirements, so that student teachers and in-service teachers in those fields
can efficiently obtain the CS endorsement, making TECS graduates highly
employable. The TECS program will recruit in-service math and technology
teachers from school districts in 50-mile radius of ISU, as well as ISU students
from Mathematics Teacher Education (MTE) and Technology &amp; Engineering
Education (T&amp;EE). The TECS curriculum will be created by an
interdisciplinary team of ISU faculty, out of existing courses from CS,
Mathematics, and Technology, with advice from the NSF-funded "Taste of
Computing" team in Chicago. UCLA's Gail Chapman will provide a design for a new
CS teaching methods course to be added to existing courses, to be piloted in
cooperation with the Taste of Computing institutions. Faculty and student
learning communities will be formed to foster an academic, social, and cultural
environment to successfully implement the TECS program. The project will utilize
advanced CS majors for peer-tutoring and mentoring TECS students. Scholarships
will be provided as needed for pre-service and in-service teachers in TECS.
Especially for in-service teachers, TECS will offer evening, summer, or online
classes. Continual multi-faceted evaluation of learning outcomes and program
operation will include competency-based tests and attitude measures for TECS
participants, and feedback forms for participating faculty, peer-tutors and
mentors, professionals, and student teaching supervisors. The project will host
statewide annual summits for relevant educators, industry representatives, and
state officials to raise awareness and promote quality CS education in Illinois
schools. The ISU administration, MTE and T&amp;EE Directors, and district
administrators of surrounding school districts (like Bloomington, Dunlap, and
Peoria) and Chicago Public Schools are highly supportive of the TECS program.