* 1339637
* NSMDS: Improving Material Safety through the Minimization of Oxidative Stress Potential:  A mechanistic understanding of ROS generation in in vitro and in vivo systems
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2019
* William Jorgensen, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Katharine Covert
* 08/31/2019
* USD 4,997,988.00

With this award, the NSF Division of Chemistry and the Environmental Protection
Agency, through a program of Networks for Sustainable Molecular Design and
Synthesis, support Professors Paul Anastas and William Jorgensen and Dr. Evan
Beach of Yale University in establishing a Network for Improving Material Safety
through Minimization of Oxidative Stress Potential. This network includes
scientists at Baylor University, George Washington University, and the
University of Washington who each have critical roles to play in advancing the
goals of the project. This network advances the science of rational design of
chemicals and materials for reduced adverse biological activity. Utilizing
empirical toxicity data, both in vivo and in vitro, computational models to
describe molecular events that trigger toxic responses are being developed.
Through an iterative process of laboratory and computational studies, design
guidelines (physical and chemical property parameters) are being created for
molecules with minimal potential to cause oxidative stress through multiple
toxicity pathways. This strategy involves preparing model training sets based on
chemicals relevant to toxicity associated with reactive oxygen species (ROS);
using computational chemistry to model and predict chemical pathways that result
in oxidative stress; modeling and measuring both in vivo and in vitro impacts of
chemicals that generate ROS; and correlating in silico and experimental results
to develop design parameters for minimal ROS
activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chemicals and the materials created through
advanced chemistry are the basis of our society and our economy. Yet, with all
of the excellent toxicology that has helped us understand and in some cases
predict toxicity associated with industrial chemicals, little progress has been
made in answering the fundamental scientific questions that would allow for the
design of chemicals with reduced hazard to humans and the environment. Although
the vast majority of commercial chemicals are not intended to have biological
activity, unintended toxicity is largely due to the lack of guidelines for
coupling efficacy of function with design for reduced hazard. New guidelines and
design tools aid in formulation of existing chemical products and guide
innovation in safe alternatives. Acceptance and implementation of these tools
are promoted by educational campaigns for students and professional chemists.
Additional efforts seek to inform chemical policy by providing a means of
managing classes of chemicals by common properties rather than on a case-by-case
basis, with the overall goal to promote innovation through the use of rational
chemical design to reduce or eliminate the toxic effects of new materials.