* 1339287
* High Resolution Functional Genomics of Fleshy Fruit Development and Environmental Responses
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2020
* James Giovannoni, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 08/31/2020
* USD 4,696,930.00

PI: Jocelyn K.C. Rose (Cornell University)&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;CoPIs: Carmen
Catala and Zhangjun Fei (Boyce Thompson Institute for Plant Research) and James
J. Giovannoni (USDA-ARS/Boyce Thompson Institute for Plant Research)&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Fleshy fruit are unique plant developmental systems and provide
important components of human and animal diets. Tomato (Solanum lycopersicum),
an economically important crop, has emerged as the principal model for studies
of fleshy fruit development, ripening, shelf life and nutritional quality.
However, many fundamental questions related to key aspects of the development,
physiology, quality traits and environmental responses of fleshy fruit remain
unanswered. This project will decipher complex problems in plant biology that
are also central to fleshy fruit development and quality: (i) the regulatory
processes that influence fruit growth and ripening; (ii) the associated hormone
biosynthesis and signaling pathways; and (iii) molecular events that result in
cell wall formation and restructuring, and that provide protection from
environmental stresses. An important element of this project is the development
of a strong education and training component. This will take the form of two
programs: (1) an annual Plant Genomics and Systems Biology Workshop, comprising
a series of integrated 'technology modules' with both seminars and lab-based
practical training in 'omics disciplines'; (2) a multi-level training course in
Scientific Communication, providing guidance in both oral and written
presentation skills. These will be affiliated with undergraduate students, high
school students and high school teachers, with particular emphasis on the
participation of under-represented groups through the support of a network of
existing Cornell programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Studies to date have provided
valuable initial insights into the identity and temporal expression patterns of
some of the genes that regulate fruit development; however, they have almost
exclusively used total tomato fruit pericarp ('flesh') and have largely ignored
spatial variation in global gene expression in the different constituent cell
types. The goal of this project is to extend these studies to characterize the
responses of fruits to drought, an increasing problem in crop production, in
tomato using cutting edge genomics technologies. These studies will be extended
to two diverse wild relatives of tomato that show a high tolerance of water
stress, and so may provide opportunities for crop improvement. The expected
outcomes are: A) the Tomato Expression Atlas (TEA), a gene expression database
for cultivated tomato and wild relatives, and new insights into the regulatory
circuitry that controls fruit development and responses to drought, at a
cell/tissue type level of resolution; B) detailed information about the tissue
specificity of hormone biosynthesis and signaling pathways, and cell wall
biosynthesis and remodeling during fruit development in tomato and wild
relatives, and following drought treatments. Public access to all data and
biological materials will be through the Tomato Expression Atlas (TEA) website
and long-term public repositories. All DNA sequences will be released to the
public domain immediately after generation and quality control through Genbank
(http://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov) and SGN (http://solgenomics.net). Raw RNA-Seq, sRNA-
seq and BS-seq datasets generated under this project will be submitted to NCBI
SRA (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sra) for long term storage and public access
while processed expression and methylation profiles will be archived and
accessed through the TEA and through the Tomato Functional Genomics Database
(http://solgenomics.net/ted) and the Tomato Epigenome database
(http://ted.bti.cornell.edu/epigenome).