* 1339779
* Southeast Massachusetts Science Teacher Scholars Program
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2020
* Nicole Glen, BRIDGEWATER STATE UNIVERSITY
* Continuing Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 08/31/2020
* USD 1,439,712.00

The Noyce Teacher Scholar Program at Bridgewater State College (BSC) in
Massachusetts includes as partners Massasoit Community College (MCC), and four
districts: Brockton Public Schools, Randolph Public Schools, Fall River Public
Schools, and Freetown and Lakeville Public Schools. The Science Teachers
Scholars program is providing 2-year scholarships to 40 pre-service
undergraduates during their junior and senior years, as well as summer
internships to 24 freshmen or sophomores. At least 6 of the Scholars have
transferred to BSU after two years at MCC, and 6 of the Interns are current MCC
students. The project is focusing on STEM majors in biology, chemistry, physics
and geology, with a special emphasis on chemistry and physics. Twenty-eight of
the STEM majors are preparing to become secondary education teachers and twelve
are preparing to become elementary education teachers. Because MCC serves a very
diverse population, the project is enabling students pursuing a STEM degree and
with a variety of backgrounds and experiences opportunities to become highly-
qualified STEM teachers at the K-12 level. Master teacher-mentors from each of
the partner school districts work with the Science Teacher Scholars throughout
their education and beginning year of teaching and provide mentoring in relation
to teaching science in high-needs schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is
utilizing the Center for the Advancement of STEM Education at BSU where interns
work with existing biotechnology, chemistry, environmental, or astronomy
projects to engage STEM majors in delivering inquiry pedagogy. STEM majors help
design and run after-school science enrichment programs as another recruiting
experience. Scholars pursuing an elementary education career are enrolled in a
traditional STEM major and in the early childhood or elementary education major
leading to an initial license. Students intending a middle or high school
teaching career are enrolled in a traditional STEM major and the secondary
education minor, again leading to an initial license. New 1-credit Science
Education Workshops are being developed to address topics that are not currently
covered in the Scholars science or pedagogical courses but that the teacher-
mentors deem important for future science teachers to know, particular those
useful in high-needs schools. During their first years of teaching, Science
Teacher Scholars participate fully in the New Teacher Partnership, a pair of
programs offered at BSC to new teachers throughout the local area. The first is
the New Teacher Academy, a two-day event each August, and the second is the New
Teacher Seminar Series, a monthly program during the Academic Year that focuses
on teaching in general as well as teaching science. Research involves a study of
the effectiveness of recruitment efforts along with the effectiveness,
confidence, and retention of the Science Teacher Scholars compared to non-
scholarship recipients.