* 1339207
* Reference Annotations for Small RNA-producing Genes in Plants
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2014,04/30/2019
* Michael Axtell, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Clifford Weil
* 04/30/2019
* USD 907,370.00

PI: Michael J. Axtell (Pennsylvania State University - University Park)

CoPI: Matthew Jones-Rhoades (Knox College)

Genes are discrete sections of DNA within chromosomes that encode specific
functional products. Gene expression is the production of RNA copies of these
discrete DNA sections that are then either used to encode for proteins, or are
functional as RNAs in their own right. Gene annotations identify and
characterize the location of genes throughout a complete genome sequence.
Annotations of protein-coding genes have received a great deal of attention, and
are at a relatively advanced state for many plant species of agricultural and
economic interest. In contrast, annotations for many other types of genes are
much less developed. Regulatory small RNAs are short bits of RNA that function
to turn off the expression of other genes in the genome and have been implicated
as key players in several important plant traits, including disease resistance,
tolerance to adverse environmental conditions, and plant growth traits affecting
yield. One sub-type of regulatory small RNA genes, the microRNAs, are well-
studied and well-annotated. However, microRNAs account for a very small fraction
of the overall small RNA gene population in plants; preliminary data indicate
that a typical plant genome has just a few hundred microRNA genes, but tens of
thousands of genes encoding other types of regulatory small RNAs. This project
seeks to provide systematic annotations of plant genes that produce all types
regulatory small RNAs for several plants of agricultural and societal interest,
including rice, maize, tomato, and apple.

Knowing where in the genome the genes are, and what types of products they
produce, is key information for genetic approaches to plant improvement.
Regulatory small RNAs are clearly a major type of gene in plants, but their
annotation is currently under-developed. Systematic and reliable gene
annotations for regulatory small RNA genes will accelerate genetic, genomic, and
breeding experiments to identify superior plant varieties to meet the challenge
of feeding a growing population and maintaining the astounding productivity of
American agriculture in the face of a changing climate. This project is also
training graduate and undergraduate students in modern plant genetics through
mentored research experience, and allowing the development of novel
undergraduate courses. All project outcomes from this project will be made
available without restriction via the project website at
http://plantsmallrnagenes.psu.edu/. Sequence data will be available through
long-term repositories (GEO, SRA) and small RNA gene models will be provided to
community portals such as Gramene and MaizeGDB.