* 1339530
* U.S. China Planning Visit: Roots of Technological Innovation and Change in Ceramic Traditions of Sichuan Province
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2015
* Chandra Reedy, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Claire Hemingway
* 08/31/2015
* USD 38,998.00

This project will catalyze a long-term collaboration between U.S. and Chinese
scientists to investigate mechanisms of technological innovation and change.
Focusing on ceramic traditions of Sichuan Province, the specific research
objective is to identify the circumstances that encourage and allow for the high
level of experimentation that fosters technological change. Sichuan, in
southwestern China, is an ideal location for studying long-term change, offering
archaeological collections, historical archives, and modern potters who still
work in a traditional manner, often in relatively isolated environments. Five
main parameters that will be investigated are materials availability, production
organization, geographic location, market types, and political stability.
Research methods will involve a combination of field observations and
interviews, mapping, historical and archival research, and laboratory analysis
of representative ethnographic and archaeological ceramics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Developing a more sophisticated understanding of
mechanisms underlying technological change is a central research issue in the
social sciences, yet theory to explain the origins of technological innovation
is sparse. This project aims to help fill that gap. Results from this work will
contribute to a more comprehensive understanding of how and why technological
change occurs in a variety of cultural contexts, especially ones that require
adapting to challenging environmental and cultural issues. By understanding the
factors that contribute to the flourishing of innovation, or to its suppression,
it is more likely that our society can develop a supportive structure for
technological experimentation, responsiveness to changing natural or cultural
environments, and the ability to innovate when necessary for economic health.