* 1339567
* Conference: 2013 Molecular Genetics of Bacteria and Phages: August 6-10, 2013, University of Wisconsin, Madison
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2014
* Patricia Kiley, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 07/31/2014
* USD 8,000.00

Intellectual Merit: This project will fund registration awards for graduate
students, postdoctoral fellows, and junior investigators who require funding to
attend the 2013 Molecular Genetics of Bacteria and Phages Conference to be held
at the University of Wisconsin, Madison from August 6-10, 2013. Applicants will
be recruited by advertisements in scientific journals and direct emails to a
broad email list that includes past and probable conference attendees. The
advertisement directs the recipient to the conference web site
(http://www.union.wisc.edu/phages/index.html), which contains instructions for
applying for a registration award. All applicants for the registration awards
are required to submit an abstract for an oral or poster presentation and a
letter outlining financial need. The applications and abstracts are reviewed by
the conference organizers, who make awards on the basis of scientific merit and
financial need. The Molecular Genetics of Bacteria and Phages conference is the
direct descendent of the original 'phage meetings' organized by Delbruck, Luria,
Hershey, and colleagues in the 1940s, and thus is the oldest scientific
gathering focused on prokaryotic molecular biology. While the focus of the
meeting has expanded over the years, it still remains dedicated to the problem-
oriented philosophy and cross-disciplinary nature of the physicists, chemists,
and microbiologists who founded the meeting. The conference provides a forum for
the presentation and discussion of the latest research findings and technical
advances in modern prokaryotic molecular biology. It is the primary scientific
meeting for many laboratories working with bacteria and phage; the average
attendance is over 325. A central aspect and major attraction of the meeting is
the breadth and interdisciplinary emphasis of the research presented. The 2013
meeting will integrate sessions ranging from basic phage genetics to genome
enabled biology, from atomic level structure-function analyses to microbial cell
biology, from single-molecule biochemistry to viral self-assembly, and from host
interactions to ecology and evolution. The diversity of research areas is
mirrored by the diversity of organisms investigated, including model organisms
as well as environmentally relevant bacteria and phages. The importance of
assembling researchers who take diverse approaches to solving problems of
relevance to microbes is a priority, particularly those that are transforming
microbiology by using genome enabled approaches and integrating computational
biology with experiments.

Broader Impacts: A key objective of the meeting is to provide a broad
educational experience for graduate students, postdoctoral fellows, and other
young scientists who constitute over half of the attendees of the meeting.
Nearly all the graduate students and postdoctoral fellows attending this meeting
give a poster or oral presentation. It is one of the few remaining open-program
meetings, where the majority of the oral presentations are selected from
submitted abstracts and all of the vibrant poster sessions run for the entire
meeting. Consequently, the people actually performing the research give most of
the presentations. Another goal of the meeting is to have a diverse group of
scientists as session chairs and presenters. In addition, leading scientists are
invited to present comprehensive introductions to the 9 scientific sessions and
short talks on their own works. The session chairs represent a mixture of
established senior investigators and prominent emerging junior investigators.
The keynote speaker will be a distinguished interdisciplinary scientist. The
session leaders and keynote speaker remain on site for the majority of the
meeting. As such, scientific experts are always in the audience, which ensures
high scientific standards and critical yet supportive questioning and commentary
at the conclusion of talks. The close proximity of graduate students,
postdoctoral fellows, and junior and senior faculty generates a unique
atmosphere for scientific and educational interactions.