* 1339781
* SI2-SSE: A Sustainable Wireless Sensor Software Development Framework for Science and Engineering Researchers
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Selcuk Uluagac, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Rajiv Ramnath
* 08/31/2017
* USD 506,000.00

In the last decade, wireless sensor networking has been one of the most popular
research areas for computer engineers and scientists. The use of wireless
sensors has also started to gain popularity among researchers other than
computer engineers and scientists. Today, sensors are used to enable civil
engineers to monitor the structural health of deteriorating infrastructure such
as highways and bridges, farmers to develop precision-agriculture techniques,
ecologists to observe wildlife in their natural habitat, geophysicists to
capture seismic activity of volcanoes, and in many other application areas.
However, the task of developing software applications for wireless sensors is
challenging for researchers because sensors have limited technical capabilities
and software implementations for sensors require meticulous procedures to
provide a desired level of services (e.g., reliability, security) for
applications. This situation is even further exacerbated for researchers in
other fields of engineering and science (e.g., civil engineers and
geophysicists) as they may not have a rigorous programming background.
Therefore, to facilitate the design, development and implementation of wireless
sensor applications, this project provides a new framework called PROVIZ, which
integrates visualization and programming functionalities into a common platform.
PROVIZ is an open-source, platform independent, modular, and extensible
framework for heterogeneous wireless sensor monitoring and application
development. It consists of a set of easy-to-use simplified languages (one
domain specific scripting language, one icon-based drag-and-drop style visual
language) and a simple programming editor for developing wireless sensor
applications and a mechanism for (re)programming wireless sensor nodes remotely
over-the-air by distributing the generated application image. PROVIZ has the
capability to visualize wireless sensor data captured from (1) a packet sniffer,
(2) a binary packet trace file (e.g., PSD format), and (3) an external simulator
running a wireless sensor application. PROVIZ also has the capability to process
data from multiple sniffers simultaneously to visualize a large wireless sensor
deployment. PROVIZ will be instrumental to scientists and engineers working with
wireless sensors in many disciplines (e.g., civil engineering, ecology,
agriculture). PROVIZ will allow these researchers to easily program sensors and
to focus more on the tasks in their domains by significantly reducing the
overhead of learning how to program sensors. The PROVIZ project will be
conducted as an open source project, enabling interested software developers to
benefit from and add to it. Further, a variation of PROVIZ will be used to
present sensor networking concepts to middle school underrepresented minority
students in Georgia. Given the proliferation of wireless sensor utilization in
various engineering and science fields, it is envisioned that the success of the
PROVIZ project will help contribute to the growth of the future cyber workforce
in the U.S.