* 1339993
* Robert Noyce Mathematics Teacher Scholarship Program
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2014,06/30/2020
* Puneet Gill, Texas A&M International University
* Standard Grant
* Susan Carson
* 06/30/2020
* USD 1,199,971.00

The Texas A&amp;M International University (TAMIU) Robert Noyce Mathematics
Teacher Scholarship Program is supporting thirty-six individuals in becoming
highly-qualified teachers committed to teaching mathematics in high-need high
schools in the Laredo, Texas area. The project is increasing the collaboration
between mathematics faculty in the College of Arts and Sciences and faculty in
the College of Education, to ensure well-prepared teachers enter the workforce.
To support the effort, the project is adding an integrated course that combines
mathematics content and teaching pedagogy preparation, all based on best
practices research. Scholars are being supported through Professional
Development workshops, membership in the Texas Council of Teachers of
Mathematics, and travel to an annual mathematics conference. The scholars being
awarded Noyce support are recruited both from students already enrolled at TAMIU
and those graduating from Laredo Community College who are academically strong
in mathematics and continuing their higher education at TAMIU. To aid in
recruiting talented students who might otherwise not consider a teaching career,
thirty-six, one-month-long summer internships are offered to freshmen or
sophomores at the place of their choosing. These hands-on internships occur at
the Laredo Community College Lamar Bruni Vergara Environmental Science Center or
at the Imaginarium of South Texas. Working with students on mathematics project
in these informal settings is reinforcing participants' career choices. The
school districts partnering with TAMIU include the Laredo Independent School
District and the United Independent School District. To help address the sense
of professional isolation that too often leads to lack of retention in newly
hired teachers, the project is supporting scholars during the induction period
both with face-to-face and virtual mentor that includes both an education
faculty and a mathematics faculty member.