* 1340947
* CC-NIE Network Infrastructure: Enhancing Connectivity for Multidisciplinary Scientific Research and Education at Auburn University
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2016
* Saad Biaz, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 12/31/2016
* USD 494,760.00

There is a growing demand at Auburn University for an on-campus
cyberinfrastructure that can enable high-speed communication for data-intensive
scientific simulation and analytics applications. The lack of a high-speed
network cyberinfrastructure on-campus has significantly constrained the growth
of multidisciplinary data-driven scientific research. Such a cyberinfrastructure
is important for interdisciplinary data analytics at
Auburn.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project constructs a cutting-edge campus-wide
network infrastructure called TigerSphere. It deploys a fabric of 10 Gbps
switches to connect colleges, schools, research centers at Auburn via dual 10
Gbps links, increasing the connection bandwidth from all colleges/schools to the
Auburn backbone by 20 times (from 1 Gbps to 20 Gbps), and the bandwidth of edge
networks at colleges/schools by 100 times (from 100 Mbps to 10 Gbps). In
addition, TigerSphere includes a new fiber circuit of 10 Gbps to national
scientific networks such as Internet2, enabling high-bandwidth, large-volume
data movement from and to national data/computing centers. Furthermore,
TigerSphere substantially improves Auburn University cyberinfrastructure for
multidisciplinary research and training activities, particularly for data-
intensive scientific computation and analytics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
network infrastructure has broader impact in several aspects, such as improving
Auburn network infrastructure with a high-speed ubiquitous TigerSphere,
promoting multidisciplinary collaborations within Auburn University and with
nearby organizations, enhancing research training activities and broadening the
participation of under-represented students in professional computing careers.