* 1340480
* Intervention to Improve Engagement and Mediate Conclusion Fear in Engineering Education
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Wendy Newstetter, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2017
* USD 149,810.00

The PIs propose an unorthodox and transformational approach to improving
engineering education. It requires embracing a concept that has been used with
great success by other organizations from marketing firms to educational
television: humor. Despite the light nature of the subject, the team will
conduct a large-scale controlled study to quantitatively determine if humor is
statistically effective in improving engineering education. Specifically, they
will test if the general intervention of humor can improve general engineering
educational outcomes and retention. The hypothesis is that such an improvement
would be due to an increase in the immediacy of the instructor interaction and
they will test the likelihood that this mechanism is behind any observed
improvement. They will also test if the use of humorous or whimsical systems
with no less technical rigor (i.e. swelling gummi bears vs. heat exchangers)
will reduce students? inability to make conclusions from engineering analysis
(Conclusion Fear). Based on Cognitive-Affective personality theory, the team
believes students? fear making conclusions given the internal impression that
faculty are domain-experts that will severely criticize their conclusions. By
using humorous systems for data or model analysis they will dispel this
impression and empower students to make the important conclusions they need to
make engineering design decisions thereby improving educational outcomes. The
proposed work uses a unique team of an educational researcher experienced in
engineering education and an engineering professor who is also a professional
comedian.

Intellectual Merit : This will be the first large-scale controlled experiment to
determine the effectiveness of humor on technical education, amid a sea of
action-research investigations that have little or no statistically significant
results. This study will also provide insight into the mechanism behind the
effectiveness of a humorous intervention based on current personality theories.
Such insight will allow more general application of humor to improve engineering
education.

Broader Impacts : The results of this study will have significant impact on (i)
distance learning (the immediacy concept addressed by our humorous intervention
is even more important in this learning mode), and (ii) attrition rates among
engineering students. Given that the unorthodox nature of our approach will
appeal to a demographic that does not usually consider engineering studies, it
has the potential to create a significant trend in engineering outreach and
recruiting to address the U.S. need for significant numbers of engineers in the
near future.