* 1340905
* EAGER:   COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:  Habitability of Antarctic Lakes and Detectability of Microbial Life in Icy Environments by Aautonomous Year-round Instrumentation
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2013,08/31/2015
* Peter Doran, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Clough
* 08/31/2015
* USD 121,017.00

EAGER: Collaborative Research: Habitability of Antarctic lakes and detectability
of microbial life in icy environments by autonomous year-round instrumentation,
is supported by the Antarctic Integrated System Science (AISS) and the Antarctic
Organisms and Ecosystems (AOE) programs within the Antarctic Sciences section in
the Division of Polar Programs within the Geosciences Directorate of the
National Sciences Foundation (NSF). The funds will allow the measurement of
year-round properties of the microbes and the surrounding water in Lake Bonney,
a lake with four meters of permanent ice cover over forty meters of liquid water
in the Dry Valleys of Antarctica. NSF funds will be used to support the
deployment, and the science enabled by the deployment, and NASA (the National
Aeronautics and Space Administration) funds will be used to purchase the
equipment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This research will be the
first to make year-round measurements of the microbial community, and several
associated environmental variables, in the continuously liquid portions of Lake
Bonney, Antarctica. Three different types of equipment will be deployed in each
of the lobes of Lake Bonney. The first instrument is an ITP (an ice-tethered
profiler) that will measure physical parameters such as temperature, dissolved
oxygen, and chlorophyll throughout the full depth of the liquid water portion of
the lake, making measurements at least once each week. The second and third
instruments will be used to collect discrete water samples at least every two
weeks to determine A) the biological community (assessing metabolic and
phylogenetic diversity) and B) the geochemistry (e.g., dissolved organic carbon,
and dissolved inorganic nitrogen species). Such samplers have never been used to
measure these properties year-round in the Antarctic. Cold temperatures, bottom
lake water salinities that are four times greater than the ocean, the thick
permanent ice cover, and the lack of sunlight to recharge batteries all present
significant challenges for the project, thus classifying the work as an early,
high-risk, high-reward activity (the acronym EAGER stands for Early-concept
Grants for Exploratory Research).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: There is
much interest in understanding the ecosystems of the Polar regions in an era of
climate change. Logistical limitations dictate much of this work only take place
in the summer, until new autonomous technologies can open the door for year-
round measurements. This award will be the first to attempt year-round microbial
sampling in Antarctica. The McMurdo Dry Valleys region is also the site of a
Long-Term Ecological Research (LTER) Program, and the research conducted on this
project with benefit from, and contribute to, the larger LTER project. The
instruments used in the project will be purchased by NASA, so two separate
agencies have agreed to explore the feasibility of an early stage project. There
will be at least three graduate student trained during the project, and the team
will also participate in outreach activities at several venues including the
Crow Reservation in Montana.