* 1340550
* Sustaining Biological Infrastructure: Strategies for Success A Short Course for Project Directors
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Jill Parsons, Ecological Society of America
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2017
* USD 358,376.00

The Ecological Society of America (ESA) is awarded a grant to develop a training
program, "Sustaining Biological Infrastructure: Strategies for Success", to
provide directors of biological research infrastructure projects with training
in strategic business planning, marketing, and communication. Successful
biological research relies on access to a wide range of supporting
infrastructure resources, including databases, living stocks collections, museum
collections, and field stations. These resources in turn require informed
planning to maintain their long-term financial sustainability and capacity to
innovate to meet the research community's constantly changing needs. The
intellectual merit of this program, which will conduct an annual training
workshop for three years, consists in providing research infrastructure
directors with the skills they need to integrate long-term financial
sustainability and innovation into their management and continuing development
of these essential resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biological research,
including research in fields of direct societal relevance such as agriculture,
genetics, environmental science, and human diseases, depends on infrastructure.
Examples of this infrastructure include collections of living organisms with
documented provenance and genetic histories, data repositories with information
about gene sequences and protein structures, and field stations with
environmental monitoring equipment. Directors of these resources need in-depth
knowledge of strategic business planning to ensure the long-term sustainability
of infrastructure vital to scientific development and innovation. Workshop
organizers will encourage participation by a wide range of scientists, including
those from groups underrepresented in science, and participants will have the
opportunity to exchange information about their challenges and experiences,
successes and failures. The broader impacts of this program thus lie in its
contribution to the long-term sustainability of biological research and to the
development of a community of scientist-program directors who can in turn pass
along their new knowledge to the next generation of scientists. Additional
information about this workshop will be made available in the "Science Programs"
section of ESA's website, www.esa.org.