* 1340277
* I-Corps:  An enzymatic method for eradicating biofilm and multidrug resistant bacterial infections
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2014
* Chuanwu Xi, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 04/30/2014
* USD 50,000.00

This technology is based on research findings that an enzyme treatment can
prevent biofilm formation and re-sensitize multidrug resistant pathogens
(including both gram-negative and positive bacteria) to antibiotic treatment.
Both in vitro and animal model experiments have been successfully completed and
demonstrated the efficacy of this technology. The enzyme can potentially be used
to alone or as an adjuvant to improve the efficacy of existing and approved
antibiotics to eradicate multidrug resistance infections, which in many cases
are considered to be non-treatable diseases. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biofilm-
related infections and the occurrence of multidrug resistance is a serious
worldwide public health problem. In the US alone, roughly 2 million people
acquire bacterial infections in the hospital which leads to 99,000 deaths
annually. The initial target application is the topical application for wound
infections and surgical site infections. Combinatorial the enzyme and antibiotic
treatment could improve and the way flesh wounds and bacterial infections are
treated in the clinic. The technology can also be applied to nosocomial
pneumonia, bacteremia and sepsis, Infections in cystic fibrosis, catheter-
associated bacteriuria, etc. especially when the last line of antibiotics is not
effective.