* 1340069
* The University of Alabama Noyce Scholars Program
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2020
* James Harrell, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Richardson
* 09/30/2020
* USD 1,450,000.00

The University of Alabama (UA) Noyce Scholars program is designed to increase
the number and diversity of teachers graduating from UA in chemistry,
mathematics, and physics. The targeted disciplines are in great demand in
Alabama and the nation. The project has 3 major goals with objectives that
include 1) recruitment through early teaching experiences, 2) collaborative
strategies supporting and sustaining juniors and seniors, and 3) extensive and
evolving induction for graduates aimed at retaining quality teachers in high-
need school districts. Noyce scholars are actively recruited from high schools
and community colleges throughout the state, universities, in addition to STEM
professionals, with a focus on underrepresented, diverse candidates. The project
is enhancing the UA teacher preparation program in the targeted disciplines with
activities leading to the production of 21 new science and mathematics teachers
including: 1) freshman orientation experiences at UA and 8 collaborating
community colleges followed by 75 summer UA internships to work with a
researcher and visit exemplary classrooms, 2) sophomore extended orientation
followed by 45 summer internships as learning assistants in UA classrooms, 3)
junior and senior year training and inquiry oriented teaching experiences using
lab technology supported by 14 scholarships, 4) MA STEM professional
certification program supported by 7 stipends, and 5) a multistage induction
process beginning with expert teacher mentoring in high needs schools through
graduate coursework leading to mentoring of new teachers by the Noyce scholar.
For each year of funding received, Noyce Scholars commit to teaching two years
in a high needs school district. UA Noyce accomplishes these goals first through
strong collaboration with Alabama community colleges in regions with many high-
need schools. Each community college has a designated liaison faculty mentor who
assists with student recruitment into UA Noyce and placement of summer interns
following the freshman and sophomore years. Second is collaboration with the
statewide Alabama Math Science and Technology Initiative recognized as an
exemplary model program by the Center for Excellence in Education. Third is
partnership with rural and urban school districts providing students with
teaching experiences throughout their program. The districts have a high
percentage of underrepresented low income students with few STEM role models.
The schools provide mentor teachers, assist in recruiting, offer exemplary
classrooms for field experiences, and collaborate with UA in developing,
implementing, and sustaining an extensive 4-year induction
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project addresses the development of the
teacher from the freshman year into the early years as an inservice teacher. It
provides research-based practices including development of a recruiting network,
early teaching experiences to motivate and sustain student interest, mentoring
relationships with inservice teachers, extensive quality field experiences in
STEM content and pedagogy, and induction courses as new teachers. The project
has strong evaluation and research components examining factors that affect the
recruitment, retention, diversity, preparation, and induction of Noyce teachers.
Some important questions for which data are collected include characteristics of
successful recruits, impact of early learning experiences, the success of the
Noyce program in keeping teachers in the profession, and the effectiveness of
inservice Noyce teachers compared with non-Noyce
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is disseminating a synergistic model
for the use of collaboratives to create, build upon, and increase the STEM
pathway. The UA model establishes an extensive recruitment network for teachers
in chemistry, mathematics, and physics using community colleges located in rural
and urban regions often lacking in role models for students in the targeted
fields. The model demonstrates the use and upgrading of existing infrastructure
to enhance research-based STEM teacher education program development.