* 1340764
* Collaborative Research: RUI: The Pulse-Shunt Concept: A Conceptual Framework for Quantifying and Forecasting Watershed DOM Fluxes and Transformations at the MacroSystem Scale
* BIO,EF
* 06/01/2014,03/31/2018
* Aron Stubbins, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 03/31/2018
* USD 342,218.00

The transfers of carbon, nutrients and pollutants from the land to streams and
their changes as they move through river networks are issues that motivate
environmental scientists and water resource managers. Dissolved organic matter
(DOM) is a central chemical in streams and rivers that affects the forms and
movements of contaminants, light penetration through the water, metabolism of
life in the streams, pH, and the efficiency of water treatments by
municipalities. This study aims to improve predictions of DOM formation and
movement from small headwater streams and our understanding of the factors that
change the amount and forms of DOM during as it moves downstream. One goal of
this research is to greatly improve a computer model of DOM transport and
transformation as it moves through a watershed and into the headwater streams.
This model links rainfall and runoff that generate streamflow to the biological
and chemical processes that lead to changes in the amount and forms of DOM. The
model will be tested against actual measurements of DOM made in several
headwater streams of the Connecticut River along its length. Measurements will
then also be made in larger parts of the Connecticut River downriver that will
help explain how DOM changes along the entire drainage network. This project
challenges a long standing picture of how streams and rivers work, called the
River Continuum Concept, proposing that a newer view may be required, referred
to as the Pulse-Shunt Concept.

This project will involve graduate students and a post-doctoral associate in the
laboratory, field, and modeling ends of the research. It will also build on a
partnership with the Connecticut Science Museum to construct educational
activities and displays related to watershed ecology and management for the
general public.