* 1340261
* Workshop Proposal: WAIS Workshops and Science Plan Development, 2013-2016
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2016
* Ted Scambos, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Julie Palais
* 05/31/2016
* USD 97,107.00

Scambos/1340261

This award provides partial support for a series of three West Antarctic ice
sheet (WAIS) workshops to be held in different locations over the next three
years (2013-2015). The funding will support an organizing committee based at
NSIDC (National Snow and Ice Data Center) for communication, agenda, abstract
and document management, website maintenance, and travel support for young
investigators and students to attend the meetings. Additional support from NASA
will be provided each year to the host organizer to cover venue costs. The WAIS
workshops have been highly successful over the last two decades (since 1993) in
providing a forum for the science community to discuss and plan complex field
programs designed to answer fundamental questions about the history and dynamics
of the West Antarctic ice sheet. These interdisciplinary workshops have lead to
studies of various components of the climate and earth system interacting with
the West Antarctic Ice Sheet, as well as biological and paleoclimate studies.
The ultimate goal of these programs has been to better understand the dynamics
of marine ice sheets, variable outlet glaciers, and ice shelves by identifying
the key processes that govern them, and measure their response to a changing
climate. The work that has developed out of the WAIS workshops has lead to
improved projections of future sea level rise and has informed the Inter-
governmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) series of reports. The WAIS
workshops have been a forum for cutting-edge, high profile science presentations
by leading researchers and they have also excelled at fostering and encouraging
graduate students and early-career polar scientists. The broader impacts of this
award include not only the support for early-career scientists but also the
contributions that this work will make to a better understanding of the future
the Antarctic ice sheet. The West Antarctic ice sheet research that has evolved
out of these workshops has led to important findings that have informed public
policy and they will continue to provide a forum for sharing of data and leading
the way in the support of a mechanism for all to have access to the data. The
WAIS workshops are synergistic with a separate grant that supports the Antarctic
Glaciological Data Center (AGDC). The AGDC staff always attend the WAIS workshop
and work with PIs to develop not only data management protocols but also provide
them an easy mechanism for archiving of data and metadata. The primary goals for
this series of WAIS workshops are to: 1) Update the science plan, with a greater
focus on integrated ice-atmosphere-ocean studies that will help predict future
changes of the WAIS; 2) Engage new students and include scientists from
disciplines that have traditionally not been involved in the WAIS meetings; 3)
Support and encourage the development of new technologies for use in previously
unexplored regions of Antarctica; and 4) Encourage data submission and good
meta-data practices for field-acquired data from all WAIS scientists.