* 1340174
* EAGER: Improving Ice Core Observations of Large Volcanic Eruptions, and Their Effect on Global Climate Change, with a Novel Sulfur Isotope Method
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2015
* Jess Adkins, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 05/31/2015
* USD 147,822.00

The attribution of modern planetary scale warming between forcings associated
with solar output, greenhouse gases, and both natural (volcanic) and
anthropogenic aerosols is a challenging and important problem. To date the
cooling effect of large volcanic eruptions has been determined by measuring
sulfate concentrations in ice cores. However, only volcanoes that inject sulfur
dioxide into the stratosphere can cause sustained global cooling as the rain out
of new aerosols in the troposphere is very efficient. We need a way to
distinguish volcanoes with large amounts of sulfate in the ice core record, but
no stratospheric impact (like the Mount St. Helens eruption), from those that
reached the stratosphere, so that they can be taken out of the volcanic forcing
function in climate attribution studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fortunately,
injection of SO2 into the stratosphere leaves a mass independent isotopic signal
on the sulfur of the resulting sulfate aerosols. This research, led by a
professor at the California Institute of Technology, builds on a new technique
for measuring sulfur isotopes on small samples that lowers the detection limit
the relevant isotopic systems by over three orders of magnitude. This new method
will be used to generate a time series of sulfur isotope variability in ice
cores of the top 100 volcanic events of the last 1,000 years. The researchers
will identify which volcanic eruptions actually entered the stratosphere and
therefore caused a global climate cooling. These are the events that must be
accounted for in climate warming attribution studies. The research will focus on
an ice core from South Greenland. Certain events will be cross-checked in ice
cores from Antarctic to confirm the global distribution of sulfate aerosol.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this work could be potentially
transformative in changing our understanding of the sensitivity of climate to
CO2 increases. Outcomes will inform educational outreach efforts. Funding also
supports an early career scientist.