* 1340990
* CC-NIE Networking Infrastructure: Accelerating Research Data Transit Between the Scientist's Desktop, Campus, and National Cyberinfrastructure
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2014,06/30/2016
* Joannes Westerink, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 06/30/2016
* USD 499,935.00

This project accelerates transformative research in numerous data bound STEM
fields through acquisition, deployment and efficient sustained operation of high
capability research network infrastructure. Notre Dame scientists are too often:
working on local systems of insufficient capacity because remote access to
national resources is of unreliable performance; deploying 100s of TB of local
storage because remote data access is too slow for local computation; moving
data between campuses at 10Mbps despite fiber connectivity at 10Gbps; decoupled
from access to experimental data taken in disparate campus facilities; or worse,
simply not sharing available data due to the complexity and poor reliability of
network transfers for their large datasets. In partnership with the University's
central enterprise IT organization, the Center for Research Computing identified
those unfunded components most critical to science at the University today and
essential for supporting the increasingly data centric science of tomorrow. The
proposed system addresses the bottlenecks, Accelerating Research Data Transit
(ARDT) between the scientist's desktop, campus, and national cyberinfrastructure
resources. ARDT extends Notre Dame's current infrastructure with three new
components: a new science DMZ that provides an optimized external network path
clear of traditional campus network appliances which hinder campus bridging; a
new core switch and router for the research data center which adds many more
higher speed lower latency uplinks; and endpoint building network upgrades for
faculty in engineering, physical, and social sciences providing over 100 10Gb
and 500 1Gb new network ports.