* 1340539
* 2013 Graduate Climate Conference; Woods Hole, MA; November 1-3, 2013
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2014
* R. Alan Plumb, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Anjuli Bamzai
* 06/30/2014
* USD 15,000.00

This is to support the Graduate Climate Conference (GCC) to be held at Woods
Hole Oceanographic Institution, November 1-3, 2013. The goal of the GCC is to
provide a discussion forum for graduate students undertaking research on climate
and climate change in an array of disciplines, including atmospheric,
biological, earth and ocean sciences. Each year participants share new
techniques and avenues of research, discuss recent findings and their
implications, and consider the major questions in the future of climate
research. The format is designed to encourage new climate scientists to become
acquainted with the details of diverse areas of climate research and to place
their own research in the broader context of the climate science community. This
opportunity allows graduate students to familiarize themselves with the breadth
of climate science as well as the enormous range of tools available to help
answer complex questions. This opportunity allows graduate students to
familiarize themselves with the breadth of climate science as well as the
enormous range of tools available to help answer complex questions.
Approximately 90 graduate students selected through a competitive process, will
attend the GCC. Applications from mathematics and physics departments, with the
goal of stimulating an interest in climate science problems in students who may
not have considered this field before.