* 1340919
* CC-NIE Networking Infrastructure:  Developing a Dedicated Research Network Infrastructure at the University of Central Florida
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2013,03/31/2015
* Brian Goldiez, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 03/31/2015
* USD 313,860.00

The University of Central Florida (UCF) is extending a newly formed dedicated
research network to three buildings on the main campus and deploying the
Internet2 Innovation Platform on the research network. This project is providing
on-campus researchers access to a Science DMZ, software-defined networking
(including OpenFlow), and 10 Gb/s ports at their desktops. This enables labs
with data-intensive research in departments such as Physics and Computer Science
to use a dedicated research network, avoiding competition for bandwidth with
other traffic on UCF's enterprise network. Additionally, UCF is installing
perfSonar nodes to help monitor traffic on the research network, as well as a
node to serve as an OpenFlow controller for software defined
networking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These improvements to UCF's cyberinfrastructure
improve access for faculty, graduate student researchers, and undergraduates to
facilities in the Central Florida Research Park, such as the STOKES Advanced
Research Computing Center. It also improves access to Florida LambdaRail (FLR),
which enhances collaboration with a variety of institutions throughout Florida.
This effort establishes the foundation of a dedicated research network, which
helps UCF continue to align itself with the National Science Foundation's CI
vision for discovery by working to provide the science and engineering
communities with access to world-class CI tools and services, including those
focused on: high performance computing; data, data analysis and visualization;
observatories and virtual organizations; and education and workforce
development.