* 1340852
* Collaborative Research: Landscape Genetic Connectivity of a Foundation Tree Species: Implications for Dependent Communities Facing Climate Change and Exotic Species Invasion
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2020
* Thomas Whitham, Northern Arizona University
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 12/31/2020
* USD 2,236,163.00

An important topic of research today is how temperature affects the diversity of
life on earth. At the same time as the climate is rapidly changing though, there
is also rapid expansion of highly invasive, exotic species that additionally
threaten biodiversity by displacing native species. The combined effects present
an enormous challenge to land managers, as they may threaten established
ecosystems and undermine the services they provide to humans. One way to meet
this challenge is to study the effects on what are called foundation species.
This study focuses on Fremont cottonwood, a foundation tree species that creates
unique habitats along streams in the southwestern United States. These habitats
support a high diversity of microbes, insects and animals, but are threatened by
climate change along with a major invasive tree species, tamarisk, that
displaces the native cottonwood and drastically alters the habitat and the
beneficial ecosystem services it provides. The project uses genomic techniques,
plus experiments that involve planting the same tree species in a range of
areas, and computer modeling to determine gene flow among the cottonwoods along
streams, to figure out how the cottonwood interacts with tamarisk, and to
determine how tamarisk invasion changes all of the plants in these habitats and
the services they provide. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;As environmental conditions
change, foundation species must either adapt or go extinct. The loss of
streamside habitats that are based on Fremont cottonwood is important because
they are hotspots of biodiversity and provide services to local human
populations in the region. This project may transform how we think of foundation
species and how they respond to major disturbances, along with the other plants,
animals and insects they harbor. This is useful for conservation planning. The
project will provide lesson plans and teaching materials for elementary and high
school teachers and opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students. It
will also expand outreach to the public on how to approach the impacts of
climate change and invasive species. The field experiments will be installed in
collaboration with the Southwest Experimental Garden Array, which is focused on
using genetics to address climate change impacts. The results will also be made
available on a public outreach website.