* 1340109
* Recruiting and Preparing STEM Teachers for High-Need Schools: Community College-University of California, Santa Cruz Partnerships
* EHR,DUE
* 01/01/2014,06/30/2020
* David Belanger, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Richardson
* 06/30/2020
* USD 1,450,000.00

Four high-need school districts and seven community colleges are partnering with
the University of California, Santa Cruz (UCSC) to recruit and prepare forty two
new math and science teachers. This project targets prospective Silicon Valley
career-change professionals in addition to traditional community college
transfer students and UCSC undergraduates. The Noyce funds are to support
intensive K-12 field experiences for ninety students over three years to attract
STEM majors and STEM professionals into the Noyce program and into teaching.
This includes undergraduate and continuing MA/teaching credential scholarships
for 10 community college transfer students in two cohorts, scholarships for an
additional thirty two MA/credential students in four cohorts, and early career
mentoring and induction for all forty two new teachers.

The project activities take place in a broader framework of support for
prospective and early career science and math teachers including: UCSC's
undergraduate support program for prospective math and science teachers (and
parallel programs at some community colleges), UCSC's MA/Credential program, and
a well-developed teacher induction programs in the partner districts.

Substantive evaluation and research address a key issue: the successful
development of knowledge about teaching science and math to diverse learners,
especially English learners. The results are informing the current practice of
UCSC and its partners and contribute to national conversation in this area.
UCSC's Noyce Scholarship Program is strengthening outreach to and support of a
diverse pool of prospective mathematics and science teachers and is building a
closer partnerships between UCSC, seven community colleges, and four high-need
school districts. These efforts are enhancing recruitment and retention of new
teachers in key areas of district shortages and developing a central piece of
research on these issues.