* 1340324
* Research Initiation Grant:  Defining Success for Undergraduate Research Experiences by Non-Elite Engineering Students
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2016
* Cindy Walker, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Elliot Douglas
* 09/30/2016
* USD 149,995.00

Participation in undergraduate research has often been presented as a mechanism
to improve student retention in a discipline and as a means to inspire more
students to pursue graduate studies. Past studies have concentrated on studying
the effects of undergraduate research experiences (UREs) on high-achieving
students ? but these students are already likely to graduate and are more likely
to pursue graduate studies. Because non-elite students are often at risk for
leaving engineering programs and are less likely to pursue graduate studies than
high-achieving students, the proposed project begins a study of the benefits of
participation in UREs for ?average? engineering students with respect to their
educational and professional development. The primary focus of this research
initiation project is developing definitions of success for different types of
students, with categories determined through classification of the academic and
personal background of the students. Following the determination of the
definitions, a pilot study involving a representative fraction of undergraduate
students who participate in engineering research activities at the University of
Wisconsin-Milwaukee (UWM) is to be conducted to confirm the appropriateness of
the definitions of success.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this
work is that it expands the study of the benefits of UREs to average engineering
students ? a population of students that it is important to nurture through to
graduation in order to increase the number of engineers produced in the United
States. By determining appropriate definitions of success of URE participation
for a wide range of students and then testing the definitions in a pilot study,
this project begins to determine if increasing URE participation to a larger
percentage of engineering students is useful and appropriate. Furthermore, this
project begins to identify the elements of a URE that are most beneficial for
different groups of students. The broader impact of this work is the potential
to significantly influence the future directions of research experiences of
undergraduate engineering students. By determining different expectations for
various types of students and research programs, this project provides
engineering educators with realistic expectations of undergraduate research on
the education and preparation of future engineers.