* 1340360
* Workshop: ExTerra 2013, Florence, Italy
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2015
* Sarah Penniston-Dorland, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 05/31/2015
* USD 27,265.00

Subduction zones are places on Earth where one of Earth?s tectonic plates slides
beneath another. They are locations of intense geologic activity that pose
hazards to humans, including earthquakes and volcanoes. Understanding subduction
zones is critical to developing our understanding of global geochemical cycles;
the formation, evolution, and composition of the Earth?s crust; global-scale
mantle dynamics; the distribution of valuable natural resources in ore deposits;
and numerous geological hazards including volcanic eruptions, earthquakes, and
tsunamis. Processes occurring deep within subduction zones are impossible to
observe directly, but there are a wide variety of rocks that have been exhumed
to the Earth?s surface from deep within subduction zones. Those who study these
exhumed rocks have the unique ability to inform studies of active subduction
zones by ?ground-truthing? the assumptions that go into models, experiments, and
interpretive geophysics and geochemistry. ExTerra represents the community of
scientists involved in studies of these exhumed rocks from the subduction
system. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the workshop ExTerra 2013:
Understanding Subduction through Studies of Exhumed Terranes is to organize
disparate studies of subduction-related metamorphic and igneous rocks around a
common set of scientific targets in order to move the discipline forward more
efficiently as a community. In order to accomplish this goal, we will gather the
communities of researchers investigating three categories of exhumed rocks from
subduction zones: 1) high-pressure rocks of the subducted slab, 2) middle and
lower arc crust, and 3) the mantle wedge. ExTerra 2013 will focus on research
themes of common interest to these groups, provide a forum for communication and
interaction among scientists, promote participation in the 2013 international
Goldschmidt conference, and foster collaboration among participating scientists.
We will lay the groundwork for the long-term structure of ExTerra, plan and
organize future field trips, and develop an infrastructure for shared sample and
data collection, archiving, and distribution. The proposed workshop will
incorporate scientific presentations (talks and posters) on current research in
exhumed terranes, an update on database and archiving progress, and will
identify localities and organizers for field forums to be held over the next few
years.&lt;br/&gt;