* 1340619
* EAGER: Information and complexity in the analysis of biological data sets and networks
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2015
* David Galas, Pacific Northwest Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 06/30/2015
* USD 299,740.00

A living system is distinguished from most of its non-living counterparts by the
way it stores and transmits information. It is just this biological information
that is the key to the biological functions. It is also at the heart of the
conceptual basis of what we call systems biology. Much of the conceptual
structure of systems biology can be built around the fundamental ideas
concerning the storage transmission and use of biological information.
Biological information resides, of course, in digital sequences in molecules
like DNA and RNA, but also in 3-dimensional structures, chemical modifications,
chemical activities, both of small molecules and enzymes, and in other
components and properties of biological systems at many levels. The information
depends critically on how each unit interacts with, and is related to, other
components of the system. Biological information is therefore inherently
context-dependent, which raises significant issues concerning its quantitative
measure and representation. An important and immediate issue for the effective
theoretical treatment of biological systems then is: how can context-dependent
information be usefully represented and measured? This is important both to the
understanding of the storage and flow of information that occurs in the
functioning of biological systems and in evolution. This work involves both new
ideas and the integration of new ideas. It represents new mathematical methods
as well as a novel integration of approaches that are focused on the very real
and practical problems of biological data analysis. The PI as developed a new
conceptual approach that is novel and mathematically well-defined, exploring the
relationships between graph properties and set complexity and considering new
approaches to network analysis. New interaction distance measures are considered
with a new way of dealing with especially large data sets, especially the
maximal information coefficient, for which a general approach may be possible,
certainly for a small number of variables, and possibly in the general case. The
ideas will be tested on a number of diverse biological data sets, especially
around gene expressions, and other variants. Current methods often fail in the
face of truly complex dependencies in large data sets, and powerful new methods
would be of high value. This work involves both new ideas and the integration of
new ideas. It represents new mathematical methods as well as a novel integration
of approaches that are focused on the very real and practical problems of
biological data analysis.