* 1340006
* Preparing and Supporting New Earth Science Teachers through a Museum- and School-Based Teacher Residency Program
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2022
* Denton Ebel, American Museum Natural History
* Continuing Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 09/30/2022
* USD 1,886,627.00

The American Museum of Natural History (AMNH), in partnership with the New York
City Department of Education, the New Teacher Center (NTC), and the Center for
Education Policy, Applied Research is extending its Masters of Arts in Teaching
Residency program with specialization in Secondary Earth Science (AMNH MAT). The
only informal science education institution to offer a master's program leading
to certification in teaching, the Museum is moving to institutionalize this
pioneering approach to the preparation, induction, and retention of STEM
teachers. This five-year NSF Teaching Fellows project helps address the
documented shortage of Earth science teachers in NYC by supporting a cohort of
15 teacher candidates as they complete a master's degree in education and begin
their teaching careers. The 36-credit, 15-month MAT program, led by a team of
education and science faculty, includes two five-month teaching residencies in
NYC high-need schools that involve both ELL and special needs rotations.
Teaching Fellows receive mentoring, both from residency school teachers and
Museum educators. The program also includes a six-week summer residency at the
Museum teaching NYC students in the Museum's education programs, and a six-week
summer science practicum with Museum scientific staff and postdoctoral fellows.
After completing their MAT degree, Teaching Fellows complete four years of
teaching in high-need schools, receiving two years of induction support that
includes online mentoring through the NTC's e-Mentoring for Student Success
(eMSS) and New Teacher Academy sessions at the Museum followed by two years of
additional professional development support provided by the Museum's Gottesman
Center for Science Teaching and Learning. AMNH is recruiting Fellows through
broad outreach to geoscience majors while also seeking career changers and
individuals of diverse backgrounds. In preparing teacher candidates for
certification and developing effective teachers, the project is advancing
knowledge in the field of STEM teacher preparation and retention. The AMNH MAT
model focuses on clinically-rich museum and school-based residency experiences
that are central to preparing teachers combined with extensive mentoring during
the first two years of teaching, which are critical toward supporting retention
efforts. The project also involves opportunities for scientific research, access
to scientific collections and halls, and ongoing professional development
opportunities after induction. The results provide evidence for assessing and
designing programs drawing on the AMNH MAT model and lessons learned from
supporting new teachers during their first years of teaching.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project presents a new approach to STEM teacher
preparation that leverages the unique strengths and resources of an informal
science education (ISE) institution. The project demonstrates the potential of
ISEs nationwide to help address the nation's critical need for qualified STEM
teachers and to contribute more broadly to reform by strengthening the formal
role of science-based cultural institutions in science education. It presents an
important model of science and education faculty cooperating in program delivery
and for ISE-non-profit teacher preparation and retention partnerships.