* 1340074
* Fort Berthold Bridge to Master of Science in Science Education (FBB-MSSE) Project
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2016
* Kerry Hartman, NUETA HIDATSA SAHNISH COLLEGE
* Continuing Grant
* Lidia C. Yoshida
* 09/30/2016
* USD 300,000.00

Through this capacity building project Fort Berthold Community College (FBCC) is
developing the infrastructure to support future Noyce Scholars to serve the Fort
Berthold Indian Reservation, located in northwestern North Dakota. The goal is
to establish the capacity to produce K-12 STEM teachers who complete a Master of
Science in Science Education (MSSE) degree and serve the high-needs reservation
schools of the Mandan, Hidatsa, and Arikara (MHA) Nation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project integrates an MHA culture context into its
activities, and thus potentially transforms the way STEM teachers are prepared
to teach Native populations. Specifically, the project activities include: 1)
conducting a needs assessment to increase the pool of MSSE applicants, 2)
developing a recruitment plan for future Noyce Scholars serving in high-needs,
K-12 reservation schools, 3) conducting research regarding an MHA traditional
environmental knowledge and educational pedagogy in K-12 science, 4) creating
and pilot testing a culturally rich MHA K-12 science curriculum, 5) expanding
the existing FBCC Teacher Education Program to enable individuals with at least
a STEM Bachelors degree to meet K-12 teacher licensure requirements in North
Dakota, 6) creating a bridge to support graduate level and distance learning
challenges for future Noyce Scholars seeking an MSEE, and 7) establishing
procedures at Montana State University (MSU) and FBCC to monitor compliance with
required coursework completion and teaching commitment required for a Robert
Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project addresses
the need for well-prepared STEM teachers at reservation schools. Ten potential
Noyce Scholars from the region participate in a four-week internship to pilot
test a culturally based, hands-on science curriculum. Additionally, a
collaborative team of stakeholders that includes FBCC and MSU faculty, MHA
Elders, and teachers from local school districts (New Town, Parshall, Mandaree,
White Shields, and Twin Buttes) are engaged in project activities.