* 1340201
* Participant Support for the 2013 NSF Cyberbridges Workshop: Developing the Next Generation of Cyberinfrastructure Faculty for Computational- and Data-enabled Science &amp; Engineer
* CSE,OAC
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2014
* Thomas Hacker, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Katz
* 04/30/2014
* USD 98,686.00

The objective of this proposal is to build on the success of the first NSF
CyberBridges Workshop to bring together the community of NSF OCI CAREER
researchers. The 2013 NSF CyberBridges Workshop will provide attendees with
opportunities to seek out new collaborations, strengthen existing
collaborations, encourage networking, and to provide feedback to NSF from the
OCI CAREER community on how to further build the community of
cyberinfrastructure researchers. The workshop, provisionally titled ?Participant
Support for the 2013 NSF CyberBridges Workshop: Developing the next generation
of cyberinfrastructure faculty for computational- and data-enabled science and
engineering?, will feature keynote speakers from five critical areas of
cyberinfrastructure: Visualization, Grand Challenges and Interdisciplinary
Research, Computational- and Data- Enabled Science and Engineering, Education,
High Performance Computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In 2010, the NSF Office of
Cyberinfrastructure launched a new Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER)
program to support investigators working on interdisciplinary research in
cyberinfrastructure and the application of cyberinfrastructure for science and
engineering research. Over the past three years, approximately 50 CAREER awards
have been made to researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first workshop for
Office of Cyberinfrastructure CAREER awardees was held June 25-26, 2012, in
Arlington, Virginia. The attendees, who were funded by the NSF OCI, BIO, CISE,
ENG, HER, and MPS directorates, were selected from 24 institutions. Five keynote
presentations were given by nationally and internationally recognized leaders in
fields relevant to the use and development of cyberinfrastructure in science and
engineering research. Each keynote presentation was followed by a discussion
session with workshop attendees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop provided a
venue for CAREER awardees to interact and to develop new collaborations with
leading researchers and other CAREER awardees. As a result of this workshop, 55
potential new collaborations were identified by attendees. The workshop provided
many opportunities for discussions among attendees and speakers. We received
many positive comments from the attendees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of
the first NSF CyberBridges Workshop are available on the NSF website at the URL
http://nsf.gov/attachments/126052/public/ACCICAREERworkshoptalk.pdf. The website
for the 2012 CyberBridges workshop is at the URL
http://www.cse.psu.edu/conferences/cb2012/.&lt;br/&gt;