* 1340044
* Duke University Noyce Scholarship - Phase II
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2020
* Richard Hodel, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Lewis
* 08/31/2020
* USD 795,110.00

The Duke University Master of Arts in Teaching (MAT) Program, in collaboration
with the Durham Public Schools and the STEM departments in the Trinity College
of Arts and Sciences, establishes a Robert Noyce Scholarship Program Phase II
Project to provide stipends to 30 Duke Noyce Scholars during the project period.
This project has four goals: 1) Recruit and enroll diverse cohorts of highly-
qualified STEM graduates and mid-career professionals; 2) Prepare teachers to
improve student achievement in mathematics and the sciences; 3) Support new
teachers during the first three years of their career as they teach in high-need
school districts; and 4) Continue longitudinal evaluation and analysis of the
project to determine those factors most effective in recruiting, preparing, and
retaining highly-qualified teachers for high-need school districts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project extends and expands work completed in a Phase
I project awarded in 2006. In particular it seeks to increase teacher retention
and to attract more underrepresented minority STEM majors and professionals into
STEM teaching. A comprehensive set of activities is implemented to reach these
goals. This Noyce project seeks to build relationships with and recruit from
prestigious historically black colleges and universities (HBCUs). The one-year
MAT Program for Noyce Scholars includes a curriculum of pedagogical coursework,
graduate coursework in the Mathematics and Science disciplines, and two-semester
internships in high schools of Durham Public Schools. New teachers in their
first three years in the profession are supported by an innovative, structured
teacher mentoring program that includes the early-career Duke Noyce graduates,
experienced Duke Noyce graduates, and faculty. Other support activities include
bi-annual Noyce Learning Conference events and support of professional
development through conference participation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impacts of this project include increasing the diversity of highly-qualified
science and mathematics teachers and implementing a model to effectively
recruit, prepare and retain STEM teachers. The systematic mentoring program for
early-career teachers encourages higher teacher retention rates and provides a
model that can be adapted at other programs. Through the evaluation activities,
this project advances the understanding of strategies to develop and implement
an effective MAT program for STEM majors and mid-career professionals and to
support new teachers in high-need school districts.