* 1340964
* CC-NIE Networking Infrastructure:  Configurable, High-Speed, Extensible Research Bandwidth (CHERuB)
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2016
* Thomas Hutton, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 12/31/2016
* USD 499,987.00

The Configurable, High-speed, Extensible Research Bandwidth (CHERuB) project
connects the University of California, San Diego (UCSD) and the San Diego
Supercomputer Center (SDSC) to national research networks at 100Gbps for
collaborative research in data-driven science and engineering. CHERuB supports
multi-institutional data transit over research networks such as Internet2 and
ESnet for analysis and distributed computing, such as that provided by SDSC's
Gordon project, and collaboration, such as that facilitated by UCSD's LHC Tier-2
site. It includes an upgrade of the campus gateway to support CENIC's newly-
installed 100G pipe between San Diego and Pacific Wave's 100G regional research
network collective, and intra-campus infrastructure to facilitate high-speed
access by targeted research activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CHERuB enables
advancement of knowledge in large cosmology, atmospheric science, high-energy
physics and other fields by providing high-bandwidth connectivity between the
researcher and national networks. The project allows scientific instruments to
efficiently transport big data, removing the network as bottleneck in the course
of scientific discovery. Simulation, visualization, measurement, and interactive
experimentation is streamlined. Exploration of OpenFlow/OSCARS coordination with
real-world data flows will help other research users understand how best to set
up projects for large pipes/big data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Beyond the initial
science drivers, CHERuB establishes infrastructure to serve additional research
projects on campus and across the country. UCSD shares what we learn via CHERuB
about transmission and processing of big data across the national network
infrastructure with other campuses. High bandwidth makes possible new
instructional activities that cross institutions and locations, such as
telemedicine and distributed distance learning.