* 1340372
* I-Corps:  Explanation-Based Auditing: Improving the Security of Electronic Medical Records
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2013,10/31/2014
* Michael Cafarella, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 10/31/2014
* USD 50,000.00

Researchers have developed an explanation-based auditing system to improve
electronic medical record auditing efficiency by filtering appropriate accesses
from the audit log so compliance officers can focus their efforts on suspicious
behavior. The team's approach to audit log analysis eliminates non-suspicious
accesses based on mined logical explanations and enhances these explanations
with common types of missing data. The key insight is that electronic medical
record (EMR) databases already store information describing the process by which
a patient is treated (e.g., appointments, medication orders, diagnoses, etc.),
which can be used to explain why accesses occur. Moreover, instead of requiring
compliance officers to manually specify all reasons for why accesses should
occur, the auditing system automatically discovers these explanations and
presents them to compliance officers for approval. Previous research has
confirmed that the system reduces the auditing
burden.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The explanation-based auditing system
has the potential to reduce the auditing and compliance burden for hospitals.
First, compliance offices at large hospital currently employ tens of individuals
to manually process and review tens of complaints a week. With the proposed
technology, compliance officers will only need to review a small subset of the
accesses, significantly reducing the manual effort. Previous research has shown
that over 94% of all accesses can be filtered for clinical or operational
reasons. Second, hospital patients can request an accounting of all accesses to
their medical record, which are known as access reports. Currently, these access
reports are un-interpretable for patients because they simply list the employees
who accessed the medical record instead of who they are and why the access
occurred. The explanation-based auditing system enhances these access reports by
attaching interpretable text descriptions describing the clinical or operational
reason for access. Third, to verify the efficiency and effectiveness of the
explanation-based auditing system, a pilot trial has been set up at to allow
compliance officers to test the auditing tool and measure its accuracy using
known instances of misuse.