* 1340042
* SIUE Noyce Scholarship Program: Preparing Future Science Teachers for Southwestern Illinois
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2023
* Susan Wiediger, Southern Illinois University at Edwardsville
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,214,304.00

The NSF Noyce Scholarship Program at Southern Illinois University Edwardsville
(SIUE) is graduating and certifying 36 secondary science teachers serving in
high-need rural and urban communities in the southwestern Illinois region. The
project is a partnership of the College of Arts and Sciences, School of
Education, SIUE STEM Center, master teachers, community-based organizations, and
the cooperating school districts. The objectives of the project are to: 1)
recruit highly qualified STEM students that demonstrate an aptitude for
teaching, 2) provide students with an enhanced experience in STEM education and
research, 3) supply high-need middle and high schools with exemplary science
educators, 4) increase outreach in the communities of southwestern Illinois, and
5) disseminate project findings for use in other STEM education settings. The
project is implementing strategies for recruiting and nurturing cohorts of STEM
teacher candidates during their college years and into their early teaching
careers in high-need schools. Key components of the project are: 1) a self-
efficacy framework that imparts confidence and skills to developing teachers, 2)
a two-phased recruitment strategy that exposes underclassmen to the rewards and
challenges of education and offers scholarships and research opportunities to
upperclassmen, and 3) the development and support of a STEM teacher network in
southwestern Illinois high-need school districts. Ten internships are awarded
each year to freshmen and sophomores with an intended or declared major in STEM
disciplines who show promise to be strong teachers. Interns teach in a variety
of educational outreach programs at SIUE or with community partners for 200
hours during the summer. They receive training in science pedagogy for informal
learning, meet regularly with project staff to reflect on their experiences, and
give a culminating presentation at the end of the summer. Competitive Noyce
Scholarships are awarded to juniors and seniors with a STEM major who are
committed to pursuing STEM education careers. Noyce Scholars conduct outreach
with disadvantaged middle and high school students, observe master teachers in
high-needs schools, and take on the challenges of formal research in their
content area or STEM education. They are participating in professional
organizations and monthly meetings as they build a professional learning
community. The activities are sequenced in order to build scholars' self-
efficacy for teaching in a high-need school. After graduation, new teacher
support includes a summer face-to-face workshop, online mentoring and support,
and professional development events to maintain a collaborative network of peers
and supportive master teachers in southwestern Illinois. The new teachers have
access to and support from the SIUE STEM Center, which provides numerous
services to educators including a lending library and professional development
opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SIUE Noyce Scholarship program is
graduating candidates with a high self-efficacy for science teaching and strong
STEM content background, connecting new teachers with other STEM educators in
order to strengthen the network of STEM teachers in the region. The evaluation
is examining the project's ability to effectively attract, train, place, and
retain STEM students in teaching careers in high-need schools. Three novel
elements of the project design are a self-efficacy framework, a focus on
recruitment of pre-health professional students, and regional capacity building.
The results of the evaluation are presented at national conferences to inform
other Noyce programs and teacher preparation programs about the effectiveness of
the model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project addresses a need for high quality
teachers in underperforming urban and rural districts in southwestern Illinois.
The scholars are teaching in schools in depressed small cities on the Illinois
side of the Mississippi River, which have a large minority population, as well
as in rural districts with high poverty rates and low high school graduation
rates. Through outreach activities built into the project design, the Noyce
interns and scholars reach an additional 2,500 middle and high school students,
providing minds-on STEM activities designed to generate interest and enthusiasm
in STEM and STEM careers.