* 1340024
* Collaborative Research: Controls over Prairie Plant Range Distributions under Future Climate Change
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2014,09/30/2020
* Daniel Doak, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 09/30/2020
* USD 416,355.00

A key challenge for environmental science is to understand how climate change
will interact with other disturbance agents, such as invasive plant species, to
impact biodiversity through changes in the range of both native and invasive
species. There is overwhelming evidence that many species have shifted their
ranges in the past 30 years as the climate has changed. However, observed range
shifts and the results of computer modeling based on the current climatic
boundaries of species distributions, both fail to provide a strong enough
theoretical foundation for making sound predictions of how future changes will
affect these distributions. A mechanistic approach that fuses theory with field
experimentation is required to truly understand controls over range
distributions. In addition, how plants disperse has not been included in models
of range shifts except in rudimentary ways. Yet dispersal may keep many species
from responding to climate change, especially for those native species that
occur in isolated pockets of the highly fragmented landscapes of today. This
project will address this gap in understanding by using a novel climate change
experiment at three prairie sites across a 300 mile climate gradient in the
Pacific Northwest. It will also estimate historical and recent rates of
dispersal of representative prairie plants using molecular genetics techniques,
and computer models that include the effects of climate on the survival,
reproduction, and rates of dispersal of these plants. A range of education
activities will help high school, undergraduate, and graduate students to
develop their professional skills. A web site will be developed to focus on the
potential impacts of climate change on regional and global biodiversity. Several
nongovernmental conservation organizations will be partners in the
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will be comprised of three coupled
tasks. (1) An established manipulative warming and precipitation study that is
embedded within a regional climate gradient will be used to experimentally
examine the role of climate versus local factors in controlling the demography
of a broad suite of 12 native grass and forb species that currently reach
northern range limits in the Pacific Northwest. Demographic models will be used
to quantitatively determine the relative effect sizes of local factors (e.g.,
plant community composition and soil variables), regional-scale climate
differences, and interannual climate variability on the vital rates of the focal
species. (2) Landscape population genetics will be used to determine dispersal
probabilities of eight of the focal species in landscapes that face different
barriers to dispersal due to both historical and contemporary land use and
vegetation, geographic dispersal barriers, and distance between prairie habitat
patches. (3) The first two components will be synthesized in a regional
landscape simulation under three climate change scenarios within interior-valley
prairies in the Pacific Northwest. The simulation model will then be used to
predict whether the focal species are likely to go extinct in all or parts of
their current ranges, where they are capable of surviving outside of their
current ranges under future climatic conditions, and the probability of reaching
these new favorable habitats, if they exist. The effects of increased or
decreased landscape resistance to dispersal through loss (e.g., increased
development pressure) or gain (e.g., increased prairie restoration) of prairie
habitat in the future will also be examined.