* 1340163
* Support for Doctoral Students from U.S. Universities to Attend the AIED 2013 and EDM 2013 Conferences
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2014
* Sidney D'Mello, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Hoadley
* 06/30/2014
* USD 19,860.00

The International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Education (AIED
2013; http://aied2013.memphis.edu) and the International Conference on
Educational Data Mining (EDM 2013; http://edm2013.memphis.edu) provide
professional opportunity for researchers from around the world to share results
of cutting-edge research from the fields of artificial intelligence (AI), data
mining, computer science, cognitive and learning sciences, psychology, and
educational technology that focuses on the design and effective use of advanced
learning technologies. AIED researchers aim to design new technologies and
advance understanding of how to use those technologies and integrate them into
learning environments so that their potential is fulfilled. EDM researchers
focus on working towards better use of technology for collecting, analyzing,
sharing, and managing data to shed light on learning, promoting learning, and
designing learning environments. Researchers from both communities aspire to
better understand how people learn with technology and how technology can be
used productively to help people learn, through individual use and/or through
collaborations mediated by technology.

This project supports travel for advanced graduate students from US universities
to attend these two conferences, held in Memphis, Tennessee, AIED 2013 from July
6 to 8, 2013, and EDM 2013 from July 10 to 12, 2013. Participating graduate
students join the Doctoral Consortium (DC) tracks of the two conferences and are
paired with a senior member of the AIED or EDM community for one-on-one
mentoring throughout the conferences. The DC tracks of the conferences and
mentor pairing are designed to provide young researchers with mentoring beyond
what they get at their home institutions to help them transition from graduate
school to a fruitful research career. DC track activities include structured
poster sessions where students present their work, meetings with peers who have
related interests, and interactions with senior members of the field. Each young
researcher's one-on-one mentor will be senior members of the AIED/EDM community
who shares research interests with the young researcher and who comes from a
different university and has a different approach than the young researcher
experiences in his/her home institution. It is expected that conversations
between peers and between mentors and mentees will continue throughout each
young researcher's career.

This activity supports the mission of NSF to train more advanced professionals
in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics. Attending conferences is
expensive for graduate students; funding their travel allows them to present
their work to the larger community, speak individually with leaders in the
field, and receive both support and advice from both senior researchers and
peers. The AIED conference is special in its synthesis and cross-fertilization
across three STEM capacities: building cutting-edge learning technologies,
investigating pedagogical methods that are theoretically grounded in the
cognitive, social, and learning sciences, and rigorously testing the learning
environments for their effectiveness at promoting learning (in STEM and other
disciplines) among K-12, college, and workplace populations. The EDM conference
is special in its focus on learning how to use data collected as learners
interact with learning technologies to assess learner understanding and
capabilities so as to personalize feedback and advice.