* 1340143
* CAREER: Enhancing the Precision of the Double Chooz Experiment  By Calibration with an Articulated Robotic Arm
* MPS,PHY
* 02/01/2013,02/29/2016
* Jelena Maricic, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 02/29/2016
* USD 177,707.00

A new exciting and profound question was brought up by the confirmation of
neutrino oscillations: Can the source of the matter/anti-matter asymmetry of the
universe be explained by CP violation in the neutrino sector? The answer to this
fundamental question strongly depends on the magnitude of observable CP
violation effects, which is, restricted by the size of the neutrino oscillation
angle theta-13. The PI proposes a combined research and educational project
focused on a highly sensitive search for a non-zero value of this neutrino
mixing angle with the Double Chooz experiment. This experiment will measure, or
significantly improve the upper limit on, the value of sin^2 (2theta-13) from
0.2, as measured by CHOOZ experiment, to 0.026.

The PI proposes to build a multi-axis calibration system that will greatly
enhance the precision of the measurement. Precise and comprehensive calibrations
are critical to the minimization of systematic errors and the success of the
Double Chooz experiment. The development, utilization and optimization of the
articulated robotic arm system, and the analysis of the data obtained from the
full volume calibration are all part of this five year research and education
project. Besides providing an important augmentation for the Double Chooz
experiment, the development of an articulated, robotic arm calibration system
and its usage will also have important applications to future neutrino
experiments where full target volume calibration systems will be of increasing
importance.

The PI is strongly committed to extending the scope of her research program to
educate a broad range of students. A highly interactive multimedia web site that
will introduce the physics of neutrinos and the Double Chooz experiment to high
school students and their teachers as well as interested members of the general
public will be designed and developed.