* 1340971
* CC-NIE Network Infrastructure: Enabling Big-Data Science Collaboration at Georgetown
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2014
* Ardoth Hassler, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 09/30/2014
* USD 379,018.00

Georgetown is upgrading high-end networking across the main and medical center
campuses to support science faculty. These faculty routinely collaborate across
the campuses, within and across disciplines, and with colleagues at other
universities, at-large private research facilities, and National Labs as they
research complex physics, genomics, functional magnetic resonance imaging,
Internet search indexing, and other computationally-intensive topics.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;These network improvements enable end-to-end 10 Gbps connectivity
among GU's science buildings, campus backbone, off-campus data center, Mid-
Atlantic Crossroads (MAX) Gigapop, and Internet2. 1Gbps or 10Gbps connections
are provided to select locations within the buildings.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
ability to share and analyze large datasets, and disseminate findings advances
scientific and technological understanding. Improvements in GU's science
facilities have led to increased applications and enrollments of undergraduate
and graduate STEM students. This infrastructure is designed to further bolster
STEM research and education at GU. Investments during the past 5 years have
doubled the size of faculty in the Computer Science Department; built a new
building for biology, chemistry, and physics; and enhanced other infrastructure
to support research, including support of a computational core facility,
creating an isolated security research network, and increased data storage
capacity. This award is enabling over 300 Main Campus and Medical Center
researchers to collaborate and broadly share their work on campus, connect
equipment, enhance their ability to collaborate with researchers off campus, as
well as benefit extensive basic sciences research on the contiguous medical
campus.