* 1340233
* EarthCube Test Enterprise Governance:   An Agile Approach
* GEO,RISE
* 09/15/2013,09/30/2016
* Kimberly Patten, University of Arizona
* Cooperative Agreement
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 09/30/2016
* USD 3,599,687.00

This project for Test Enterprise Governance outlines an agile model to identify,
test and evaluate governance models to manage the development of Geosciences
cyberinfrastructure. This model seeks broad engagement and participation of the
EarthCube stakeholders to define and assess governance models while seeking
evaluation and cross-checks from advisory committees and evaluation
mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal employs an iterative deployment
across the range of EarthCube stakeholders to encourage transparency, consensus,
and inclusiveness. A broad coalition of stakeholder groups will comprise the
"Assembly? to serve as a preliminary venue for evaluating and testing governance
models in Stage I, while a "Secretariat" will act as the coordinating body
throughout the project, carrying out duties such as planning, organizing,
communicating, and reporting and serve as an a priori governance test scenario
itself. To ensure broader end-user participation in evaluating governance
models, a "Crowd-Source? approach will be used for members not involved in the
Assembly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In Stage II, a community selected test governance
pilot will be deployed. The organizational structure will be demonstrated and
evaluated. The structure and activities related to Stage II demonstration will
depend heavily on the outcomes of Stage I. The role of the test governance
demonstration is to facilitate community convergence on a reference
architecture, procedures for standards, and coordination among emerging
EarthCube elements. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The agile approach for Test Enterprise
Governance has the potential to advance knowledge by providing community-guided
solutions to the governance of cyberinfrastructure for the geosciences. It
intends to incorporate multiple science disciplines and encourage broader
participation of early career scientists. This proposal encourages cross-
disciplinary research and discovery, not only across core science disciplines
but also the computer and information sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By building
a collaborative, virtual community of practice, this proposal will enable
distributed knowledge communities to cooperate, pool resources and work together
across disciplines, geography, and cultures. Building upon existing NSF
investments in cyberinfrastructure, this proposal allows for, and enables, a
diverse set of end users previously unengaged in discussions within
cyberinfrastructure - to define expectations, decision-making and leadership
processes, leading to a sustainable and adaptable cyberinfrastructure for the
geosciences that is extensible and scalable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A significant
responsibility of the Test Enterprise Governance is facilitation of geosciences
community activities related to cyberinfrastructure, data policies and
standards, and outreach related to these issues. The project will provide web
services, forum and other engagement activities to facilitiate this
outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;