* 1340921
* EAGER: Advancing Biological Interpretations of Radar Data
* BIO,EF
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2017
* Le Gruenwald, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 07/31/2017
* USD 301,641.00

Earth's seasonality produces a flow of energy, information, and biodiversity
between tropical and temperate regions. Much of this flow occurs through the
aerosphere is a broad diversity of migratory animals. Long distance migration
and dispersal is an important contributor to the rapid seasonal redistribution
of productivity, spread of disease, and shifts in biodiversity across and among
continents. Visualizing and modeling the collective behaviors of the diversity
of animals that use the aerosphere for foraging, dispersal, and migration is
pivotal to understanding and forecasting continental macroecological dynamics;
and will be a core focus of this project. This EAGER award will focus on a high-
risk approach building a mechanistic understanding of macroecological dynamics
in the aerosphere based on the NEXRAD network of weather surveillance radars.
The combination of recent and ongoing advances in radar technology, computation
capabilities and data processing workflows, primarily in meteorology, have
brought researchers to the edge of a revolution in the capacity to use weather
radars as a biological sensors system. However, outside of meteorology, this
resource is vastly under-used due to a general lack of analysis tools and data
sets tailored to biologists. This EAGER award will focus on improved
infrastructure and validation on providing radar-based metrics of distribution,
density, and diversity of animals in the aerosphere. This project will include
an integrated series of observational, experimental, and modeling studies that
will result in a set of tools, products, and applications that enable
transformative science in aeroecology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts
of this award will increase the availability and interpretability of radar data
for investigations in environmental biology and building an interdisciplinary
training environment at the interface of ecology, spatial modeling, computer
science and meteorology. The radar tools and products that are developed will be
widely distributed and make major contributions to basic understanding of
aeroecology, which will be useful in (1) minimizing the impact of wind power
development; (2) aviation safety; and (3) evaluation of ecosystem services. This
project will lead a growing culture of interdisciplinary research by supporting
a post-doc and student in an interdisciplinary group project with co-advisors
and committee members from different disciplines (i.e. biology, computer
science, and meteorology).