* 1340007
* Noyce Explorers, Scholars, Teachers (NEST): Fostering the Creation of Exceptional Mathematics and Technology Teachers in New York City
* EHR,DUE
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2019
* Mete Kok, CUNY New York City College of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Michelle Camacho - Walter
* 12/31/2019
* USD 1,418,976.00

New York City College of Technology (City Tech) and Borough of Manhattan
Community College (BMCC), neighboring CUNY institutions, are implementing a
Noyce Teacher Scholarship Phase I program that increases the number of highly
qualified STEM teachers in high need school districts in Brooklyn and the New
York metropolitan area. The three-tiered Noyce partnership recruits students in
their first and second years of STEM undergraduate studies and enrolls them as
Noyce Explorers (Tier I). The Noyce Explorers, Scholars, Teachers (NEST) program
leads Noyce Explorers through an engaging summer program at BMCC that offers a
combination of STEM content, STEM pedagogy, and provides an opportunity to
interact in a pedagogical role with peers and/or younger students, through peer
tutoring, mentoring, and in other quasi-instructional capacities. Noyce Scholars
(Tier II) are third and fourth year undergraduates in STEM programs who have
committed to becoming STEM (either Mathematics or Technology) teachers in high
need schools and are supported with Noyce scholarships. Upon licensure, Noyce
Scholars will be designated Noyce Teachers (Tier III), and they will receive
support through their initial induction into the profession either from City
Tech's Mathematics Education or Career and Technical Teacher Education program.
The five-year program will produce a total of 20 new STEM teachers and create a
new STEM teacher preparation pathway for the critically underpowered STEM
teaching force in New York City.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit lies in
an innovative three-tier structure that begins by designating a broad pool of
potential scholars as Noyce Explorers, continues to support a selected cohort as
Noyce Scholars, and maintains professional support through their induction into
the profession as Noyce Teachers. As part of the NEST program, Noyce Scholars
are guaranteed yearly Noyce teacher training workshops, summer internship
opportunities, mentorships, and the opportunity to practice teaching under the
direct supervision of STEM middle and high school teachers in the field, the
training to experience math and science education in informal settings through
community service, and enrollment in courses on pedagogy that incorporate both
the use of technology as a teaching tool and inquiry as an effective teaching
strategy. Moreover, Noyce scholars will be qualified to obtain a license to
teach in New York City after the completion of the
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A broader impact of the NEST program is that it
increases the number of well-qualified STEM teachers who teach in Brooklyn and
other high-need districts in the metropolitan New York region, thereby expanding
exponentially the numbers of students in under-resourced school districts who
will be taught by well-qualified STEM professionals. The NEST program builds on
existing partnerships with the New York City Department of Education, P-TECH
High School, City Poly High School, and other schools in the NYC School
District. The BMCC-to-City Tech STEM teacher preparation infrastructure that
provides a sustainable pathway for the professional teacher preparation of
underrepresented students who attend City Tech and BMCC for years to come. The
NEST program serves as a model pathway with multiple points of entry through the
innovative, three-tier structure "Explorer, Scholar, Teacher" that maximizes
support for STEM students who wish to enter the teaching profession in STEM
disciplines and serve their communities.