* 1340001
* Inactivation of microRNAs in Crop Plants Using Short Tandem Target Mimic (STTM) Technology
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2019
* Xuemei Chen, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* R. Kelly Dawe
* 05/31/2019
* USD 2,499,979.00

PI: Guiliang Tang (Michigan Technological University, Houghton) CoPIs: Xuemei
Chen and Wenbo Ma (University of California, Riverside), Harold N. Trick (Kansas
State University), and Hairong Wei (Michigan Technological University, Houghton)
Key Collaborator: Kan Wang (Iowa State University) Small RNAs, including
microRNAs (miRNAs) and small interfering RNAs (siRNAs), play central roles in
growth and development, epigenetics, genome integrity, defense against pathogen
infection, and responses to environmental changes in plants. miRNAs are
especially important in controlling plant development, productivity, and
responses to biotic and abiotic stresses by negatively regulating gene
expression at the post-transcriptional level. Hundreds to thousands of miRNAs
have been identified from dozens of plant species. However, their roles in plant
development and response against various pathogens and other stresses are
largely unknown. This project will integrate the most recent cutting-edge
genomics technology into the study of miRNAs in crop plants. Students at all
levels of education will be engaged in a variety of activities including
teaching, training, learning workshops, and technology-extension. The project
will provide research training in small tandem target mimic (STTM) technology,
rice transformation, and functional studies of miRNAs for postdoctoral
associates, graduate and undergraduate students. Underrepresented minorities and
women, as well as students from the Upper Peninsula region of Great Lakes, will
be targeted and recruited. The project will also organize and hold a training
workshop in STTM construction. The knowledge provided by this project will be
disseminated to the public at large through informal talks at appropriate
community venues. This work will address key mechanistic hypotheses regarding
miRNA evolution by answering important questions: Why do plants need so many
miRNAs? Are they essential? What are their functional conservation and
diversification in different plant lineages? This project will develop miRNA
"knockdown" populations in selected agriculturally important crops as a pilot
project using the recently developed STTM technology. These mutant populations
will be further used to investigate the functional conservation and
diversification of six highly conserved families of plant miRNAs, and to study
the regulatory role of miRNAs in plant-microbe interactions. The project will
provide a resource database, application and service for web-based materials
transfer and distribution. All sequence data will be deposited at Gene
Expression Omnibus (GEO). STTM constructs, STTM seeds of rice, maize,
Arabidopsis and soybean for use in basic biology in plant science and crop
improvement will be available upon request.