* 1340385
* I-Corps:  Ultra Violet Guardian: Real Time Estimation of Pedestrians Ultraviolet Exposure
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2013,10/31/2014
* Mario Gerla, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 10/31/2014
* USD 50,000.00

Researchers seek to provide real-time ultraviolet (UV) monitoring across the
globe for pedestrians with an UV-exposure monitoring technology for the purpose
of protecting users from sun over-exposure and aiding in skin cancer prevention.
Using a cell phone device and a Bluetooth enabled UV sensor, volunteers walking
outdoors contribute to constructing a global UV irradiance map in their
respective areas, by periodically uploading UV irradiance samples to the
technology's web service. Subsets of the aggregated UV readings are made
anonymous, geographically segmented, then made available to the general public
for location based UV irradiance queries via a webpage. With smart phone and the
technology's App, the typical customer, even without wearing a UV sensor, can
keep track of cumulative exposure and can plan travel paths that minimize UV
exposure before stepping outdoors.

This technology has the potential to have significant impacts on health and
wellness both near and long-term. In the near term: (1) Build a global UV
irradiance map in real-time at the pedestrian level through participatory
sensing; (2) estimate the pedestrians' UV exposure traveling along a path before
they step outdoors: A personal UV monitoring device can prevent over-exposure,
however only performs incremental or post processing of the pedestrian's UV
exposure. In the long-term: this technology could be used to correlate the
pedestrian's UV exposure patterns with skin cancer types: Today, there is little
data that correlates UV exposure to the onset of any type of Skin Cancer. If 1
in 5 people are projected to get skin cancer, 20-30 years from now Physicians
may be able to obtain UV exposure data from users of this technology that
contract skin cancer provided their consent.