* 1340592
* CC-NIE Networking Infrastructure: Infrastructure Upgrades for Advancing Discovery
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2015
* Susan Schwarz, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 12/31/2015
* USD 473,324.00

The flood of Big Data now being created across the sciences and social sciences
has produced extraordinary new intellectual and empirical opportunities with
implications throughout society. While high performance computing has long been
available for processing such large data sets, researchers and institutions must
carefully design network computing environments in order to effect useful
analyses in real time. One of the greatest limitations of such analyses at
Dartmouth currently is simply moving data from where it is produced and stored
to where analyses are done: simply getting the data to the computer for analysis
can now often take longer than the analysis will take once the data is there.
Dartmouth has a number of superior high performance computing assets, but these
currently exist as silos on the network. The work supported by this proposal is
consolidating Dartmouth's high performance computing assets onto one high-speed
network - the Science DMZ - that is separate from the main campus network. The
Science DMZ allows optimal configuration of the Dartmouth computing clusters and
file storage systems; alleviates file storage and movement issues from the
workflow of researchers; and provides a robust and secure scientific network
backbone for future system growth and innovation. The Science DMZ network will
tremendously increase the pace of scientific research done at Dartmouth. In
particular, the Science DMZ will greatly expand the abilities of the more than
500 undergraduates who perform independent research each year and graduate
students across Dartmouth's graduate and professional programs to accomplish
their work.