* 1340542
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Evaluating Political Competition Between Chacoan- Style Great Houses in the Southern Cibola Region, West-Central New Mexico
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2015
* Kristin Safi, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2015
* USD 24,812.00

Under the direction of Dr. Andrew Duff, and with support from the National
Science Foundation, Kristin Safi's doctoral research at Washington State
University will examine the degree to which localized political competition
organized migrants into cooperative multi-ethnic settlements in west-central New
Mexico, a unique cultural setting at the interface of two ancestral cultural
traditions, the Pueblo and Mogollon. This research focuses on the A.D. 1050-1150
period, when migrants from both ancestral traditions formed multi-ethnic
communities in this area centered around Chacoan-style great houses. These great
houses represent scaled-down emulations of the monumental architecture found at
Chaco Canyon, New Mexico. Chaco Canyon and the smaller great houses found
throughout the Four Corners area has been argued to be a socially and/or
politically integrated system of unparalleled scale in the ancient American
Southwest. However, little research has investigated how great houses
articulated with Chaco Canyon or the role great houses played within their local
communities. This research aims to do so by evaluating how political competition
between great house communities on the margins of the "Chacoan regional system"
mitigated the social stresses caused by rapid population increase by groups from
distinct ethnic traditions.

Research on migrant integration and community organization will better frame
studies of identity expression within multi-ethnic communities and will further
knowledge of the interplay between group affiliation and cooperation within
multi-ethnic groups, questions relevant to studying migrant integration and
community identity in contemporary heterogeneous populations worldwide.

This study focuses on the Largo Gap great house and its associated community.
The study aims to: (1) characterize the construction and chronology of use at
the Largo Gap great house; (2) characterize the Largo Gap support community, and
the role of the great house within this community; (3) compare the settlement
pattern around, and use of the Largo Gap great house to its two nearest
neighbors, Cox Ranch Pueblo and Cerro Pomo; and (4) to explore the articulation
between great houses in this region with contemporaneous great house communities
across the Four Corners, which will help clarify the nature of the "Chacoan
regional system." Systematic survey of lands surrounding Largo Gap and limited
testing of the Largo Gap great house and associated community sites will provide
the data needed to address these questions. These data, when combined with that
collected by Duff at the Cox Ranch and Cerro Pomo great house communities, will
permit Safi to evaluate models of political competition, multi-ethnic community
integration, and great house function at local and regional scales.

This research promotes a wider appreciation for archaeological science and the
preservation our national heritage. It also advances increased participation of
women in science by training women at all educational levels to conduct
archaeological research in the field and laboratory. This project promotes
engagement between academia and descendent communities through consultation and
research presentations, and engages local residents through community outreach
to promote increased understanding of Native American history, the conservation
of heritage resources, and to foster relationships between researchers, the
descendants of these ancient communities, and the region's current residents.