* 1340278
* I-Corps:  Development of Integrated Optofluidic ELISA Biosensor Plates
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2013,10/31/2013
* Xudong Fan, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 10/31/2013
* USD 50,000.00

This research team has recently demonstrated integrated optofluidic enzyme-
linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) technology that can tremendously improve the
ELISA performance. The proposed project will be focused on the effort to further
develop the optofluidic ELISA technology. The integrated optofluidic device is a
plastic module that consists of 96 flow-through multi-hole capillaries, which
improves the analyte capture efficiency/rate and the signal-to-noise ratio.
Currently, it is capable of detecting 1 pg/mL of analytes in only 55 minutes by
using only 5 micro-liter sample/reagents, which is already 4-fold, 8-fold, and
20-fold improvement in detection limit, detection time, and sample/reagent
consumption, respectively, over the traditional ELISA. Additional 10-fold
improvement in sensitivity and analysis speed is expected as the development
efforts continue. Significantly, the optofluidic ELISA device is fully
compatible with the existing ELISA readers without the need of modification.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed device has the potential to be faster, more
sensitive, and more cost-effective. Therefore, it could replace the current
devices in use. The proposed ELISA device has a societal impact when used in
biomedicine. Due to its rapid analysis, it can be used in emergency rooms to
provide time-critical information to save lives. The high sensitivity enables
early-diagnosis, disease prognosis, and therapeutically monitoring of patients.
Finally, significant reduction in reagent volumes translates directly to over
75% savings in healthcare costs. The device is also beneficial to industries and
research labs. It expedites the testing turn-around time, cuts the research and
development costs, and helps identify molecules at extremely concentrations.