* 1340992
* CC-NIE Network Infrastructure: Building a ScienceDMZ for Enhanced Engineering and Science Research
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2013,09/30/2015
* Richard Sause, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 09/30/2015
* USD 384,733.00

At Lehigh University the Imbt Laboratories are comprised of two nationally
recognized research facilities: The Advanced Technology for Large Structural
Systems (ATLSS) Engineering Research Center and the Network for Earthquake
Engineering Simulation (NEES@Lehigh) Facility. These labs conduct data- and
computationally-intensive research in the areas of structural and civil
engineering, as well as simulation of earthquake effects on large-scale
structural systems. The increasing use of numeric and fast hybrid simulations in
these areas of engineering in the Imbt Labs require massive data transfers,
which require high-capacity network availability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed upgrades to the Imbt Labs and Lehigh's campus cyberinfrastructure
provide three major functionalities to enhance research and teaching. These
include: improved access to computing infrastructure maintained in the
university data center; improved access to national computational resources
(e.g. NSF XSEDE); and enhancements to collaborative research
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The network enhancements provided by the
project consist of upgrading the Imbt core network infrastructure with gigabit
connectivity for improved bandwidth supporting large dataset transfers. This
project also creates a campus ScienceDMZ, greatly enhancing long-haul transfer
of large data sets with external research partners and collaborators working
with ATLSS, NEES@Lehigh, and other campus research centers such as Lehigh's
Center for Advanced Materials and Nanotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project significantly enhances research at Lehigh as well as graduate and
undergraduate education in various disciplines that utilize the resources of the
Imbt Labs. Activities in the Imbt Labs also contribute to and promote Lehigh's
diversity commitment to increase the participation of members of
underrepresented groups in science and engineering.