* 1340999
* CC-NIE Integration: Supporting Climate Modeling Over Named Data Networking (NDN)
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2013,12/31/2016
* David Randall, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 12/31/2016
* USD 999,766.00

Named Data Networking (NDN) is an instance of Information Centric Networking
(ICN). Unlike IP, NDN focuses on content (the what) rather than hosts (the
where). In NDN users simply request content by name rather than its location,
and the network locates and retrieves signed content from anywhere, including
the publisher, a network cache or a nearby user. The ability to specify content
by name and retrieve the nearest copy is of great benefit to Big Data
applications by seamlessly locating related data and speeding up retrieval of
large datasets, especially in collaborative
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, networking researchers at
the Computer Science and Atmospheric Sciences departments at Colorado State
University will work together to integrate NDN with the Global Cloud Resolving
Model (GCRM) application. GCRM simulates the global atmosphere using a grid fine
enough to crudely resolve the larger individual clouds. This application
typically generates terabyte to petabyte scale datasets. GCRMs are currently
under development at several modeling centers in the U.S. and
abroad.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project contributions include a seamless
integration of NDN with researchers' work flow through integration with the file
system, versioning control, the design of appropriate name spaces to facilitate
seamless data discovery, building efficient collaboration and sharing
environments and ensuring data integrity. To ensure smooth transition to the new
environment, the project builds translators between existing and NDN-appropriate
formats. Instrumented NDN routers are deployed across three campuses to support
testing and engagement in a continuous feedback loop with researchers to improve
the network and the tools.