* 1340616
* Student Travel Support for the 2013 Workshop on Health Information Technologies (HealthTech '13)
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2014
* Tadayoshi Kohno, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 08/31/2014
* USD 5,000.00

This award is for travel support for up to ten students to the 2013 USENIX
Workshop on Health Information Technologies
(HealthTech13).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous USENIX workshops on Health
Information Technologies (HIT) have traditionally provided a forum for
discussion of aggressively innovative and potentially disruptive ideas on all
aspects of medical and health security and privacy, including technology and
policy. This year's 2013 USENIX Workshop on Health Information Technologies,
called HealthTech13, will be held in conjunction with the annual USENIX Security
conference in Washington, D.C., on Aug. 12, 2013. Its focus differs from
previous USENIX workshops on HIT by its broader scope that is intended to
encourage the development of new technologies that generally improve the quality
and safety of healthcare, as well as the access to it. The workshop audience is
similarly broadened to encourage greater cross-disciplinary engagement by
researchers and practitioners in technology, medicine, and policy communities
across academia, government and industry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop
will offer several means by which participants can interact and engage. In
addition to keynote and technical research presentations, there will be a poster
session and a best research paper award, which will both be a first for this
workshop series, and a continuation of last year's successful session for
announcing research progress on hard problems. The topics to be covered in
HealthTech13 include architectures for large-scale health information systems,
and health information exchanges, medical devices and body area networks, home
and assisted living monitoring systems, privacy enhancing technologies,
regulatory and policy issues, telemedicine, and mobile health technologies,
among others.