* 1340669
* EAGER: Measuring Continental Scale Anthropogenic Impacts on the Environment through Acoustics
* BIO,EF
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2016
* Kurt Fristrup, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 07/31/2016
* USD 297,889.00

Acoustic signaling and reception are integral to the survival of a wide variety
of organisms, ranging from small invertebrates to the largest whales. Animals
rely on sound for a number of fundamental life functions including locating
food, selecting mates and avoiding predation. Increases in background noise from
human activities can have serious impacts on sensory ecology by reducing the
range signals can be detected. This EAGER award outlines a pilot project to use
acoustic monitoring to document levels and temporal patterns of anthropogenic
noise in natural environments and diel activity patterns and seasonal phenology
of vocal taxa across regional spatial scales. Techniques and algorithms normally
associated with marine mammal research will be modified and used to evaluate
these capabilities at National Ecological Observatory sites. Biocoustical
monitoring has the potential to provide archival records of first occurrence of
acoustic activity for all species that produce sound at a given location. As
such, acoustic recording can provide an achievable long-term record of phenology
of breeding behavior for multiple species, in multiple taxonomic groups,
simultaneously. Coupling these data with long-term climatological measurements
at and between NEON sites will provide a strong dataset to assess phenological
events relating to breeding activity to a diversity of species. This award will
utilize acoustic recordings at four current sites in NEON to address two
scientific objectives: Objective 1) Collect long-term acoustic recordings at
four NEON sites across an urban ecosystem gradient and apply automated signal
detection algorithms and noise measurements to quantify the prevalence and
levels of noise at each site generated by transportation (automobile, plane and
train) and mineral extraction (oil &amp; gas wells). Objective 2) Develop
automated signal processing tools to identify diel and seasonal trends in
acoustic signals produced by benchmark bird, amphibian, and insect breeding
chorusing at these same four NEON sites to assess changes in migration and
breeding activities associated with local climate
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using acoustics to study continental wide the
impacts of human activities on wildlife is a new approach to providing
ecological data from remote sensing. This project includes significant training
and educational components for two female graduate students and undergraduates
from under-represented groups who will be involved in the research and outreach
components of the proposed study. Focused outreach activities will engage
underrepresented minority K-12 students from the Syracuse University School
System in science research though an established early college program at the
Syracuse University Department of Biology.