* 1340304
* Research Initiation Grant: Exploring the Disconnect between Self Determination Theory and the Engineering Classroom Environment
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2016
* Nancy Romance, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* Elliot Douglas
* 09/30/2016
* USD 150,000.00

The proposed work is an empirical investigation to explore the effectiveness of
the Self-&lt;br/&gt;Determination Theory (SDT) in the context of undergraduate
engineering education. It is&lt;br/&gt;hypothesized that there is a disconnect
between the principles outlined in SDT and the actual&lt;br/&gt;classroom
environment, thus creating a barrier to intrinsic motivation needed for student
learning.&lt;br/&gt;Accordingly, the primary objectives will be to (i) assess
the Faculty knowledge of SDT; (ii) develop&lt;br/&gt;a measurement framework to
assess the classroom environment as it relates to SDT; and
(iii)&lt;br/&gt;determine the association among Faculty knowledge of SDT,
student motivation, learning&lt;br/&gt;environment, and student
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research design and measurement framework are
developed through a meaningful collaboration&lt;br/&gt;between the researchers
from Engineering, Psychology, and Education. This takes advantage
of&lt;br/&gt;current standards and techniques employed in the field of Social-
Cognitive Psychology. The&lt;br/&gt;research questions answered through this
project are valuable in developing reform strategies for&lt;br/&gt;engineering
education, and can also serve as a future model for other STEM disciplines.
The&lt;br/&gt;broader objectives of the project support the NSF?s strategic
goals of transforming the frontiers by&lt;br/&gt;preparing a better engineering
workforce with new capabilities and expertise. Also the NSF goal
of&lt;br/&gt;innovating for society is achieved by producing research-based
results that may be useful in&lt;br/&gt;informing educational policy and
practices.