* 1340812
* Complex Effects of Climate Change on Nature Reserve Networks at Macroscales
* BIO,DEB
* 11/01/2014,12/31/2020
* Andres Vina, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 12/31/2020
* USD 2,494,913.00

Protected areas such as nature reserves have been a major cornerstone of
biodiversity conservation. However, human activities have compromised
conservation goals in many nature reserves, and climate change poses additional
threats to their long-term viability and success. Although some studies have
analyzed climate change impacts on the conservation effectiveness of nature
reserves, most have focused on individual nature reserves in localized regions.
Funding is provided to assess the changes in species distribution within and
across networks of nature reserves in broad geographic regions, and to analyze
the effects of climate change on the long-term survival of plant and animal
species. An exceptional setting for achieving the objectives is the globally
important forested macrosystem that is the historical geographic range of the
world-famous endangered giant panda (2.2 million km2 across 19 provinces of
China). Across this vast macrosystem there are currently 63 panda reserves and
over 1,000 reserves for other purposes, which together constitute a reserve
meta-network (network of networks). Using state-of-the-art climate change
projections, remote sensing techniques, meta-uncertainty analyses, and species
distribution models, a multi-disciplinary and international team of researchers
will analyze climate change impacts on conservation effectiveness of this meta-
network of reserves as well as current and future geographic distribution of the
panda and around 30 bamboo species that comprise 99% of its diet.

This project will lead to transformative and significant outcomes, such as
testing and extending two fundamental theories (niche theory and connectivity
theory) at macroscales. It will also generate powerful and lasting broader
impacts. Through active engagement with stakeholders, the research team will use
project results to develop and evaluate effective and efficient conservation
strategies of global importance in the context of climate change. Improving
conservation strategies for a well-known charismatic endangered species will
help to increase the public awareness of the potential climate change impacts on
biodiversity, and encourage public engagement on climate change mitigation and
adaptation. Through strategic communication and hands-on workshops, the results
and methods will be widely disseminated to inspire others to analyze the impacts
of climate change on other species and other nature reserve networks around the
world. Furthermore, the project will train undergraduate and graduate students
as well as post-doctoral scholars, who will gain broad and deep knowledge and
learn important skills to become future visionary leaders and globally-engaged
researchers who can creatively address future challenges to biodiversity
research and conservation.