* 1340336
* I-Corps:  High Power/High Energy Density CNT based Li-ion battery
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2013,10/31/2013
* Sivasubramanian Somu, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 10/31/2013
* USD 50,000.00

Researchers propose to further the development of high power density layered-
layered CNT/active materials based cathodes and anodes for Li-ion battery. This
layered-layered nanomaterial based electrode architecture designed to be
compatible with various Li-ion materials was developed using a room temperature
and pressure processes. Coin cell battery prototypes in full as well as half-
cell configuration were fabricated and tested. Preliminary results indicate that
these electrode architectures can have very high power density at a fast
charge/discharge rate and long cycle life.

This battery electrode technology may have a large economic impact by enabling
the realization of low cost all electric (EV), plug-in hybrid electric (PHEV),
hybrid electric vehicles (HEV) and renewable energy storage devices. It will
also exhibit the advantages of incorporating nanotechnology into macroscopic
devices. The layered-layered electrode technology is compatible with various
types of active materials and can be readily incorporated into the existing
manufacturing process, enabling the use of commercially available materials.
This technology will aid researchers in understanding the impact of electrode
architecture and geometry on the performance metrics for energy storage devices.