* 1340374
* Workshop on Origami Design for Integration of Self-assembling Systemsfor Engineering Innovation
* ENG,EFMA
* 05/15/2013,10/31/2013
* Kurt Maute, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Christiaan Paredis
* 10/31/2013
* USD 31,350.00

Folding and unfolding materials to create structures with novel shape and
functionality has been recognized as a promising design concept for engineering
systems at and across a broad range of length scales. This workshop will bring
together a diverse group of international experts to discuss and explore
challenges and opportunities in the emerging field of origami design. The
workshop will be held on May 14, 2013, in Orlando, Florida, directly subsequent
to the 10th World Congress on Structural and Multidisciplinary Optimization
(WCSMO-10). WCSMO-10 is considered the primary conference series in topology
optimization, an approach that is particularly promising for origami design. In
addition to internationally renowned leaders in computational design and
topology optimization, researchers of current NSF EFRI ODISSEI projects will be
invited.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of the workshop will be on the
fundamental principles of origami design. The main goals are to (a) identify the
intrinsic challenges of designing structures that fold and unfold at various and
across length scales, and (b) explore opportunities for design optimization, in
particular topology optimization, to systematically design (unfolding)
structures. The workshop will result in a comprehensive understanding of the
current capabilities of topology optimization for origami design and the new
challenges origami design poses for the design optimization community. The
workshop will educate materials, device, and structural design researchers on
systematic approaches to origami design, and it will pose novel, exciting
problems to the topology optimization community. The workshop will bring
together both senior researchers and their graduate students from around the
globe, thus planting the seed for new domestic and international collaborations.