* 1340867
* CC-NIE Networking Infrastructure: FlowWave: Enabling High Bandwidth Science Data Flows
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2015
* Maria Drake, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 09/30/2015
* USD 275,908.00

The FlowWave project creates a dense wavelength division multiplexing (DWDM)
solution that segregates and protects light paths dedicated for researchers.
FlowWave bridges the University's science cyberinfrastructure to regional,
national and international research networks in light waves reserved for
researchers in order to support end-to-end science flows.

FlowWave enhances the campus network by creating a distinct and dedicated path
for research circuits to support targeted science application drivers towards
increasing science flows and data-driven discovery. It provides a safeguard by
separating the circuits dedicated for interconnecting research resources from
the rest of the University traffic. The initial suite of science applications
benefiting from this solution are in the physical and computational sciences
with applications in the domains of high-energy physics, optical astronomy,
climate modeling, real-time large-scale network simulation, and cloud computing.
Researchers and their students at FIU (the largest Hispanic minority serving
institution within the continental U.S.) can access and share resources for at-
scale experiments. Campus IT staff are assured that experiments executed on the
science cyberinfrastructure will not affect production services. The separation
of production and research flows across the fiber link facilitates the use of
SDN (software define networking) to provision slices across the research link
enabling instant provisioning of circuits.