* 1340862
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Testing the relationship between nasal traits and the anterior dentition in Homo
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2015
* Robert Franciscus, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2015
* USD 7,649.00

While the mid-face (the nose and the region around it) is argued to be an aspect
of anatomy that is highly constrained by the need to function in respiration,
there are obvious differences in mid-facial form between both fossil human
species and populations of living humans. The cause of this variation is still
not entirely understood. One nasal trait in particular, a distinctly depressed
shape to the bottom of the inside of the nose (the internal nasal floor), has
previously been argued to be a Neanderthal adaptation to cold climates to help
warm inhaled air. Recent research, however, has cast this into doubt. The bones
which makes up the majority of the nasal capsule, the paired maxillae, also
house the upper dentition and must respond to the competing biological
constraints that respiration and mastication place on them. Pilot data for this
project indicate that the development of the front teeth during childhood may be
the ultimate cause for shape differences in the internal nasal floor. This
project by doctoral student Christina Nicholas (University of Iowa), under the
supervision of Dr. Robert Franciscus, tests the hypothesis that aspects of the
shape of the internal nose, such as internal nasal floor depression versus the
lack of depression, are correlated with variation in anterior dental traits. If
so, this may imply that some internal nasal traits are a secondary result of
evolutionary factors acting upon anterior dental traits (e.g., tooth root size,
and timing of tooth eruption). A sample of CT scans of recent humans and 3D
surface scans of fossil humans will be analyzed to examine the relationship
between internal nasal traits and anterior dental
traits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project takes a developmental
perspective to investigating mid-facial evolution, with a sample composed of
individuals from birth through young adulthood. Little is currently known about
the development of internal nasal floor shape, despite the fact that the
internal nasal floor plays an important role in pediatric facial surgeries such
as the realignment of deviated nasal septa. The results of this project thus
have clear relevance not only for biological anthropology, but also clinical
areas such as pediatric maxillo-facial surgery and orthodontia. This project
also will contribute to training a female scientist.