* 1340232
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Ceramics in the 18th-century Spanish-Atlantic World: An Archaeological Investigation of Culture and Social Display
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2015
* Kathryn Ness, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2015
* USD 22,746.00

Under the guidance of Dr. Mary C. Beaudry, Kathryn Ness will study daily life
and expressions of social ambition in the 17th-19th-century Spanish Atlantic.
Early modern Spaniards confronted numerous changes as a result of new wealth
from Spain's American territories, dynastic transitions, and an influx of
Enlightenment ideals. Many middle- and lower-class individuals during this time
had access to new sources of wealth and could afford luxury items traditionally
reserved for the upper classes and nobility. As a result, these nouveau-riche
individuals faced pressures to imitate their social superiors by owning and
using similar luxury goods. Ms. Ness will examine documentary sources as well as
archaeological household sites in southern Andalusia, Spain to determine how
individuals expressed these social aspirations and how changes in demonstrations
of status impacted the material culture of the early modern Spanish Atlantic.

The importance of material culture as an indicator of social status is widely
accepted and studied across a variety of fields, including archaeology,
anthropology, history, art history, and material culture studies. While
archaeologists working in the Spanish Americas have studied related topics for
nearly sixty years, their research has been largely restricted to sites in the
Americas. Because these interpretations of Spanish-American life are based
largely on conjectural ideas of contemporary Spanish lifeways rather than models
established from empirical research, more data is needed from Spain. To help
address this problem, Ms. Ness will combine three lines of evidence: documentary
sources, museum collections from an 18th-century house in Jerez de la Frontera,
Spain, and archaeological fieldwork at a 17th-19th-century farmhouse in Rota,
Spain. This three-pronged approach will allow her to obtain a holistic view of
daily life in early modern Andalusia. She will then situate her work within the
broader context of the Spanish Atlantic by comparing her findings from Spain
with data from Spanish America. This comparison will indicate specific ways in
which Spanish Americans modified or preserved their cultural heritage to fit
their new surroundings in the Americas. While this project provides new ways to
interpret Spanish-American data, it will also facilitate future archaeological
research by serving as a potential model for examining the social connections
between a nation and its overseas territories well after the initial conquest.

This research will seek to have a broader impact beyond the research topics
presented. The trans-Atlantic approach of this project will foster international
collaboration between American and Spanish archaeologists and museum staff. The
project will also assist in graduate student training, both for Ms. Ness and her
graduate research assistant, who will participate in the project's
archaeological fieldwork. Ms. Ness will disseminate the results from her
research in professional presentations and peer-reviewed publications, while the
raw data will be made publicly available through The Digital Archaeological
Repository (tDAR.org). In doing so, she plans to enhance public understanding of
early modern Spanish archaeology as well as facilitate future interdisciplinary
research between archaeology, history, Hispanic studies, material culture
studies, and anthropology.