* 1340580
* Conference - Mechanisms in Plant Development,  in Saxtons River, Vermont, USA.
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2013,09/30/2014
* David Jackson, Federation of Amer Societies For Exper Biology
* Standard Grant
* Ben Holt
* 09/30/2014
* USD 19,900.00

Meeting: FASEB Conference on Mechanisms in Plant Development,&lt;br/&gt;August
11-16, 2013, Saxtons River, Vermont, USA. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will promote interactions between biologists who are using different scientific
approaches to study plant developmental mechanisms. These interactions will take
place at the 13th International meeting on Mechanisms in Plant Development,
which will be held from August 11th-16th, 2013 in Saxtons River, Vermont, USA.
This meeting is the only regular international conference devoted entirely to
plant developmental biology, which is the study of how plants grow and how they
are able to make different structures, such as leaves, fruits and grains, that
are critical to our agricultural economy. Discoveries in developmental biology
may help in the design of better crops for food and biofuel production, as well
as reduce the impact of agriculture on the environment. This particular
conference is special because the small size and secluded location of the
meeting are higly conducive to informal discussion of new ideas and emerging
concepts, and also because it will support the involvement of early career and
minority scientists. The results of the conference will be widely disseminated
through a written summary and slides to be used by meeting participants to
spread the exciting new findings presented.