* 1340364
* I-Corps:  Microwave Stethoscope for Monitoring Vital Signs and Changes in Lung Water Content
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2013,06/30/2014
* Magdy Iskander, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 06/30/2014
* USD 50,000.00

The objective of the proposed work is to develop a low-cost and wireless enabled
'Microwave Stethoscope' system that can continuously monitor human vital signs
from a single reflection coefficient measurement. These vital signs include the
heart rate, breathing rate, stroke volume, and more importantly the changes in
lung water content which is unique to our sensor. The system is based on the use
of a single miniaturized microwave sensor placed on the patient chest for
reflection coefficient measurements. This broadband microwave sensor is attached
to the body in a similar fashion to an EKG lead. The measured reflection
coefficient (specifically the phase) exhibits changes due to respiration,
hearbeat, and the changes in the lung water content. These vital signs are
extracted by a novel digital signal processing algorithm providing multiple
vital signs through a single measurement such as heart rate, respiration rate,
EKG like heart waveform, and changes in the lung water content.

Healthcare is, and remains, a pressing challenge facing our nation in the 21st
century. The diminishing ratio of the primary care physicians to the population,
and the increasing requirements of the aging population are the driving forces
for the home and patient centered delivery of healthcare approach. Successful
completion of this project could provide a single low-cost and non-invasive
sensor that can continuously monitor multiple vital signs, hence, enable
improving healthcare in remote and under privileged communities, and in
supporting a variety of in-field and emergency military applications. The
developed hardware platform can be an investigative tool for further illness
diagnosis. This project could enable use of millimeter wave integrated circuits
for high accuracy monitoring of human health, and provides a new diagnosis tool
to a wide array of medical doctors including epidemiologists, pediatricians, and
family physicians. Typical MDs who would be interested in this technology
include those who work in pulmonary and respiratory, burn and ICU units. It has
the potential to help improve healthcare in remote and under privileged
communities in the US and perhaps beyond.