* 1340910
* CC-NIE Integration: Leveraging DYNES for Weather Data Distribution on Multicast Virtual Circuits
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Malathi Veeraraghavan, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 09/30/2017
* USD 899,946.00

The project objective is to create a new version of a software program called
Local Data Manager (LDM), which is used to distribute weather data by the
University Corporation for Atmospheric Research (UCAR) to over 170 institutions.
This new version uses network multicast services in order to decrease the
required computing resources and network capacity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
methods being employed are as follows: (i) implement a new version of LDM,
LDM-7, by integrating a reliable multicast transport protocol called Virtual
Circuit Multicast Transport Protocol (VCMTP) into the current LDM-6, (ii)
install LDM-7 on Dynamic Network System (DYNES) hosts that have been deployed at
several universities as part of another NSF grant, (iii) compare performance of
LDM-7 across two types of network multicast service: layer-3 (IP) multicast and
layer-2 multicast virtual circuits, and (iv) beta test LDM-7 at U. Wisconsin and
Rutgers U. for future transition to practice at the other 170 institutions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential benefits of the project are promising
because LDM-6 has a large deployed base; in addition to UCAR, it is used by
NOAA, NASA, US Geological Survey, US Army Corps of Engineers, US Air Force, US
Navy, and international agencies. Our expected outcome, based on a preliminary
evaluation of VCMTP, is that LDM-7 will require fewer servers and lower network
capacity to achieve the same level of performance as today's LDM-6. More
broadly, this network multicast solution with the reliable transport protocol
can be used to disseminate other types of information such as financial data and
video files.