* 1340984
* CC-NIE Integration: High Performance Computing with Data and Networking Acceleration (HPCDNA)
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2013,10/31/2016
* Thomas Lehman, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 10/31/2016
* USD 644,609.00

Future cyber-infrastructures are increasingly expected to revolve around the
integration of big data, computation, and high performance networking. The High
Performance Computing with Data and Networking Acceleration (HPCDNA) project
focuses on these issues in the context of campus science and computational
requirements. Many researchers have application specific data and a variety of
desired compute environments, including purpose built small lab compute
resources, medium scale campus High Performance Computing (HPC), cloud
computing, and national scale distributed or centralized resources. The
inability to flexibly and seamlessly get data to the most appropriate compute
resource is often the limiting factor determining where the computation is run
and what computation is performed. The HPCDNA project is developing technologies
to greatly improve the ability to utilize common data sets across this diverse
set of computational resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The HPCDNA architecture and
technologies include a Network Embedded Storage (NES) system based on a
distributed high performance parallel file system deployed in the core of the
Mid-Atlantic Crossroads regional network. This system is enhanced for high
performance via tight integration with campus HPC, campus networks, and wide
area networks. An NES client interface is being developed, which coordinates
storage with dynamic network provisioning, and enables a variety of high
performance access methods by workflow processes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is
expected that the HPCDNA system will facilitate expanded use of HPC and clouds
by researchers, which will allow the adoption of more ambitious goals with the
knowledge that their computing environments can scale up along with their
problem space.