* 1340454
* CC-NIE Networking Infrastructure: Dedicated High-Speed Science Network
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2016
* Ricardo Cortez, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 09/30/2016
* USD 498,655.00

This project, "CC-NIE Network Infrastructure: Dedicated High-Speed Science
Network", establishes a high-performance campus network dedicated to the Tulane
University scientific research community. The new network offers a 10x and 40x
speed increase from the current general-purpose campus network. The network
connects directly to researchers' PCs and servers, successfully addressing the
"last meter" problem. Researchers can provision a 10-gigabit connection between
equipment and remote servers located on various Tulane research campuses;
Tulane's planned (summer 2014) 100 Gbps connection to the Louisiana Optical
Network Initiative (LONI) and Tulane's Internet2 affiliation allows researchers
to connect across the state, the country, and the world.

The dedicated high-speed science network mitigates current bandwidth constraints
and enables faculty to conduct and advance data-intensive research through
increased visualization capacity, telepresence, and low-latency, bandwidth-
intensive data transfers to campus computational clusters, regional institutions
via the LONI network, and national centers that peer with I2, including members
of the XSEDE consortium. These capabilities impact a vast spectrum of academic
research education and outreach, meeting the demand for science-oriented
services, while satisfying the ever-growing need to provide these services for
non-science disciplines.

This upgrade enables the expansion of the university population that utilizes
the resources available at the national HPC center, while encouraging increased
participation in STEM disciplines. The projects that benefit from this increased
functionality have tremendous impacts on the interests of the greater community,
including advancement of Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill recovery, Mississippi Delta
research and coastal conservation, and an increased understanding and ability to
treat genetic disease.