* 1340958
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Growth, immune function, and the energetics of childhood
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2015
* Peter Ellison, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2015
* USD 13,233.00

Childhood is a unique and developmentally critical life stage within the human
genus. While theory concerning the evolution of the human life cycle now
abounds, biocultural data from traditional, non-industrialized populations are
scarce, and relatively little is known about how children in such challenging
environments behave, respond to environmental stimuli, or manage limited
energetic resources. This study by doctoral student Samuel Urlacher (Harvard),
under the guidance of Dr. Peter Ellison, builds upon scholarship in diverse
areas of anthropology, biology, and public health to address two questions that
are critical to our understanding of human life history and adaptation: 1) How
is childhood growth related to the function of the immune system? 2) How do
children 'buffer' energetic tradeoffs between competing metabolic demands? To
investigate these questions, this research operationalizes hypotheses relating
to childhood energy allocation and phenotypic plasticity among the traditional-
living Shuar of the Ecuadorian Amazon.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Innovative in
design, the project involves longitudinal data collection for measures of short-
term linear growth, body composition, physical activity/behavior, and a diverse
set of biomarkers of immune function with children age 5-10. This study is
unique in its ability to control for differences in individual biology and is
the first to consider multiple branches of immunity and physical activity as
important variables in childhood energy management. Employing a novel method for
short-term growth assessment (knemometry), the research also provides insight
into previously unexplored relationships between primary human life functions
and acute ecological/energetic variables. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to
increasing our broad-based understanding of human health, adaptation, and the
importance of energy management in the evolution of childhood, the project has
implications for multiple areas of research and application to issues of
childhood development and well-being on a global scale. As part of the Shuar
Health and Life History Project, this research builds on a strong foundation of
international collaboration and community outreach. Results from the study are
shared with Ecuadorian officials and will directly influence the development of
health policy and the targeting of humanitarian aid in Shuar territory.
Essential to any research with at-risk populations, the project also shares
information with participants' families and delivers basic health education at
the community level.