* 1340648
* Collaborative Research: Climatic and Anthropogenic Forcing of Wetland Landscape Connectivity in the Great Plains
* BIO,EF
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2018
* Frank Schwartz, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 05/31/2018
* USD 238,444.00

The presence and persistence of animals in a landscape is a function of the
availability of suitable habitat and the ability of individual animals to find
this habitat. Thus, in any landscape, animals encounter an arrangement of
suitable habitat patches, or stepping-stones, located within a matrix of
unsuitable habitat. The spatial arrangement of these stepping-stones is known as
a "habitat network." Losses of these stepping-stones stemming from human
development and climate change can alter these habitat networks, affecting
persistence of the species in the face of rapid climate and landuse change.
Wetland habitats in the U.S. Great Plains are embedded within a mixed grassland
and agricultural landscape. The Great Plains experiences dramatic year-to-year
variability in weather. Climate drives surface processes such as the hydrologic
cycle, and hydrology is the most important factor controlling the quality of
wetland habitats and the presence of wetland habitat networks. Thus the spatial
arrangement of wetland habitat networks in the Great Plains is constantly
changing; some wetlands (stepping stones) disappear as others reappear. Land use
change adds an additional level of complexity. Increasingly, farmers are
converting remnant grasslands in the Great Plains to row crops, with most of
this conversion occurring in close proximity to wetlands. This loss of grassland
habitat interferes with the ability of some organisms to move between
neighboring wetlands, while other species tend to avoid wetlands not surrounded
by sufficient grassland cover. This award will use the highly dynamic wetland
landscapes in the Great Plains as model systems for exploring general principles
related to habitat connectivity. In particular, the funds will allow the PIs to
examine how both climate change and land use change will likely influence the
connectivity of wetland habitat networks into the next century. This study will
focus on two groups, water birds and amphibians, as model organisms that vary
widely in their abilities to disperse between wetlands. Methods for quantifying
habitat connectivity will be adapted from the study of social networks and a
branch of mathematics known as graph theory. Temporal series of wetland
condition and land use trends from satellite imagery, computer simulations of
wetland hydrology, and downscaled climate change projections will be used to: 1)
examine the effects of land use change and climate change on the ability of
these two groups of animals to disperse between wetlands, 2) identify barriers
to these movements, and 3) identify those wetland habitat networks most likely
to persist under projected change

Findings from this study will be used in support of regional conservation
planning. Results will be disseminated to public-private partnerships like the
U.S. Department of Interior's network of Landscape Conservation Cooperatives and
the Prairie Pothole, Rainwater Basin, and Playa Lakes Joint Ventures led by the
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, and to state management agencies and
nongovernmental organizations like Ducks Unlimited and The Nature Conservancy in
support of their wetland and grassland easement purchasing strategies. This
project will support the early- to mid-career development of four co-PIs, all of
whom are from under-represented groups. Through support of external training and
lab exchanges, a cadre of four Postdoctoral Fellows and one Ph.D. student will
be trained in inter-disciplinary, collaborative research. This research will
advance the field of Macrosystem Biology by leveraging support from other
different disciplines, e.g., advanced hydrologic modeling, atmospheric science,
and graph theory to address previously inaccessible biological questions.
Methods developed over the course of this project, and general principles
potentially discovered, are anticipated to be broadly applicable to conservation
of other types of habitat networks, globally.