* 1340938
* CC-NIE Network Infrastructure: Science DMZ and Research Network Upgrade for Case Western Reserve University
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2015
* Lev Gonick, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 09/30/2015
* USD 499,533.00

The Research Network Upgrade Project at CWRU improves the campus
cyberinfrastructure in three coordinated areas to address increasing demand by
research faculty for bandwidth to the national research network. New network
edge equipment increases bandwidth to the national research network via the
regional network, OARnet, to 100 Gbps. New network access electronics extends 10
Gbps bandwidth to four areas of campus with data-intensive research in
engineering and physics. A new Science DMZ with data transfer nodes reduces the
friction of large-scale scientific and research data transfers across the
national network.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The enhanced network capabilities
facilitate the research endeavors of diverse groups at the university including
the Case Center for Imaging Research; Pharmacology and the Cleveland Center for
Membrane and Structural Biology; as well as Astrophysics, Cosmology, and
Particle Physics. This complements past work that provided bandwidth
enhancements at selected locations in the access layer serving the health
sciences campus.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The application of these advanced
technological capabilities brings broader impacts within and beyond the
immediate subject areas. The development of real-time MRI techniques is
envisioned to lead to real-time imaging for surgical procedures with image
information delivered to the surgeon from a remote data center. Advances in
structural biology and hybrid methods facilitates molecular characterization of
challenging biological systems including membrane proteins, receptors, and
engineered viral vectors. The development of new radiation detection and
detector media purification techniques impacts future medical imaging, nuclear
non-proliferation, and industrial processes.