* 1340546
* Conference: GRC Protein Folding Dynamics: From the Computer to the Cell: Protein Folding, Function and Evolution to be held in Galveston, TX on January 5-10, 2014
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2014
* Nancy Gray, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 07/31/2014
* USD 20,400.00

Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;The Gordon Research Conference (GRC) on Protein
Folding Dynamics "From the Computer to the Cell: Protein Folding, Function and
Evolution" will be held at the Hotel Galvez in Galveston, Texas, January 5-10,
2014. The conference will assemble experimentalists and theoreticians to discuss
basic issues in protein folding dynamics and their role in function, in the
evolution of protein sequences and in disorders associated with protein
misfolding. It has become increasingly clear that understanding the details of
Protein Folding Dynamics is crucial in describing virtually all processes of
life, including protein synthesis, co-translational folding, protein allostery,
protein function and diseases related to protein misfolding.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This meeting will bring together senior scientists,
postdoctoral researchers and graduate students from a wide range of interests
and approaches to protein folding dynamics. The nature of the conference allows
close interaction among participants, who can share their ideas and results
unpublished and published, officially and off-the-record. For the first time,
the 2014 conference is expanding to include complete formal sessions on membrane
protein folding and folding within the cell and protein design. This expansion
is largely in response to requests from previous years' participants and current
organizers believed that extending the range of topics would add to the
intellectual merit of the conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;By bringing together researchers from chemistry, physics and
biology to explore recent exciting developments in this field in a concrete
forum that encourages open discussions from researchers working on different
systems, the new paradigm of cross-disciplinary research is strengthened. The
program covers a range of topics, not restricted to, in vitro and in vivo
folding, protein aggregation, protein evolution and design, and the role of
protein dynamics in function. Particular care will be taken for the inclusion of
diversity in ethnicity, gender and age and geographical location.