* 1340122
* EAGER: Field Experiments and Formal Models of Arbitrary Social Inequality
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Arnout van de Rijt, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 08/31/2017
* USD 274,769.00

SES-1340122&lt;br/&gt;PI: Arnout van de Rijt&lt;br/&gt;SUNY at Stony
Brook&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sociologists have long suspected that a great deal of
social inequality is inherited from the past, namely through a mechanism of
success-breeds-success, or, "cumulative advantage." When a select group of
individuals accumulates long strings of successes amongst large numbers of
repeatedly unsuccessful others, this may well be because these fortunate
individuals experienced small, random initial advantages that grew larger and
larger through positive feedback, thus increasingly setting them apart from the
rest. However, establishing that any given instance of social inequality is
arbitrary is difficult, because once clear winners and losers are identified, it
is easy to justify that differential success by selectively attributing it to
certain hard-to-quantify personal qualities. This research incorporates an
experimental strategy for compellingly demonstrating cumulative advantage that
can be deployed live in many real-world situations where people seek some form
of success. The experimental design is implemented in three specific live
domains of success accumulation: financial gain, social status, and social
support. In each domain, the experimenter selects individuals at random from a
real-world population and bestows upon them money, status, or support through an
internet-enabled transfer. Comparison of subsequent success with non-recipients
provides a clean test of cumulative advantage. Further, from varying the amount
of success bestowed in these experiments we learn how much past success
translates into how much future success, which will be used to construct and
parameterize formal models of cumulative advantage. These models, in turn, will
be used to calculate how much inequality in a system is generated by cumulative
advantage. The experimental strategy proposed will reveal whether a large
portion of the variation in success across members of various populations is
causally attributable to prior differences in success. A key feature of the
approach proposed in this project is the application of a consistent
experimental framework across different domains to test a common hypothesis and
draw general conclusions about the dynamics of social inequality. This approach
promises a qualitative shift in our understanding of how societal inequalities
emerge and are sustained. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts &lt;br/&gt;The
results of this research may suggest novel policy interventions specifically
designed to rectify the effects of cumulative advantage by using the very
feedback mechanism against itself. For example, the research may suggest that it
would be possible to effectively jump-start projects by means of loans that are
repayable through the proceeds that cumulative advantage generates. Further,
much of the work proposed in the project will build links between the computer
science and sociology communities by suggesting a collaborative framework that
can be applied to other important sociological questions. Additionally, the
project centrally includes the training and mentoring of graduate and
undergraduate students.