* 1340632
* Warming Winters and Regional Implications for the Subnivean Climate
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2020
* Warren Porter, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 08/31/2020
* USD 779,820.00

This award will provide funds to study a poorly known environment below the
snowpack known as the subnivium. To escape the harsh winter weather, many plants
and animals persist within a warmer and more stable environment underneath the
snowpack. The climate of the subnivium is dependent on snowpack depth, density
and duration; deep, soft snow provides excellent insulation that results in mild
subnivium temperatures. Within the Great Lakes Region, the subnivium is
historically important, but winter conditions are changing rapidly. By 2050,
mean winter temperature is predicted to be 3-4 degrees Centigrade warmer
resulting in a shorter snowcover season and shallower and denser snowpack. These
changes will produce a colder and more thermally variable subnivium. For species
that are specially adapted to survive winter in the subnivium, such changes
could effect their survival and distribution. To determine how climate change
will affect the conditions and distribution of this sensitive habitat, this
award will experimentally mimic climate change predicted by 2050 across the
Great Lakes Region using micro-greenhouses. Finally, laboratory experiments and
distribution modeling will reveal how future subnivium conditions will affect
the physiology, survival and distribution of a sensitive subnivium hibernating
amphibian species native to the Great Lakes Region. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will provide new information on the mechanisms and extent to which
climate change will affect various attributes of the subnivium a biologically
important and climatically sensitive seasonal refugium. It will assess how
changing snow conditions will alter the survival and physiological function of a
hibernating amphibian and predict their future distribution in warming winters.
This project will also provide professional development opportunities for
graduate and undergraduate students through interactions with partners at the
Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources, Michigan Tech University, and The
Wildlife Society's Climate Change Working Group. Micro-greenhouses will be
constructed by participants at Operation Fresh Start, a local youth development
program, and will provide opportunities for underrepresented, at-risk and
minority youth to interact with university faculty, researchers and students.
Finally, the placement of micro-greenhouses at state parks, and recreational
areas will serve as an important tool for climate change education and provide
potentially long-term research opportunities.