* 1340039
* Building CAU Capacity to Prepare STEM Teachers for High Need K-12 School Districts
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Eric Mintz, Clark Atlanta University
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Richardson
* 09/30/2017
* USD 295,911.00

Clark Atlanta University's (CAU's) Robert Noyce Capacity Building project is
supporting CAU's effort to build a K-12 science educator preparation program
based on partnerships between CAU STEM departments, the School of Education, and
the Atlanta and Clayton County Public Schools. New curriculum is being developed
for undergraduate STEM majors and STEM graduates wishing to earn certification
for high school teaching with a particular emphasis on developing highly
qualified, culturally competent science educators for high need school
districts. The curriculum under development is responsive to state, district,
and national professional associations science education standards. This teacher
certification program is based on a strong STEM subject matter curriculum,
leading to a B.S. degree in a STEM field, such that the developing educators are
fully prepared to teach the subject matter without trepidation and to keep up
with advances in their chosen science field. The new curriculum provides
opportunities to test hypotheses about science achievement in urban 7-12
classrooms and translate these findings into a district specific set of "best
practices" for teaching and learning science. Broader impacts of this project
include enhanced STEM teaching at the secondary level where STEM majors and non-
majors alike benefit from STEM classes taught by faculty with knowledge, skills,
and cultural competence.