* 1340033
* Building Rural STEM Educator Capacity through Partnership
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Jonathan Shemwell, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 08/31/2017
* USD 299,997.00

This project brings together STEM and STEM education faculty, teachers and
administrators from rural districts, and others committed to improving STEM
education to develop a partnership to build capacity in Maine to attract,
prepare, and support STEM teachers and teacher leaders in high-need rural
districts. This partnership fosters a networked improvement community to develop
and disseminate exemplary STEM teaching methods courses, preparing both pre-
service and in-service teachers to begin the transformation process called for
in the Next Generation Science Standards and the Common Core State Standards in
Mathematics. After conducting a needs assessment of high-need districts, the
partnership is using this information to design recruitment strategies,
innovative, collaborative field experiences and other professional development
to support ongoing professional growth of STEM teachers and teacher leaders,
with Master Teaching Fellows earning a Graduate Certificate. These teachers are
positioned to have a significant, long term impact on their students and their
communities. As information is collected and capacity is built, partnership
members are obtaining cost share commitments and agreements for Fellow
placements, develop a research and evaluation plan, providing the basis for an
NSF Teaching Fellowships and Master Teaching Fellowships proposal. The
partnership for this initiative includes researchers with expertise in STEM
teaching and learning, veteran teachers, and curriculum directors, each of whom
brings different knowledge to the community. The course and curriculum
development is informed by discipline-based education research, including
studies related to challenges of implementing the practices. Each element of
professional development is assessed, with the results used to guide
improvements. The project's networked improvement community is providing
insights into the use of this strategy for ongoing educational improvement in
rural areas. Courses developed through this project are disseminated broadly, so
others benefit from the products of this community.