* 1340126
* I-Corps:  ABO-Rh Blood Type Identification Using Dielectrophoretic Microdevice
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2013,09/30/2013
* Adrienne Minerick, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 09/30/2013
* USD 50,000.00

This research further investigates how molecular expression on red blood cell
membranes alters the dielectric properties, which are discernable in a
dielectrophoretic microdevice. The immediate application for this scientific
finding is that ABO-Rh blood types, which are morphologically similar cells
whose phenotype differs only by expression of a polysaccharide surface antigen
exhibit different polarization responses. A secondary application for this
finding is to use the baseline ABO-Rh responses to determine if the blood is in
a diseased state. Future progress will correct remaining deficiencies in
knowledge and commercialize-able practicality of the ABO-Rh blood typing device
by 1) identifying the greatest commercial utility in discerning molecular
expression for medical diagnostics, 2) experimentally achieving unique
signatures for every combination of the eight blood types (A+, B+, AB+, O+, A-,
B-, AB-, and O-), 3) demonstrating via antigen modification, the scientific
basis for the ABO/Rh antigen?s impact on the effective polarizability of the
blood cell and thus the observed dielectrophoretic response. This work is a
significant addition to scientific knowledge and is a powerful alternative to
antigen/antibody molecular recognition reactions for medical diagnosis. Thus,
this electric field mediated approach enables more rapid analysis without
perishable reagents.

Current medical diagnosis relies on expensive and time-consuming blood tests in
centralized analytical laboratories. The research team's electrokinetic
microdevice technology could replace off-line lab analysis with significantly
less-expensive point-of-care devices featuring user-friendly operation that
produces rapid results with equivalent reliability. There are currently 84
million blood typings per year in the U.S., 16 million donations, and current
protocols require 4 or more tests to minimize fatal transfusions. Current
technology cost ~$95 per test, while the electrokinetic approach could cost as
low as $5 (reusable) $10 (single-use) per test. This technology has the
potential to streamline preparations during emergency blood transfusions, while
reducing overhead and costs. It also has the potential to take blood typing
outside of the traditional medical laboratory and into the hands of emergency
medical personnel such as EMTs and third world health organizations.