* 1340824
* RESNA Student Design Competition: Technology Solutions for People with Disabilities
* CSE,IIS
* 05/15/2013,04/30/2014
* Nell Bailey, Rehabilitation Engineering and Assistive Tech Society of NA
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 04/30/2014
* USD 18,020.00

This is funding to support the Student Design Competition (SDC), which will be
part of the 2013 annual RESNA conference to be held June 22-24 in Bellevue,
Washington. Today, more than 54 million people in the United States report some
type of disability, and this number will likely grow in the coming years as the
baby boom generation enters late life. RESNA, the Rehabilitation Engineering and
Assistive Technology Society of North America, is the one organization with an
international focus that is devoted solely to technology for individuals with
disabilities. RESNA's membership consists of individuals and institutions
covering a range of disciplines (including researchers, clinicians, suppliers,
manufacturers, consumers and educators who work in non-profit and for-profit
settings), all of whom are dedicated to promoting the exchange of ideas and
information for the advancement of assistive technology. In addition to its
annual conference, RESNA conducts a credentialing program for assistive
technology practitioners, rehabilitation engineering technologists and
suppliers, as well as sponsored projects. RESNA's Technical Standards Board is
the U.S. Technical Advisory Group to ANSI, the official United States
representative to the International Organization for Standardization (ISO), for
the development of ISO standards pertaining to assistive technology and other
products for persons with disabilities. More information about RESNA and its
annual conference is available online at http://www.resna.org.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The RESNA Student Design Competition fosters innovation
and creativity with the ultimate goal of producing technology that can
contribute to the independence of individuals with disabilities. The first SDC
was held in 1980 as part of the inaugural RESNA conference; since then over 250
designs have been identified as winning entries from among over 780 submitted by
students from over 124 different universities and institutes of higher learning.
Both undergraduate and master's level graduate candidates are eligible to submit
entries, which must represent the work of students ONLY; no faculty or
professionals may be included as co-authors, although faculty may be mentioned
as advisors and/or mentors. NSF has been a supporter since 2005. This year's
funding will enable the SDC to be further expanded and enhanced, so as to
include more entries and support for more design teams, especially from
minorities, women, and individuals with disabilities. A call for participation
has been posted on the conference website, and also distributed electronically
to a large number of colleges and universities with engineering and design
schools. A team of 5 judges will pre-select entries from up to 10 teams, from
which two members each will be invited to attend the conference supported with
travel and hotel funds as well as complimentary registration. During a half-day
session in which the teams will make presentations before the judges and public
audience at the conference, 5 teams will ultimately be selected as the final
winners. Judges will have an opportunity to ask questions and make suggestions
and recommendations to the design teams. The conference schedule includes a
platform session in which finalists will present their designs to the general
conference audience; in addition, finalists will have an opportunity to present
their projects during the Annual Developers' Forum which highlights new products
under development (some past SDC student team designs have been patented and are
now available commercially). New this year and incorporated into the conference
is a Student Track with specifically designed sessions, including:
Rehabilitation Engineering and Technology Careers; Presentation Skills; How to
Write for Peer Review Journals; and Engineering Concepts in Assistive
Technology: A course for Non-Engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
The annual RESNA Conference and the Student Design Competition combine to create
a forum for interaction between working and experienced rehabilitation engineers
and students who are about to enter the field. Unique in its primary focus on
undergraduates, the event provides participants with experience and skills that
help them succeed in their engineering and design careers. It encourages and
mentors students in various disciplines to become involved in the assistive
technology and rehabilitation engineering fields, and provides an opportunity
for the students to network with their peers as well as participants in previous
SDC competitions, many of whom are now leaders in service, research, and
educational areas related to technology for people with disabilities.
Furthermore, continuing a practice started a few years ago, all participants
(not just the finalists) will create blog posts that capture and archive their
submissions, and these will remain accessible indefinitely through the RESNA and
the ATWiki. Thus, those who teach will also be able to share this information
with their students as examples of projects that others have done, while service
providers and people with disabilities will be able to search for unique
solutions to barriers they may face.