* 1340410
* CAREER Workshop for Materials Scientists &amp; Engineers
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/2013,04/30/2014
* Vidya Madhavan, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Michael J. Scott
* 04/30/2014
* USD 108,585.00

TECHNICAL ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;This workshop focuses on the professional
development of materials science and engineering CAREER awardees in the third
year of their award. The workshop programming will consist of a combination of
talks from mentors (renowned scientists and educators) and NSF personnel, as
well as panel discussions and interactive sessions with mentors. Workshop topics
will include entrepreneurship, innovations in classroom teaching, pivoting to
new research areas, career-life balance, and NSF initiatives and operations.
Research scientists with experience and success in these areas will serve as
speakers, panelists, and mentors. Establishing connections with these role
models will not only provide an opportunity for career advice, but also provide
opportunities to develop meaningful and sustained relationships. This workshop
will also enable CAREER awardees to network amongst themselves to form
meaningful relationships, which may lead to new research collaborations. The
outcomes of this workshop are expected to provide important input for increasing
the impact of future NSF workshops in a similar
category.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
DESCRIPTION:&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this workshop is to assist CAREER
awardees engaged in materials science and engineering research in continuing
their paths to research and education leadership. The primary workshop
participants will be third-year CAREER awardees from the Division of Materials
Research as well as third-year CAREER awardees from other divisions who engage
in materials-related research. The participants will be provided information
about NSF operations, funding priorities, and other initiatives that will better
position them to promote their research and take advantage of funding
opportunities. Additionally, the participants will receive mentoring from
renowned professors, department chairs, and former CAREER awardees, along with
NSF program directors. This workshop will take place on June 17-18, 2013 at NSF
headquarters in Arlington, VA.