* 1340754
* CC-NIE Networking Infrastructure: High Speed Science DMZ @ Johns Hopkins for Data Intensive Computing
* CSE,OAC
* 12/01/2013,11/30/2015
* Jonathan Bagger, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 11/30/2015
* USD 494,874.00

This cyberinfrastucture project is focused on creating an advanced dedicated
research network that will facilitate the transfer of large scientific datasets
while eliminating the barriers of traditional packet based inspection
technologies. The goal of this project is threefold: 1) to establish a robust
research oriented Science DMZ that simplifies the network perimeter, 2) to
expand high-speed connectivity to internal research groups throughout the
institution, and 3) to connect to a newly constructed High Performance Research
Computing Facility (HPRCF) opening in 2014.

The ability to quickly transfer large scientific data sets from origination to
destination is of paramount importance. The principal goal of this project will
be the creation of a new network perimeter to significantly increase the
transfer rates of large scale datasets. With network throughput speeds reaching
100G, traditional firewall technologies relying on packet based inspection
introduce too much latency and need to be eliminated. The Science DMZ will
embrace newer network protocols, such as Virtual Device Contexts and multi-
packet layer switching to enable faster convergence.

JHU is at the center of several data-intensive activities that are transforming
whole communities across the country. The archive of the Sloan Digital Sky
Survey, the world's most used astronomy facility, is hosted at JHU, and our
100TB public turbulence database is largely responsible for a new access
paradigm to numerical simulations. The new HPRCF will create new collaborations
between JHU and University of Maryland scientists. This project will transform
the JHU backbone and bring high-speed connectivity to a much broader community.