* 1340019
* The Pipeline to Teacher Preparation in Chemistry and Physics
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2023
* Gregory Rushton, Kennesaw State University Research and Service Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,198,577.00

The Pipeline to Teacher Preparation in Chemistry and Physics is a collaborative
project between the Chemistry and Biochemistry Department, Biology and Physics
Department, and Education Student Services at Kennesaw State University (KSU) to
recruit 25 high school and early college STEM majors into secondary chemistry
and physics programs with a teacher certification option. Support is provided
through an induction program to provide a seamless transition into the students'
new teaching career in a high-needs Georgia school district. Previous Noyce
projects at Kennesaw State University (KSU) have developed targeted recruitment
plans for Masters of Arts in Teaching Chemistry and Physics Education since
2008. These projects have highlighted the importance of developing strategic and
deliberate recruitment efforts to attract highly competent chemistry and physics
students who are close to, or have already graduated, into chemistry and physics
certification programs. These projects also provide a general framework for the
development of recruitment plans that target other populations. The Noyce
project offers stipends to college-bound high school juniors and seniors and KSU
freshman and sophomores who participate and lead a week-long science summer camp
to engage in them in the science education community of practice and begin to
build their teacher identity. Once accepted into the education program, eligible
students receive up to a 2-year scholarship to complete their certification
coursework and field experiences. This project is designed to engage students
early on in educational experiences and keep them progressing at a rate that
will allow them to graduate in four years. The specific objectives of this
project are to: 1). develop customized recruitment strategies to attract
academically strong and culturally diverse students to the B.S. Chemistry and
Physics Education program at KSU from these two sources, 2). offer stipends to
high school students and KSU freshmen and sophomores who participate in a week-
long science summer camp intended to build their teacher identity, 3). provide
25 2-year scholarships to students to participate in the B.S. Chemistry or
Physics Education program, and to assist with placement in high school
chemistry, physics, and physical science teaching positions and 4). implement a
teacher induction program to provide support to students graduating from these
programs to enable them to successfully make the transition into the teaching
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is not only producing 25 highly
qualified chemistry and physics teachers, but also serves to disseminate best
practices for attracting early career deciders to these fields of education. The
strategies and activities developed by this project serve as a framework for
recruitment at other institutions. In turn, this knowledge is leading to a
significant increase in the number of highly qualified chemistry and physics
teachers nationwide.