* 1340097
* California State University, East Bay (CSUEB) Noyce Scholars Program Phase II
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* David Stronck, California State University, East Bay Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 08/31/2018
* USD 800,000.00

The California State University, East Bay (CSUEB) Noyce Scholars Program Phase
II (NSP II) is building on and expanding Phase I efforts to recruit and support
academically successful senior mathematics and science majors and STEM
professionals in completing a credential program and becoming highly effective
teachers in high needs, urban schools. This four-year joint project, in
collaboration with K-12 districts across Alameda and Contra Costa counties,
supports 32 new math and science teachers (16 scholarships in year 2 and 16 in
year 3) and focuses on two areas: 1) continuing to increase the number of middle
and high school math and science teachers obtaining their credentials at CSUEB
and 2) informing understanding of how best to attract, prepare, and provide
ongoing support in order to retain highly effective STEM teachers by expanded
evaluation of program efforts and the effectiveness of participating scholars.
The NSP II is significant in its focus on the early recruitment of teacher
candidates who are highly qualified in disciplinary areas.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The East Bay Area, which includes Alameda and Contra Costa
Counties, supports an ethnically and racially diverse population. STEM
professionals are in high demand but there are significant shortages in the
workforce of those possessing competence in science and math. The future
economic health of the region depends increasingly on an educational system
capable of preparing teachers to respond successfully to the needs of students
who require intensive and effective educational programs in science and math.
The Noyce scholars furnish the tools to their students that enable
underrepresented groups to be competitive in the workforce.