* 1340269
* EAGER: Exploring a New Bi-ionic Transport Mechanism in Dual-Phase Electrochemical CO2 Separation Membranes
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2014
* Kevin Huang, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 04/30/2014
* USD 100,000.00

1340269 - Huang

The exploratory research proposed is aimed at understanding from a fundamental
science perspective why and how dual-phase mixed oxide-ion and carbonate-ion
conducting membranes containing highly interconnected ionic channels exhibit
superior CO2 transport characteristics.

Intellectual Merits

The key intellectual merit of the proposed research is centered on the unique
parallel bi-ionic pathways model that extends the ionic transfer zones from
triple-phase boundaries (3PBs) to double-phase boundaries (2PBs) and is
complemented by the experiments of 1) identification of a new intermediate
surface species with in-situ Raman spectroscopy and 2) verification of the bi-
ionic transport model through an MC-flooded permeation cell. Specifically: o For
the first time C2O5 2- polycarbonate ions are proposed as an intermediate
surface species that are reduced by O2- at 2PBs of MC/oxide-ion conductor
interface o Confirmation of the formation of CO3 2?(CO2)n containing strong CO
bonds and structurally stable chainlike [CnO2n+1] moieties by successively
binding the simple nucleophilic anion CO3 2? with several CO2s through in-situ
Raman spectroscopy o Verification of the proposed bi-ionic transport model
through MC-flooded surface blocking permeation cell

Broader Impacts

Discovering energy-efficient and cost-effective CO2 separation membranes is of
prime importance to the development and deployment of CO2 capture technologies
in existing fossil fueled power plants. This research has the potential to
transform conventional wisdom in understanding ionic transport behaviors in
heterogeneous systems, and ultimately lead to rationally designed high-
performance ionic systems for a variety of energy applications. One example is
the design of (CO2)n chainlike compounds such as solid polycarbonates CnO2n+1R2
(R=large-size group) for highly efficient large-scale CO2 scrubbing. Another
example is the design of CnO2n+1H2, a class of potential candidates for high-
energy density materials as they decompose exothermically into nCO2 + H2O
products, but are locally stable because of the existence of substantial
dissociation barriers.

Both graduate and undergraduate students including minority and underrepresented
groups will play an active role in this research through clearly identified,
focused research projects. The importance and potential impact of ongoing
scientific advances in the area of CO2 capture and storage technologies will be
disseminated to the general public via the annual "Edison Lecture Series"
program of the College of Engineering and Computing at the University of South
Carolina.