* 1340099
* Project Tiger Teach (PTT)
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2023
* Artenzia Young-Seigler, Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* Kimberly Tanner
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,189,490.00

The Tennessee State University Project Tiger Teach (PTT) project is supporting
STEM students who will earn a degree in biology, chemistry or mathematics with
teacher certification. PTT is a collaborative partnership between Tennessee
State University and the Metropolitan Nashville Public Schools (MNPS) System, a
typical urban system serving 81,003 students, 75% of whom are economically
disadvantaged. PTT is targeting four cohorts of 10 undergraduate students each
(3 biology, 2 chemistry, and 5 mathematics), over a period of 5 years. The goals
of PTT are to 1) increase the number of highly-qualified certified high school
STEM teachers in high-need schools in Nashville, TN; 2) increase teacher
diversity with emphasis on recruiting African-American male STEM teachers and 3)
provide four years of mentoring and professional development opportunities to
graduates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recruitment efforts include introduction of PTT
to 1) science, mathematics, and undecided majors' orientation classes; 2) area
high school career counselors; 3) students in HBCU-UP, Regents Math Academy, and
TLSAMP; 4) student organizations and student athletes, and 5) the general public
via creation of a web page. Participants are involved in summer institutes that
include tutoring high school students in the Math Academy and Tennessee State
University's Math and Science Center. By the end of their sophomore year, Noyce
Scholars are admitted to the teacher certification program in biology, chemistry
or mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prior to their senior year, students
complete four educational courses and all required content courses in
preparation for the MNPS high school-based Residency I and Residency II. The
year-long residency produces highly-qualified teachers who have mastered content
knowledge and who understand the learning process and application of assessment
results to improve instruction. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Noyce graduates receive
four years of support including mentoring and opportunities for professional
development. Among the professional development topics are strategic planning
period, from class to the classroom, improving working conditions, effective
communication with administration, current research and trends in education,
professional rights and responsibilities, and opportunities for professional
growth/training. The mentoring component consists of professional and social
support networking including Facebook and Skype.