* 1340968
* CC-NIE Networking Infrastructure: Upgrading the Campus Networks to Support Data Intensive Research at the University of Hawaii
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2015
* Gwen Jacobs, University of Hawaii System
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 09/30/2015
* USD 486,438.00

The Hawaii Innovation Initiative, a bold plan to double University of Hawaii
(UH) research, will focus on research strengths in astronomy, earth and ocean
sciences, as well as agriculture and health sciences. During the planning for
the initiative it became clear to all that meeting this goal would require the
development of a highly advanced cyberinfrastructure (CI) framework that
encompasses high performance computing, data visualization, big data analytics,
cybersecurity, large data storage and real time collaboration with scientists
around the globe. All these capabilities must be enabled by advanced networking.
UH has been extraordinarily successful in designing and implementing research
and education (R&amp;E) networks to connect campuses, research facilities,
public schools and libraries throughout the Hawaiian Islands with national,
international and regional networks. A recent series of NSF network
infrastructure and NTIA BTOP awards now provide 10Gbps network connectivity on
the islands, between the islands, to the mainland national R&amp;E networks and
to international peer networks in Australia and Asia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With
a major upgrade in the campus fiber infrastructure fully funded and underway,
this project will complete the necessary upgrade of the campus network at UH
Manoa to support data-intensive science by creating a Science DMZ and providing
10Gbps bandwidth increases to key campus research facilities. The project will
enable the rollout of OpenFlow on campus, is fully compatible with OSCARS for
dynamic circuit provisioning, and will support GENI experimentation. Finally,
the project includes the innovative deployment of perfSONAR tools to support
continuous monitoring of the campus network with the lowest possible impact on
staff.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed perfSONAR work represents a real
innovation in campus networking. Exemplar projects with campus and global
implications that will benefit from improved campus networks include: the Pan-
STARRS Survey Telescope, the Alpha Magnetic Spectroscopy Data Center, microbial
oceanography research at the Center for Microbial Oceanography Research and
Education STC, the Hawaii Institute for Marine Biology, and sensor based
research in climate change, oceanography and disaster preparedness at the UH
School of Ocean and Earth Science and Technology. In addition, broad national
and global access will be improved to significant scientific resources based in
Hawaii. And as the premier research university in an EPSCoR jurisdiction, UH
Manoa has one of the most diverse populations in the nation. UH is a Native
Hawaiian-Serving Institution and also enrolls significant and growing numbers of
Pacific Islander and Filipino students, who are also highly under-represented in
STEM-related employment and education. The increased engagement of under-
represented local and mainland students and scholars in research in Hawai?i will
lead to improvements in U.S. research and education for the entire nation.