* 1340972
* CC-NIE Network Integration: Advancing UNH's High-Performance End-to-End Research
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2015
* Robert Russell, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 09/30/2015
* USD 499,255.00

The University of New Hampshire (UNH) is developing a Science DMZ, a computer
network capable of operating at 100 Gigabits per second that connects scientists
to external partners and allows research data and equipment to be accessed
locally regardless of actual location. Capitalizing on the existing UNH LAN
design and 750 miles of UNH leased dark fiber cyberinfrastructure in New
Hampshire, this Science DMZ creates a 100-fold increase in bandwidth available
to UNH researchers for exchanging research data with worldwide collaborators
over Internet2. Data-intensive research areas participating in the initial UNH
Science DMZ deployment include Atmospheric &amp; Geospace Research, Civil
Engineering &amp; Structural Health Monitoring, Experimental Fluid Dynamics
&amp; Flow Physics, Genomics, Ocean Mapping &amp; Visualization, and research
into high performance networking &lt;br/&gt;itself.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;UNH's
Science DMZ offers researchers the ability to move data from generating
instruments to storage repositories in high-availability data centers across the
campus, ensuring that data security, management, and accessibility are
maintained for both local and remote research teams. Real-time remote equipment
management and data transfers from sensor networks and satellite feeds are
enabled by the UNH research network upgrades and offer greater opportunities for
collaboration by researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will spawn new
methods of data sharing and collaboration, offering NH researchers the means to
participate in solving the grand challenges facing science today - complex
problems requiring multidisciplinary, large-scale approaches. The Science DMZ
will be a model for expansion of "big-data" scientific data stores and real-time
collaboration for all levels of student education and scientific research.