* 1340256
* Conference:2013 RNA Upstate NY Conferenceto be Held October 25-26, 2013 in Canandaigua, NY
* BIO,MCB
* 05/15/2013,04/30/2014
* J. Scott Butler, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 04/30/2014
* USD 4,264.00

Intellectual Merit: The 2013 RNA Upstate NY Conference will be held October
25-26, 2013 at the Inn on the Lake, Canandaigua, NY. The objective of this
conference is to assemble a diverse group of scientists from the northeastern
United States that is actively involved in a broad range of research on the
biology of RNA, to present and discuss recent findings, evolving methodologies,
and future scientific directions and challenges. The field of RNA Biology has
greatly expanded over recent years and RNA is now known to be involved in
regulating metabolism and gene expression in all forms of life. The Specific
Aims of the meeting are to: 1. Provide a venue for the exchange of ideas among
researchers from the northeastern United States with interests in the role of
RNA in biology. 2. Encourage the participation in RNA research careers of
graduate and postdoctoral students, as well as women, under-represented
minorities and person with disabilities. 3. Enhance future communication and
collaboration among regional scientists working in the field of RNA biology. The
site of the conference will allow easy access by regional scientists, thereby
encouraging the participation of graduate and undergraduate students, postdocs
and junior level researchers. The conference will enhance the cross
fertilization of interdisciplinary ideas by organizing presentations along
thematic lines that represent cutting edge research in the field of RNA biology.
The format of the meeting will include four keynote speakers in different areas
of RNA biology and additional speakers, chosen from the students and post-docs
who submit abstracts for the meeting. Those not chosen for talks will present
their work in poster form. Time is allowed in the meeting schedule for formal as
well as informal interactions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: One
important goal of this conference is to enhance the dissemination of new
scientific results, ideas and techniques in current use in the field among
students, junior faculty and experts in the field. This is especially important
this year as the annual RNA Society Meeting is being held in Switzerland, beyond
the fiscal reach of many junior laboratory members. Thus, the conference will
facilitate the participation of scientists with broad experience in this rapidly
advancing field. The organizers will choose speakers from submitted abstracts,
ensuring that students and postdocs deliver the majority of platform
presentations, and will balance the gender and ethnic diversity of the
participants. The previous RNA Upstate RNA Conference participation included
about 25% women and at least 2% under-represented minorities. Four of the
sixteen platform speakers were women, as were 16 of the 64 poster presenters.
The organizers expect to exceed these numbers, if possible, and to ensure the
seamless participation of persons with disabilities.