* 1340459
* The development of the global engineer: Effects of ethnographic investigations on students' design decisions
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Shanna Daly, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Elliot Douglas
* 08/31/2016
* USD 150,000.00

The goal of this research is to characterize how the content and depth of
students? ethnographic&lt;br/&gt;investigations impact their design decisions,
specifically as students define the problem,&lt;br/&gt;develop design
requirements and engineering specifications, select concepts, and
develop&lt;br/&gt;validation studies. Successful design solutions must be
practical in the cultural context in which&lt;br/&gt;they will be used. While
all engineering students are not able to participate in a
substantial&lt;br/&gt;cultural immersion experience, a clear understanding of
how these skills develop, the&lt;br/&gt;challenges students face, and how design
ethnography affects later stages of design will&lt;br/&gt;facilitate the
development and integration of these techniques into engineering design
courses&lt;br/&gt;as well as the development of validated metrics to evaluate
proficiency in design ethnography.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader significance
of this research is to provide undergraduate engineering students
with&lt;br/&gt;pedagogy, curricula, and experiences that teach them ethnographic
and co-creation skills. The&lt;br/&gt;result will be design solutions that
better address user needs for emerging global
technological&lt;br/&gt;challenges. The ability of engineers to conduct
ethnographic studies and use the data to make&lt;br/&gt;effective design
decisions will facilitate the development of innovative, practical,
and&lt;br/&gt;implementable solutions that address this century?s global
challenges.