* 1340050
* Genetic and Epigenetic Regulation of Gametophyte Development and Transposon Expression in Maize
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2020
* Donald Auger, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 07/31/2020
* USD 4,189,994.00

PI: Matthew M. S. Evans (Carnegie Institution of
Washington)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CoPIs: Donald L. Auger (South Dakota State
University), John E. Fowler (Oregon State University), R. Keith Slotkin (The
Ohio State University) and Erik W. Volbrecht (Iowa State
University)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Senior Collaborators: Allison Phillips
(Wisconsin Lutheran College) and Jennifer Eustaquio (Stanford
University)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project comprises foundational research on
epigenetics and gene expression, and thus may have broad implications for the
manifestation of important plant traits, particularly in crops with large
numbers of transposons in their genomes. More specifically, gametophytes are
central to plant reproduction; thus this project is directly relevant to several
agricultural objectives (e.g., controlling pollen fertility, limiting pollen-
mediated transgene flow, inducing apomixis), particularly given the project's
focus on a crucial crop plant, maize. Additionally, the project will provide a
data framework for other researchers to determine how gametophytes function and
how they can be manipulated to generate improved crop plants. This project will
train a number of undergraduate, graduate and post-graduate scientists in an
interdisciplinary fashion through frequent exchanges between the partnering
laboratories. Undergraduates will gain experience in modern laboratory
techniques as well as computational analysis of large-scale data sets.
Undergraduate students will simultaneously be trained as researchers and
educators through Stanford University's Science in Service Program.
Undergraduates learn to be Science Mentors for high school students and develop
laboratory curricula that are then performed by local high school programs under
the supervision of the undergraduate mentors. As part of the project, students
from the high school programs also participate in the project, getting exposure
to genetics and image analysis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Within the floral tissues
of flowering plants, multicellular haploid female and male gametophytes produce
the gametes that undergo fertilization to produce seeds. Although gametophytes
are small and undergo few cell divisions, they are crucial for producing the
next generation, and execute diverse biological processes. Plant seed formation
and reproduction, and thus global agriculture, are dependent on gametophyte
function. In spite of their critical role in plant reproduction, gametophyte
function and development has largely been overlooked due to their small size and
imbedded location within the parental tissue. The maize genome, like many crop
plant genomes, harbors a large number of mobile DNA elements, called
transposons, and control of these elements, often through regulation of
epigenetic states, is critical for maintenance of gene function and genome
structure. Gametophytes help set epigenetic states in the next generation,
however little is known, especially in the female gametophyte, about how
transposon expression is regulated, and how that control impacts the concurrent
expression of protein-coding genes. This project will use tissue micro-
dissection techniques and whole genome analysis to understand the mechanisms
that underlie developmental regulation of epigenetic states and cellular
functions in the gametophytes of both sexes in maize. This project will screen
for new mutants and genes that function in gametophyte development; perform
genome-wide analysis of expression of genes, transposons, and different classes
of RNAs with cellular detail; generate visual reporters for transposon activity;
and characterize transposon expression in developing gametophytes. This project
will determine the spatial and temporal expression pattern for genes and
transposons in developing gametophytes, as well as define how they function to
program gametophyte development. The effect of relevant mutants on transposon
expression is expected to increase understanding of the interaction between
basic gametophyte development and control of transposon activity in the
important crop plant, maize. The sequence gene expression data generated from
this project will be widely accessible through the project website
(www.maizegametophyte.org) and the National Center for Biotechnology Information
Gene Expression Omnibus (www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo), and the Maize Genetics and
Genomics Database (maizegdb.org). Seed stocks will be deposited with the Maize
Genetics Cooperation Stock Center.