* 1340301
* EarthCube RCN:   C4P:   Collaboration and Cyberinfrastructure  for Paleogeosciences
* GEO,RISE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2018
* Christopher Jenkins, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2018
* USD 299,381.00

This project establishes and operates the EarthCube Research Coordination
Network (RCN)&lt;br/&gt;Collaboration and Cyberinfrastructure for
Paleogeosciences (C4P) to advance the role of cyberinfrastructure&lt;br/&gt;(CI)
in unraveling the large-scale, long-term evolution of the Earth-Life System
through the&lt;br/&gt;study of the geological record.Paleogeosciences research
into our large-scale, long-term Earth-Life system is an
ambitious&lt;br/&gt;program that informs public debate on human stewardship of
the earth and has - since its inception&lt;br/&gt;- caught public imagination on
issues such as species survival under environmental changes.&lt;br/&gt;In the
last decade, fresh discoveries, plus the application of new technologies of
measurement,&lt;br/&gt;data analysis, and modeling have revitalized the science.
Bringing to bear recent advances&lt;br/&gt;in computing and mathematics will
further quicken the pace of discoveries, synthesis and publication&lt;br/&gt;in
the science. This RCN intends to stimulate and grow CI-focused collaborations
and&lt;br/&gt;partnerships among paleogeoscientists, paleobiologists,
bioinformaticists, stratigraphers,&lt;br/&gt;geochronologists, geographers, data
scientists, and computer scientists that will help dissolve&lt;br/&gt;existing
intellectual barriers to dramatically improve the application of modern data
management&lt;br/&gt;approaches, data mining technologies, and computational
methods to better analyze the heterogeneous&lt;br/&gt;and sparse data of the
Earth record in sediments, rocks, and ice within the
paleogeosciences&lt;br/&gt;and other domains and
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Activities envisioned include a series of
coordinated workshops and webinars, web-enabled networking, outreach events
such&lt;br/&gt;as symposia and town-hall meetings, and cross-EarthCube
coordination, and creation of an interoperable&lt;br/&gt;C4P resource catalog
that will be integrated with other EarthCube resource inventories. High-
priority&lt;br/&gt;themes in C4P are the management and representation of age
and age uncertainty in data models&lt;br/&gt;and computation to advance
interoperability among and analysis of time-referenced data types,&lt;br/&gt;the
integration of physical samples into digital data infrastructure, and the need
to properly&lt;br/&gt;track and attribute provenance of data to ensure trust in
the data and credit to authors.