* 1340912
* ACQUISITION OF AN INSTRUMENTATION ARRAY TO MONITOR AND MODEL WATER, CARBON AND ENERGY FLUXES AT THE HILLSLOPE SCALE IN THE LANDSCAPE EVOLUTION OBSERVATORY
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2016
* Guo-Yue Niu, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 07/31/2016
* USD 188,266.00

1340912&lt;br/&gt;Troch&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant provides support for the
acquisition of new environmental sensing and sampling capabilities to enhance
and realize the scientific goals of the Landscape Evolution Observatory (LEO) at
Biosphere 2 (B2) in Oracle, AZ. The goals of LEO are to permit controlled study
of land surface fluxes of water, energy and carbon at the hillslope scale where
key observables are monitored at sub-meter scales across a moderately complex
landscape. The observed spatial and temporal variability of fluxes and their
relationship and feedbacks to controlled and observed climatic parameters would
then be used to inform improved models of land-surface water, energy and carbon
cycling processes at larger watershed, continental and even global
scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;LEO consists of three replicated 340 m2 convergent
experimental watershed mesocosms constructed inside a 5,000 m2 environmentally
controlled facility at B2. The LEO mesocosms have as their basic design, three,
30 m length, 12 m width, 1 m depth, sloped (approximately 10 degrees from
horizontal) steel tanks that have been filled with a grain size homogenized
basaltic tephra as a starting soil. The tanks have as part of their frame
design, arrays of distributed load cells that permit precise determination of
weight changes across the tanks and located above the surface of the tanks are
precipitation simulation systems that are rate controllable and can be varied
across the surface of the soil tanks. An aspect of the design is that overland
flow and erosion is specifically prevented by subsurface pumping and removal of
water as the soil horizon saturates ? LEO is not designed for erosion process
studies. The tanks are densely arrayed with sampling ports for drawing pore
waters and gases and numerous sensor modalities have already been added
including soil moisture content probes, soil temperature sensors, soil water
potential sensors, soil water samplers, soil gas samplers, CO2 sensors, surface
heat flux plates, electrical resistivity tomography probes, piezometers, and
water flow and drainage flowmeters. The initial plan calls for 1-2 years of
studies of the experimental landscapes devoid of vascular plants followed by the
planting of an array of vascular plant types to allow for study of the co-
evolution of the physical, chemical, and biological systems in the mesocosms and
their influence on the land-atmosphere exchanges of water, energy and
carbon.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;***