* 1340020
* TELBio: Teaching English Learners Biology
* EDU,DUE
* 01/15/2014,12/31/2023
* Michael Dias, Kennesaw State University Research and Service Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 12/31/2023
* USD 1,198,224.00

The TELBio: Teaching English Learners Biology project is a collaboration between
Kennesaw State University's (KSU) College of Science and Mathematics and the
Bagwell College of Education, as well as with five high-need school districts in
the metropolitan Atlanta, Georgia area including Atlanta Public Schools, Fulton
County Schools, Cobb County School District, Marietta City Schools, and Gwinnett
County Public Schools. The Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program TELBio
project supports thirty-six qualified students in obtaining a Master's of Arts
in Teaching (MAT) and teacher certification in secondary biology, as well as
English for Speakers of Other Languages (ESOL) endorsement. Biology is
vocabulary-intensive and is often a particular challenge among the sciences for
non-native English speakers, as evidenced by high failure rates on Biology End
of Course Tests for students designated Limited English Proficient (LEP).
Scholars with strong biology content knowledge are recruited into the program,
and instruction in methods of teaching ESOL as well as cultural issues
strengthens the skill set of these future biology teachers. Through the TELBio
project, research-based best practices in biology instruction with English
language support, social justice techniques, culturally relevant and culturally
responsive pedagogies are used to equip Noyce Scholars to meet the needs of all
students. Instructional classroom strategies, as well as state science,
mathematics, and literacy standards, are addressed through graduate (MAT)
courses, seminars, professional learning communities, pre-service teacher action
research, and websites and blogs. Once scholars become teachers, mentoring is
provided through teacher-mentor training opportunities (supported by districts'
individualized induction programs), in-school mentoring, and KSU faculty
mentorship support. Data regarding the academic strength and commitment of the
applicants, evidence of development of candidate skills during the program
period, and evidence of success during the induction period for scholarship
recipients are used to evaluate program effectiveness.