* 1340034
* Retaining the Math & Science Teachers We Need: High Quality STEM Teachers in High Schools
* EHR,DUE
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2017
* Rodney Ogawa, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Richardson
* 12/31/2017
* USD 299,979.00

The Noyce Teacher Scholarship Phase II project at University of California-Santa
Cruz is researching math and science teacher retention and attrition in high
needs schools so as to better inform strategies to improve the supply and
quality of STEM teachers in public schools. Results from the Phase I project
demonstrated the insufficiency of academic and pedagogical training alone to
ensure teacher retention in underserved schools. Specifically, the initial data
suggested that working conditions, and especially hiring and class assignment
practices, might be driving Noyce Scholar Teachers out of their schools and even
the profession. This project is specifying the enacted policies and practices in
the schools and of the teachers that result in the retention of highly qualified
teachers in high-needs schools.

The research project is using a nested case design to follow the thirty-two
Noyce Scholar Teachers working in three unique districts, from the Phase I
project, through the next three years of their teaching. Teachers' career
decisions and trajectories are being tracked and examined within the context of
their sites of employment. Insight is being obtained on the organizational
contexts that attract high-qualified teachers and the strategies and practices
that lead to retention beyond the first few years of teaching. The interplay
between individual teacher commitment, career trajectory and decision making,
with school and district human resource policy and practices, and with school-
level working conditions, is being characterized.

This research is informing the local and national Noyce Scholar community about
ensuring a stable teacher workforce. The results are being shared with teacher
education students to better guide their job search and opportunity selection
process. The case study findings are being summarized in a professional handbook
for teachers and human resource personnel on strategies that lead to successful
navigation of teacher employment selection, placement, and working conditions
that ensures teacher retention.