* 1340911
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: A test of the vocal grooming hypothesis in the gelada
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2015
* Jacinta Beehner, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2015
* USD 24,917.00

One intriguing hypothesis about the origins of human language is that it emerged
as a 'social tool,' facilitating our abilities to maintain relationships with an
increasing number of people (the "social grooming hypothesis"). The basic idea
is that social grooming (which facilitates a bond with only one individual) is
replaced by vocal 'grooming' (which facilitates bonds with several individuals,
simultaneously). Indeed, social bonds have adaptive value for both humans and
non-human primates. Thus, if vocal contact represents an efficient way to
maintain relationships, then selection should favor its development. Despite a
great deal of theoretical support, however, the social grooming hypothesis has
yet to be tested empirically. Geladas provide an excellent model to test this
because they are highly social, exceptionally vocal, and uniquely time-
constrained because they must spend much of their day foraging on grass. This
research by doctoral student Elizabeth Johnson (University of Michigan), under
the supervision of Dr. Jacinta Beehner, will explore the strategies that female
geladas employ to maintain their social networks, with a specific emphasis on
when vocalizations are used, the responses they elicit, and whether such vocal
contact supplements or replaces social grooming when time budgets are
particularly strained. By utilizing a combination of methods, including
behavioral observation, social network analysis, analysis of 'stress' hormones,
and acoustic analysis of recorded vocalization, this research will elucidate one
possible route by which human ancestors may have maintained social bonds,
allowing for larger groups and greater group cohesion.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results from this study not only contribute to a better
understanding of female gelada social relationships, but also provide a
comparative dataset for on-going collaborative projects on closely related
species (e.g., anubis and hamadryas baboons). Further, this research extends
beyond academia, raising awareness about the study site (the Simien Mountains
National Park of Ethiopia, a World Heritage Site in Danger) and the study
species, an endemic species to the highlands of Ethiopia with a conservation
status labeled as "Threatened" by the IUCN Red List. Finally, this doctoral
dissertation research project contributes to the long-term viability of the park
by hiring a local field assistant (providing both employment opportunities as
well as continuing education for these young adults), working closely with park
officials, and providing educational lectures to Ethiopian nationals.