* 1340164
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Social Identity and Inequality: A Multi-Generational Case Study of the African Diaspora
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2013,09/30/2014
* Laurie Wilkie, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 09/30/2014
* USD 19,175.00

Under the guidance of Dr. Laurie Wilkie, Annelise Morris will conduct a research
project utilizing archaeological excavations, documentary and oral historical
research to examine the lived experiences of free African-Americans on the
Illinois frontier. Located in Lawrence County in Southeastern Illinois, this
study area encompasses three rural homesteads, occupied from approximately 1827
to the present. This long occupation period offers an opportunity to study the
changing economic and social realities for African-Americans from the early
pioneer period, through the Civil War and Jim Crow into the 20th century. Ms.
Morris will use these multiple lines of evidence to examine how lived social and
economic experiences changed for African-Americans through this time period, and
how this reflects changing formations of race and social identity in U.S.
society.

The importance of examining social identities such as race and their
relationship to social inequality, throughout anthropological history, been
reflected by and through studies of our own societies. Excavations will focus on
recovery of materials from household activity areas, such as yard spaces, root
cellars, and household interiors. The project will examine ceramic, glass, and
metal materials focusing on the stylistic and economic choices being made at
these sites. Additionally Ms. Morris will examine zooarchaeological remains,
which are expected to reflect the changing livestock economy (from sale to
sustenance), food-sharing, and dietary practices. Ms. Morris will also analyze
paleoethnobotanical remains (evidence of plants and their consumption at the
site) to speak further to dietary practices, and to the home medical and herbal
remedies utilized by populations such as this which did not have easy access to
outside medical care. This project will these archaeological materials recovered
from these 19th and early 20th century farmstead sites, and compare these
results with similar sites occupied by non African-American settlers. By
examining difference in consumption, stylistic, dietary and other choices, Ms.
Morris will explore how the realities of living in a society structured in
dominance shaped rural African-American society. This study hypothesizes that by
maintaining a rural, self-sufficient farming livelihood, free African-Americans
were able to cope with racism through this self-sufficiency. By examining this
issue in a 19th century setting, this study is not only a commentary of the
formation of our own modern society, but the results can be used to think
through this anthropological problem through time.

This project is based heavily in community outreach and participation. Ms.
Morris is a member of the descendant community, and as such has sought to
evaluate and strengthen archaeological relationships with stakeholders, making
the area's history and this scientific exploration relevant and accessible to
the local community, focusing on incorporation of community interest and
knowledge. All work at the site has been and will continue to be open and
accessible to public, for visiting, exploring and volunteering. Through this,
the project will bring opportunities for community volunteers, students, and
teachers to experience scientific and historical research to a rural area where
such opportunities are few, and will enrich interpretations of the
archaeological past by creating a dialogue with those people for whom this past
is still very salient.