* 1340959
* CC-NIE Networking Infrastructure: Perimeter Network to Expedite the Transmission of Science Project (PR NETS)
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2013,03/31/2017
* Rafael Arce, University of Puerto Rico-Rio Piedras
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 03/31/2017
* USD 499,667.00

The CC-NIE Networking Infrastructure: Perimeter Network to Expedite the
Transmission of Science (PR-NETS) project seeks to accelerate adoption of
advanced networking at the University of Puerto Rico-Rio Piedras (UPR-RP)
through targeted investment in networking equipment and establishment of a
firewall-less network, or Science DMZ. In most universities network security
policies are developed to ensure high quality common Internet services to the
general Campus community. These policies, however, may interfere with the best
practices for the management of large datasets, constant transmission of remote
data, and configurations of distributed systems. In addition to academic and
administrative information, university networks usually also handle scientific
research data, which today entails access to large datasets. University network
policies require firewalls and other security measures that slow the
transmission process. The PR-NETS provides the UPR-RP's capacity to transfer
large amounts of data in an efficient manner without compromising cyber
security. The Science DMZ consists of seven points of access (PoAs) at strategic
locations on Campus and two PoAs located just off Campus to serve the needs of
UPR-RP scientists who conduct data intensive research. PR-NETS is designed to
allow the addition of more PoAs, and peering with Science DMZ from other
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project amplifies research in areas
critical to national security and increased economic competitiveness, such as
nanotechnology, gene sequencing, and HIV prevention intervention. Furthermore,
the PR-NETS enhances undergraduate and graduate science education at the UPR-RP,
whose student population is 98% Hispanic, by enabling reliable multicast
videoconference access and data intensive research opportunities.