* 1340206
* US-Israel Workshop on Industrial Ecology in Multi-Scale Design and Construction of Sustainable Cities and Infrastructure
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2015
* Nabil Grace, Lawrence Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 04/30/2015
* USD 55,305.00

1340206 (Grace). The design and construction of civil infrastructure that is
more environmentally, socially, and economically responsible over its full life
cycle from extraction of raw construction materials to end of life management is
increasingly desirable worldwide. Altogether these three design goals of
improved environmental, social, and economic performance are commonly known as
the triple bottom line of sustainability. As a critical set of systems that
support our quality of life and enable global development and progress while
consuming vast amounts of material resources and energy, it is essential that
civil infrastructure, in particular cities, are designed according to these
comprehensive, long term design goals for the benefit of our planet and the
current and future generations of humans, animals, and plants that will call it
home. With the aim of discovering new ways and tools to integrate industrial
ecology within the multi-scale design and construction of built environments, a
three-day long workshop is being organized by the Center for Innovative
Materials Research (CIMR) of Lawrence Tech University and the Civil and
Environmental Engineering Department at Stanford University, in conjunction with
Technion, Israel Institute of Technology, in Haifa, Israel. This workshop will
be held in Israel. NSF will provide necessary support for travel expenses and
workshop registration of the 15 members of the US delegate team. As efforts are
currently being planned in the US toward developing sustainable buildings and
building infrastructure within sustainable built environment systems, it is
planned to have participation from Israeli researchers and practitioners working
on sustainable urban environments and US researchers working towards similar
goals in our built environments. Participation from various research
laboratories throughout Israel and the US that are engaged in the research of
green building design, integration of non-fossil-based energy systems into
building elements, engineering of sustainable building materials, urban planning
and design, and industrial ecology systems analysis is anticipated. The
bilateral exchange of ideas will be facilitated by the proposed workshop. The
three-day workshop will bring together researchers to discuss topics on the
methodology of industrial ecology for building and city design, multi-scale
design of sustainable urban systems, and engineering of sustainable building
materials. It will address environmental, economic, and social concerns in built
environment design, and deliberations will be held on the impact of innovative
materials using triple-bottom-line metrics. A major goal of the proposed
workshop will be to increase education and awareness of sustainable built
environment issues both within and outside of academia. Recommendations will be
made in adoption of the most suitable technologies in the context of socio-
economic and environmental considerations. One important workshop product will
be a set of recommendations summarizing the best practices and acceptable
methods for implementing innovative designs and materials in the construction of
sustainable built environments in urban areas.The workshop will bring together
researchers and thinkers to discuss topics on industrial ecology, such as
probabilistic life cycle analysis (LCA) and probabilistic sustainability design
approaches, and their use when creating innovative materials in green building
design and sustainable infrastructure design in environmentally sensitive and
resource-limited areas. Another important product of this workshop will be a
catalogue of best practices and emerging industrial ecology tools and methods
that can be used for the design and evaluation of new materials, structures, and
systems in growing built environments. This resource is intended to facilitate
the rapid adoption of new materials and technologies for green buildings,
transportation systems, and urban environments that exhibit improved economic,
social, and environmental performance