* 1340008
* RAPID: Ecological Resistance of Multiply Stressed Populations: the response of tidal marsh birds and plants to Hurricane Sandy
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2015
* Chris Elphick, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 05/31/2015
* USD 199,976.00

All animal and plant populations can weather change. However, the amount of
environmental change a population can absorb is likely to depend upon other,
past and ongoing stresses that the population experiences. This project will
test whether the ability of populations of native plants and animals in coastal
marshes to withstand the recent, extreme storm Hurricane Sandy was greater or
less in marshes more subject to past stresses. Researchers will compare the
abundances of marsh plants and animals before and after the storm and test
whether vulnerability was greater in more specialized species or in marshes
surrounded by development, invaded by introduced plants, or challenged by high
rates of sea-level rise, and whether previous protection of areas from different
kinds of development or use helped reduce vulnerability. By addressing these
questions using current theories of ecosystem disturbance, the research will
provide general insights on the effects of disturbance and stress on native
species and habitats. This research also will provide a specific assessment of
Hurricane Sandy?s impact on tidal marshes, a vital buffer against storm damage.
This will help managers target specific marshes for conservation and restoration
and improve the efficiency of planned federal restoration efforts. The work will
also inform future coastal management planning by identifying which types of
marshes are most vulnerable to future disturbances. Findings will be
disseminated to local, state, and federal partners through the Saltmarsh Habitat
and Avian Research Program, a cooperative consortium of universities, non-
governmental organizations, and state and Federal agency partners working
together to conserve tidal marsh habitats and the species they support
(www.tidalmarshbirds.org). The project will also help train 20 field
technicians.