* 1340936
* CC-NIE Networking Infrastructure: A High Performance Network to Enable Research in Medicine, Engineering, and Science (HERMES)
* CSE,OAC
* 12/01/2013,11/30/2014
* David Srolovitz, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 11/30/2014
* USD 495,253.00

The University of Pennsylvania's central computing organization is partnering
with leading campus researchers in engineering, physics, biology, pathology,
genomics, bioinformatics, and computer science to optimize the campus network in
support of big data research and high-performance computing. This project
establishes a 100 Gbps-capable Science DMZ that is distinct from the general
purpose campus network and is engineered for research applications.
Additionally, it extends 10 Gbps connectivity to select research projects and
increases Penn's connection to Internet2 from 1 Gbps to 100 Gbps, while also
extending that connection to the Science DMZ. The project also lays the
foundation for further enhancements to research networking infrastructure by
extending IPv6 capabilities; upgrading network monitoring tools such as
perfSONAR; and enhancing Penn's ability to support experimental networks and
network architectures, including OpenFlow and Software Defined Networking.

The project will benefit a range of scientifically meritorious research. It will
provide support for the large-scale data transfer, processing, and storage needs
of researchers across Penn, while supporting intra- and inter-institutional
collaborations and the broad dissemination of research results. Rather than
focusing on the logistics of data storage and transfer, researchers will be able
to concentrate on the transformation of these data into the information that
will drive new discoveries and the creation of new technologies, drugs,
therapies, and cures. Network enhancements will also support Penn's commitment
to integrating research and education by supporting the network needs of the
cross-disciplinary Penn Institute for Computation Science that where faculty
actively integrate computation-based research with the training of future
generations of STEM researchers.