* 1340891
* Midwest Vision and Change Leadership Fellows Midwest Regional Planning Meeting
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2014
* Kathryn Miller, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Charles Sullivan
* 04/30/2014
* USD 8,636.00

An award has been made to Washington University to organize and conduct a
workshop from April 12-14, 2013 in support of the Partnership for Undergraduate
Life Science Education (PULSE). Last September, the PULSE partners (HHMI, NIH,
and NSF) appointed 40 Vision and Change Leadership Fellows to stimulate
transformative changes in the undergraduate life science education community.
All Fellows met in October, 2012 and have since organized into four working
groups to address different challenges to reforming how biology is taught at all
types of undergraduate institutions. The Vision and Change Leadership Fellows
are focusing on how life science departments can encourage and reward faculty
members' efforts to improve undergraduate life sciences education. Such
improvements should increase student learning, should increase retention rates
for students in the sciences, and should prepare all students to be more curious
and scientifically literate citizens.

The current award is to fund a workshop in St. Louis, MO for nine of the
Leadership Fellows from a variety of institution types located within the
Midwest and Great Plains region. One of the participants is a member of the
Leadership Council that is coordinating the efforts of all 40 Fellow and the
other participants are members of the four PULSE working groups. The major goal
of this workshop is to plan a regional conference on adopting the Vision and
Change recommendations that will coincide with a fall meeting of the Association
of College and University Biology Educators (ACUBE). It is hoped that the
conference will catalyze formation of a regional network that will begin
coordinating educational reform efforts in this large geographic area. This
regional conference will expand the impact of PULSE by reaching out to
institutions from adjacent states such as North and South Dakota, Kansas,
Illinois, Michigan, and Kentucky, that are currently not represented by the
PULSE Leadership Fellows. While this regional network will be one of several
"laboratories" for testing the resources being developed by the four PULSE
working groups, the workshop organizers recognize that each region of the
country faces somewhat different challenges in moving Vision and Change efforts
forward. One challenge for the Midwest is to engage a larger number of community
college faculty in future Vision and Change activities. Results from the
workshop and the larger conference will be shared with the life sciences
community, primarily via the www.pulsecommunity.org website.