* 1340491
* Research Initiation Grant: Writing to Learn Engineering: Identifying Effective Techniques for the Integration of Written Communication  Into Engineering Classes and Curricula
* ENG,EEC
* 01/01/2014,06/30/2017
* Joshua Boyd, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Elliot Douglas
* 06/30/2017
* USD 150,000.00

Proficiency in technical writing is a highly desirable attribute for engineering
graduates, and improvement of communication skills among undergraduate
engineering students can help enhance the competitiveness of U.S. technical
talent in an increasingly global engineering market. This project responds to
the need for improved communication skills in engineering by directly addressing
challenges associated with incorporating writing-based instructional techniques
in traditional technical classes. More specifically, the goals of this project
are to develop, validate, and disseminate high-impact, scalable techniques for
integrating writing in existing engineering courses and curricula. The project
particularly seeks to address common instructor-level challenges that often
preclude the inclusion of writing in engineering coursework. This project is
primarily focused on required, large-lecture engineering courses where writing
typically does not occur, and where ample opportunities exist to train faculty
to implement simple, scalable writing activities, exercises, and related
assessments. This study will involve systematic investigation of how such
activities can potentially enhance student learning of both writing and course-
specific technical skills. The project will also survey faculty and staff at
multiple institutions to evaluate current attitudes toward writing in
engineering, while identifying the most scalable and sustainable writing
interventions from the standpoint of instructors and institutions.

The proposed project brings together an interdisciplinary team with highly
complementary expertise spanning multiple disciplines and areas of activity,
including engineering (civil and electrical/computer), technical communication,
active and experiential learning, and engineering education research. The
project proposes innovative application of writing interventions that have been
proven effective in other contexts, with the goal of transforming core courses
in engineering to enhance the technical capabilities and writing skills of
participating students. Increased emphasis on writing in engineering education
may also broaden participation and increase retention of underrepresented groups
(particularly women and linguistic minorities), including by helping to
contextualize and make more relevant the technical courses and topics that
comprise much of current engineering curricula.