* 1340617
* EAGER: Biophotonic Detection of Field Carcinogenesis of Pancreatic Cancer
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2013,06/30/2016
* Vadim Backman, Northwestern University at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 06/30/2016
* USD 299,932.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; "This award is co-funded by NSF?s International
Science and Engineering Section, Office of International and Integrative
Activities." &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is to test and
validate an optical technology, partial wave spectroscopic microscopy (PWS), as
a first-tier screening tool for pancreatic cancer in a relatively large cohort.
PWS allows for the measurement of statistical properties of the spatial
arrangement of intracellular macromolecular density at the sub-diffractional
length scales, i.e. nanoscale. Thus, PWS probes cellular nanoarchitecture, the
fundamental level of intracellular organization at the level from macromolecular
structures to small organelles. Using PWS, they demonstrated an increase in the
disorder of nuclear nanoarchitecture in the earliest stages of carcinogenesis
manifested as an alteration of the higher-order chromatin structure. This
phenomenon was observed in multiple cancer types (lung, colon, pancreatic,
esophageal, ovarian and thyroid cancers). In this project, taking advantage of
an existing established US-China collaborative team via a National Cancer
Institute funded gastric cancer project, and large patients? pool in Shanghai,
China, this project will study PWS as a potential early detection marker for
pancreatic cancer in Chinese patients. It will also study epigenetic mechanisms
of how changes in higher order chromatin structure modulate gene transcription.
From the educational perspective, the project will provide opportunities in
truly interdisciplinary research at the interface of biophotonics, molecular
biophysics, cancer epidemiology, cancer biology, and medicine for postdoctoral
fellows, and graduate, undergraduate and high school students with a particular
focus on recruitment of women and minorities in science. The findings will be
incorporated into four graduate classes directed by the PIs. The findings and
data generated during the course of the project will be disseminated to the
scientific community. The main findings will also be disseminated to the general
public.