* 1340681
* Determining how Organic Matter is Stabilized using a Unique Set of Soil Samples from across the U.S.
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2020
* Lucas Nave, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 06/30/2020
* USD 350,382.00

Soil organic matter (SOM) is a critical linkage among many ecosystem services
that sustain our society and life on Earth. It is the primary food source for
microbes and the principal storehouse of water necessary for plant growth. SOM
also stores nutrients for plants and absorbs pollutants that otherwise could
contaminate food and water supplies. Soils also help regulate climate by storing
carbon that would otherwise be released to the atmosphere and contribute to
climate change. This project investigates processes in the soil that protect SOM
from being completely consumed by microbes and conversely, processes that could
increase its sensitivity to environmental changes. The researchers will also
study how climate change and changes in how land is managed affect the amount
and stability of SOM. The project involves a large number of researchers and
laboratories in conducting a wide range of SOM analyses. It takes advantage of
soil samples already collected by the National Ecological Observatory Network
(NEON), a major NSF investment in environmental monitoring that covers the
entire United States. The samples will be preserved and the data that results
from this project made fully public via the web.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
evolution of a new paradigm, where the primary controls on SOM dynamics are less
dependent on molecular structure than on other soil and ecosystem properties,
has created a knowledge gap in our ability to predict the response of SOM to
environmental change. The relationships among shifting controls over different
SOM stabilization mechanisms, ranging from distal factors operating at broad
spatial scales (e.g., climate) to proximal controls operating at finer spatial
scales (e.g., soil physicochemical properties), are poorly defined.
Investigators will test the emerging paradigm by quantifying relationships
between the dominant mechanisms of SOM stabilization and the scale of the
ecosystem controls (i.e., fine-scale, proximal vs. broad-scale, distal) across a
continental-scale system of soil types and ecological domains, utilizing soil
samples collected during the construction of NEON. This project will be the
first continental-scale assessment of SOM vulnerability and will yield new,
predictive insights into controls on SOM stability across soil types, land-use
types and environmental gradients. The results will significantly improve our
understanding of SOM dynamics, a fundamental scientific advancement in its own
right, while also enabling better representation of soils in ecosystem and
coupled carbon-climate models. The project represents a new standard in open,
community-oriented research, supporting participation by researchers from
universities, government and non-government agencies. It will facilitate
collaboration through major scientific networks that are increasingly necessary
to conduct science at the scale needed to address the complex issues facing
society. Graduate and undergraduate students will receive training in state-of-
the-science methods of soil science by participating in this research, and
insights derived from it will inform decisions by policymakers and resource
managers concerned with carbon sequestration and ecosystem services.