* 1340534
* International Conference on Biochemical and Molecular Engineering XVIII - Beijing, China, June 10-16, 2013
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2014
* Huimin Zhao, Engineering Conferences International, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Friedrich Srienc
* 04/30/2014
* USD 25,000.00

1340534&lt;br/&gt;Zhao, Huimin &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the
18th International Conference on Biochemical and Molecular Engineering (BME
XVIII) to be held in Beijing, China from June 16-20, 2013. The conference will
bring together established researchers, young investigators, private sector
scientists and engineers as well as graduate students to assess the present and
chart the future of the field of biochemical and molecular engineering. The
focus of the 2013 conference will be on frontiers in biological design,
synthetic biology, and processing. Specific topics include foundational
technologies for synthetic biology; advances in biological processing; design
and engineering of microbial factories for the synthesis of fuels and chemicals;
engineering at the bio-nano and bio-micro interfaces; stem-cell engineering and
cell-based therapies; and engineering of next-generation biotherapeutics. In
addition, there are four workshops including opportunities for international
research collaborations, biotechnology development in China, the development of
biosimilars, and practical applications of advances in engineering sciences in
Quality-by-Design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF support will help ensure the success
of the meeting by partially defraying conference costs for select US academic
scientists and engineers with an emphasis on underrepresented groups and
graduate students. In the absence of NSF support, many US academic scientists
and graduate students would not be able to attend and to benefit from
interactions with the international community of biotechnology researchers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award from the Biotechnology, Biochemical, and
Bioengineering Program of the CBET Division is co-sponsored by the Synthetic and
Systems Biology Program of the Molecular and Cell Biology Division and by the
Biomaterials Program of the Division of Materials Research.