* 1340953
* Collaborative Research: CC-NIE Integration:  Developing Applications with Networking Capabilities via End-to-End SDN (DANCES)
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2016
* Anton Nekrutenko, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 12/31/2016
* USD 125,000.00

The DANCES project team of network engineers, application developers, and
research scientists is implementing a software-defined networking (SDN)-enabled
end-to-end environment to optimize support for scientific data transfer. DANCES
accomplishes this optimization by integrating high performance computing job
scheduling, network control capabilities offered by SDN along with data movement
applications in an end-to-end network infrastructure. This integration provides
access to control mechanisms for managing network bandwidth. The control of
network resources enabled by SDN enhances application stability, predictability
and performance, thereby improving overall network utilization. Motivation for
the DANCES project is to apply the advantages of advanced network services to
the problem of congested metropolitan and campus networks. DANCES uses XSEDENet
across Internet2 in conjunction with OpenFlow-enabled network switches installed
at the collaborating sites as the end-to-end hardware and software
substrate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Knowledge gained through DANCES is being
disseminated through educational programs offered by the participating
institutions and at existing community workshops, meetings, and conferences. The
insights and experience obtained through DANCES will promote a better
understanding of the technical requirements for supporting end-to-end SDN across
wide area and campus cyberinfrastructure. The resulting SDN-enabled applications
will make the request and configuration of high bandwidth connections easily
accessible to end users and improve network performance and predictability for
supporting a wide range of applications.