* 1340932
* CC-NIE Network Infrastructure: Network 10Gb Upgrade and Science DMZ Implementation to Support Science and Engineering Research and Enhance Outreach for High School STEM Education
* CSE,OAC
* 12/01/2013,05/31/2016
* Thomas Skill, University of Dayton
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 05/31/2016
* USD 232,788.00

High performance data networks are critical infrastructure for researchers and
educators who rely on unimpeded access to remote instrumentation, massive data
sets and distant collaborators to achieve objectives in science and engineering
fields. This project builds a high-performance research network at the
University of Dayton to provide unimpeded connections to other research
institutions via state and national high-capacity networks. The project expands
the campus network from 1Gb to 10Gb and establishes science DMZs in four science
and engineering facilities across the campus, providing researchers with new
capabilities. Research initiatives link researchers with colleagues and students
for: (1) education and outreach initiatives at Sinclair Community College and
regional high schools, (2) remote instrumentation access at The Ohio State
University, (3) climate research remote processing at the Ohio Supercomputer
Center, and (4) collaborative sensors research at Central State University (a
historically black university). This network expansion connects the University
at 10Gbps to Internet2 and OARnet's IntraOhio (both running at 100Gbps).
Additionally, the University of Dayton is utilizing perfSONAR monitoring to
measure and document the performance of the science
DMZs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key upgrades for this project include installing
science DMZ edge hardware and upgrading distribution and access layers at the
University of Dayton, and hardware upgrades for science DMZ connections at
Central State University. These improvements enable our scientists and engineers
to better connect, collaborate, and share science data, provide robust STEM
educational outreach, contribute to high-value workforce development and create
cost-effective models for sharing scarce scientific resources.