* 1340383
* Speaker support for workshop on advances in molecular programming and computing
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2014
* Erik Winfree, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 04/30/2014
* USD 27,615.00

Support is requested for the participation of ~15 researchers from US academic
institutions for a three-day workshop, ``Advances in Molecular Programming and
Computing: Toward Chemistry as a New Information Technology'', that aims to
assess the current state, prospects, and challenges in this new research area. A
similar number of researchers from European and Asian countries will be
participating, supported by other funding sources. Participation from key
industry representatives will also be encouraged.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of the workshop is to articulate a vision for the advancement of the
information science and technology aspects of molecular chemistry and
biochemistry, ranging from molecular devices to DNA nanotechnology to synthetic
biology as well as related areas involving information processing and
programmability within engineered (and natural) molecular / chemical /
biological systems. The concrete goal is to bring this emerging frontier more
prominently to the attention of both US and non-US funding agencies, to explore
it from theoretical, scientific, technological, and application perspectives,
and to provide an unbiased assessment of its potential and challenges that will
inform future decision-making. Through a written report, published along with
original research and opinion articles as a formal proceedings, the workshop
will explore how chemical and biochemical substrates might emerge as a new
information technology in the coming century, and help articulate the
challenges, the potential, and the need for vigorous research activity in this
area, with an emphasis on how researchers (and funding agencies) with deep
experience in information science and technology will be integral to developing
this frontier.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Molecular programming
will provide new insights and solutions to grand challenges in biology,
chemistry, materials science, and medicine. In manufacturing it will enable
fabrication of complex products from the bottom-up (e.g., programmable materials
and devices grown from molecules); in biological engineering it will bring
deeper computer science principles to the design of programmable subsystems
within living cells. The knowledge gained will clarify the relationship between
computation and the physical world---how information can be stored and processed
by molecules, the limits of what can be computed and fabricated, and how quickly
computation or fabrication can be done for a given energetic cost. While
molecular programming will leverage existing tools from computer science,
control theory, electrical engineering, and bioengineering, it will also require
new approaches to analyzing complex programs, circuits, and networks of
molecules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: This workshop will expand the
network of scientists and engineers working in molecular programming and bring
together a diverse community of researchers who will, over time, build this
field.