* 1340048
* MSU SETS-UP: Supporting Early-Career Teachers of Science through Urban Partnerships
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2023
* Gail Richmond, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 09/30/2023
* USD 2,533,416.00

Michigan State University is implementing an NSF Teaching Fellowships and Master
Teaching Fellowship Project called "MSU SETS-UP: Supporting Early-Career
Teachers of Science through Urban Partnerships." Intensive class- and field-
based experiences during the first summer prepare the 20 Teaching Fellows for a
year-long urban residency in four partner school districts Detroit, Grand
Rapids, Lansing, and Jackson. Working with United Way of Southeast Michigan,
Fellows learn strategies for supporting neighborhood schools and how United Way
works with families and teachers to improve the quality of life in schools. Some
key support features of this project include face-to-face coaching by
experienced science teachers, face-to-face and virtual mentoring by former MSU
Noyce Scholars from a previous award, MSU Woodrow Wilson Fellows, and Knowles
Foundation Science Teaching Fellows, workshops, on-line resources coupled with
and extending from these workshops, interviews, journal exchanges, and check-
ins. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project enables Fellows to share their deep
knowledge and skills focused on teaching reform-based and context-responsive
ways in high-need schools throughout the state of Michigan and beyond. The
Fellowships are also expected to increase the number of STEM teachers with
strong content knowledge and a strong commitment to teaching students with the
greatest need. In addition, what is learned about how to effectively prepare
individuals for teaching in high-need settings and in supporting early-career
teachers at a distance from the university has an impact on the design of more
traditional teacher preparation programs at MSU and more broadly. Lastly, this
initiative, combined with others recently undertaken at MSU, are expected to
increase the number of under-represented (women and minority) scholars who enter
the STEM teaching corps and choose to teach in high-need settings.