* 1340083
* Streamline to Mastery Phase II: Teacher-Led Professional Partnerships
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2021
* Steven Pollock, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 08/31/2021
* USD 1,800,000.00

Streamline to Mastery Phase II builds on the collective induction philosophy
that undergirds successful NSF-funded Noyce programs at the University of
Colorado Boulder. The project is integrating, expanding, and aligning teacher
preparation, induction, and leadership by bringing together Noyce Teacher Teams
of teachers and prospective teachers with different levels of experience. The
focus of each team of veteran, novice, and prospective teachers is on conducting
classroom research and the goal of this centralizing activity is the critical
examination of assumptions about teaching and learning. The mechanism by which
such reflection occurs is scientific inquiry into one's own practice, the
practices of others, and the practices of students. This design is like that of
any scientific laboratory-knowledge generation with all participants playing
critical, productive roles as knowledge producers as well as expert learners.
The project is a collaboration of the University of Colorado Boulder, Adams 12
5-Star Schools, Boulder Valley, Cherry Creek, Denver Public Schools, Englewood,
Jefferson County, Mapleton, and St. Vrain Valley school districts and includes
Colorado Legacy Foundation as a partner. The design of this project reaches
beyond general descriptions of teaching practice such as "inquiry-based" and
"student-centered" and into the realm of fundamental reorganization of learning
contexts for teachers. The Streamline to Mastery Phase II research team
activities serve as mechanisms both for the professional growth of participants
and as a model for how scientific inquiry into personally and professionally
meaningful problems leads to collective knowledge generation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has the potential to impact thousands of
students as well as to instigate large-scale change in the way teacher
preparation, novice teacher induction, and veteran teacher professional
development are conducted. The proposed Teacher Research Team model is
potentially sustainable and builds on, rather than questions, the abilities and
wisdom of people who devote their lives to teaching. This philosophy transcends
into K-12 classrooms, where the skills and experiences of students can be
utilized rather than questioned. The model proposed and tested in this project
is based on equity and access, guided by the understanding that people will
learn in contexts that capitalize on their social, linguistic, experiential, and
cognitive resources. The project immediately impacts over 40 teachers, including
10 new Master Teaching Fellows, and their students in high-needs school
districts in Colorado. The expectation that Noyce Teacher Teams publish and
present their work, and engage other teachers in professional development
activities leads to a greater impact on teachers and their students nationwide