* 1340885
* Next Generation Climate Change Experiments Needed to Advance Knowledge and for Assessment of CMIP6; Aspen, Colorado; August 4-9, 2013
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* John Katzenberger, Aspen Global Change Institute
* Standard Grant
* Anjuli Bamzai
* 05/31/2014
* USD 20,000.00

These funds support a Workshop entitled 'Next generation climate change
experiments needed to advance knowledge and for assessment of CMIP6' organized
by the Aspen Global Change Institute. As we approach the end of the
Intergovernmental Panel for Climate Change fifth assessment report (IPCC AR5)
process and the culmination of the extensive model intercomparison exercise of
Coupled Model Intercomparison Project (CMIP5), emerging gaps in scientific
understanding lead to opportunities for new climate model experiments that
explore aspects of the science best addressed through a coordinated set of model
experiments. This workshop will set the initial planning for a possible CMIP6.
The current timing affords a unique opportunity to assess the accomplishments
and outstanding issues with the CMIP5 process and use this to help inform the
development of experimental design and research directions that can be
considered for inclusion in the CMIP6 process. The range of interesting and
useful science questions include the following: (i) Land use -aerosols-ESM
applications-interact with a couple of the Shared Socio-economic Pathways (SSPs)
that show quite different outcomes from RCPs; (ii) Reversibility or geo-
engineering; (iii) More idealized experiments, e.g. 1% runs but for other
forcings, idealized aerosol, ozone, land use, like the 1% runs; (iv) Decadal
prediction and extremes; (v) Systematic biases; (vi) Very high resolution time
slice experiments for tropical cyclones and other aspects of storms and
circulation changes; (vii) Higher resolution coupled simulations for tropical
cyclones, extremes, and circulation changes; and (viii) Coupled land ice for
better estimates of global and regional sea level rise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
workshop will directly benefit agencies of the USGCRP and their contribution to
the advancement of climate projections and predictability and the scientific
process leading up to the future international assessments.