* 1340160
* CAREER: Studies of Magnesium Isotope Geochemistry
* GEO,EAR
* 12/16/2012,04/30/2017
* Fangzhen Teng, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 04/30/2017
* USD 439,744.00

The distribution of elements and isotopes in the Earth is important for
understanding its formation and evolution. Compared to the 'building blocks' of
the Earth, i.e., chondrites, the present solid Earth is highly heterogeneous,
with a thin felsic crust, thick mafic mantle, liquid outer core and solid inner
core. The extent to which these different reservoirs interacted with each other
and evolved over time is still not well-constrained. This CAREER award
investigates the origin, evolution and interactions between and among major
Earth reservoirs through studies of magnesium isotope geochemistry by graduate
and undergraduate students under the mentorship of the PI. The research results
will be integrated with the educational process to promote student creativity
and independent problem solving abilities, to broaden participation and increase
the number of underrepresented undergraduate students in Geosciences and
contribute to a broader community, through the development of application-
oriented projects and new course design, through recruitment of African American
students via a recently installed partnership for a Dual Degree Program between
Fort Valley State University (FVSU) and University of Arkansas (UA), by
providing research opportunities and summer research experiences for
undergraduates and high-school students, and by providing professional
development opportunities to community college
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Magnesium isotope geochemistry is still in its
infancy. Few studies are available on Mg isotopic composition of the major solid
Earth reservoirs and the degree to which Mg isotopes can fractionate during
high-temperature geological processes. Following recent studies by the PI and
other groups on the geochemical composition of the upper crust and the mantle,
it is proposed to systematically investigate Mg isotopic variations in major
Earth reservoirs and examine the processes and mechanisms that may produce these
variations through studies of globally distributed, chemically diverse, well-
characterized rocks and minerals. The results of the proposed research will
advance the knowledge and state of the art of Mg isotope geochemistry and lay
the foundation for using Mg isotopes as a tracer of crust-mantle interaction, as
a high-precision geothermometry in igneous and metamorphic rocks, and as a
speedometer to constrain the rates of crystal growth, cooling of magma and
metamorphic events. Furthermore, the proposed research will enable the PI to
establish for the first time a cutting-edge high-temperature geochemistry
program at Arkansas and help UA to build the first PhD program in this area of
research. The CAREER award will support one PhD student, one master student and
multiple undergraduates, and support women and minorities to work in the lab (11
out of 16 students in the PI's lab are female, including one African American
and one veteran). The PI will continue mentoring international young
researchers, supporting community college teachers to work in the lab and
serving the scientific community for Mg isotopic analysis. Results from the
proposed work will be reported in conferences and peer-reviewed journals by
students, postdocs and the PI, and eventually introduced into the PI's courses.