* 1340241
* A Workshop to Develop a Conceptual Model of the Future High Arcitc Marine Ecosystem
* GEO,OPP
* 05/01/2013,01/31/2014
* Karyn Sawyer, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Neil R. Swanberg
* 01/31/2014
* USD 56,040.00

Diminishing sea ice cover and ocean acidification are altering the Arctic Ocean
ecosystem and contributing to substantial economic and cultural changes in the
region. The significance of those changes has been highlighted in the United
States where the Arctic Ocean was identified as one of the nine priority
objectives in the National Ocean Policy and internationally by the Arctic
Council which is working cooperatively in the Arctic on ecosystem based
management, oil spill prevention and response, and search and rescue. From those
fora interest had grown for coordinating studies of the arctic marine ecosystem
and how it is likely to change in the face of global climate change, offshore
energy exploration and development, and increasing acidification. This workshop
will facilitate discussion among approximately 20 synthetic thinkers to develop
a conceptual model of the arctic marine ecosystem, and to develop hypotheses
about how that system is likely to change in the coming decades. This workshop
will begin to assemble an overview of the system such that individual efforts of
several Federal agencies can be more efficiently planned and complement one
another to further our understanding of the overall system and its likely
responses to changing conditions.

An important step in the design of a research program in arctic marine
ecosystems is the development of a common conceptual model of what the Arctic
may look like in the future, what the main information needs will be, and how a
coordinated research program aimed at addressing these needs could be
implemented.

The broader impacts expected from this workshop include an opportunity for the
research community to discuss ideas that contribute to a better understanding of
how contemporary arctic physical, biological, and human ecosystems may change
over the next few decades, and of how anthropogenic activities can be directed
to mitigate human and natural impacts on the ecosystem and facilitate human
adaptations.