* 1340037
* Planning for a Teacher Fellowship/Master Teacher Fellowship Program to Serve High-Need Schools in Urban Southwestern Connecticut
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2015
* Nelson Ngoh, University of Bridgeport
* Standard Grant
* Lidia C. Yoshida
* 12/31/2015
* USD 192,347.00

University of Bridgeport (UB), in partnership with neighboring high-need school
districts (Bridgeport, Norwalk, and Stamford) proposes to engage in a highly
effective Capacity Building Project leading to the design of a combined Teaching
Fellowship/Master Teaching Fellowship (TF/MTF) program. The investigators are
developing a program to recruit, prepare, and retain secondary science teachers
committed to teaching physical science in high-need school districts in urban
Southwestern Connecticut. The project is developing the capacity to recruit ten
TFs from UB's student body preparing to graduate in science-related and five
MTFs from in-service secondary science teachers who already serve in partner
school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project supports the advancement of
discovery through the identification of effective ways of recruiting, preparing,
and retaining high-school science teachers in urban high-poverty settings,
ultimately leading to enriched and effective learning experiences of
underrepresented students in science, and their consequent increased recruitment
into science-related careers. In addition, the project is providing essential
information for practitioners and scholars by analyzing the practices of expert
science teachers who are successful in high-poverty urban school districts, and
making their images public (presentation at national conferences and publication
in peer-reviewed journals). Third, the benefits of the project to society
consist in the potential applications of these findings at a larger scale. As
such, it serves as a model of science education improvement in high-need schools
for adoption by other teacher preparation institutions nationwide.