* 1340465
* 2013-2014 LANSCE School on Neutron Scattering
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2015
* Heinrich Nakotte, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 07/31/2015
* USD 48,520.00

1340465 Nakotte

This award from the Division of Materials Research to New Mexico State
University provides supports for students to attend the 2013-2014 Los Alamos
Neutron Science Center (LANSCE) Schools on Neutron Scattering. The LANSCE neuton
schools are intended to cover a particular science topic, for which neutron
scattering has made or is expected to make a major impact. The 2013 and 2014
LANSCE Schools on Neutron Scattering will focus on Geosciences and Materials in
Extreme Environments and Mesoscale Sciences and Interfaces, respectively. Each
of the annual schools will run for 9-10 days and they consist of formal lectures
and hands-on experiments, using the neutron scattering facilities at the LANSCE.
The main objectives of both school are: a) to provide in-depth neutron-
scattering training in a particular topic (in particular, for graduate students
in their early stage of thesis research), b) to attract new users to the
neutron-scattering community, c) to increase diversity among expert neutron
scatterers, and d) to broaden the field where neutron scattering can develop
further. The number of student participants is limited to ~30 students, selected
from a large applicant pool using a variety of criteria. A particular emphasis
is put on selecting a diverse student body in order to foster a cross-
institutional, cross-disciplinary and multicultural learning environment. This
grant will support travel and meals for accepted student participants.