* 1340265
* EC3 - Earth-Centered Communication for Cyberinfrastructure:  Challenges of field data collection, management, and integration
* GEO,RISE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Matty Mookerjee, Sonoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2016
* USD 299,329.00

Scientists who work in the field have a common set of issues when it comes to
documenting,storing, and representing data. Members from the different
geological communities would benefitgreatly from the opportunity to discuss the
types of data that they collect in the field with a group of cyberinfrastructure
and software development professionals and researchers. By holding meetings in
the field, the computer scientists will gain a better appreciation for the types
of data that are typically collected in the field, common methods for collecting
those data, the field tools/technology that are employed, data recording
conventions, and the types of question typically addressed with these data. "The
field" is an ideal location for appreciating geological concepts, and the very
act of being in the field, together with other professionals, often foster
personal connections that promote successful collaborations&lt;br/&gt;and the
exchange of ideas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Work on this RCN will facilitate
digitization of geological field data. The researchers will take steps to: 1)
Document what exists currently for field data collection; 2) Assemble a
community for discussing and exploring field data collection issues,
specifically targeting young investigators; 3) Motivate distinct communities to
work together on common issues associated with digitization; 4) Evaluate what is
missing in the creation of open and accessible data. The objective of the RCN
Proposal is to develop communication between cyberinfrastructure community and
those involved in field-based, solid earth geoscience. In order to facilitate
knowledge of the activities, they will conduct a series of both informal and
formal meetings as national meetings - workshops at GSA and townhall meetings at
AGU and AAPG). The goal of the initial meetings will be to: 1) foster community
awareness of EarthCube-related activities, 2) discover and catalog the
additional existing resources, 3) determine ways of giving publication ?credit?
for recording and sharing digital data, 4) identify attributes of a
clearinghouse website that would be most useful, and 5) find ways of motivating
the community to move quickly toward digital data collection/conversion and data
sharing.