* 1340886
* The seasonal cycle of export production in an Antarctic coastal marine ecosystem
* GEO,OPP
* 04/01/2012,05/31/2015
* Hugh Ducklow, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Clough
* 05/31/2015
* USD 257,280.00

The research project will obtain a comprehensive data set on the seasonal cycles
of new, export and net community production, and lead to a better understanding
of the production and export of organic matter (C and N) in a coastal Antarctic
marine ecosystem. There have been relatively few measurements of these three
processes in polar regions, and even fewer systematic time-series investigations
conducted at the proper scales to uncover mechanisms. In consequence, the
physical, ecological and biogeochemical mechanisms regulating new production,
NCP and export production remain poorly-characterized. We propose to conduct a
detailed, season- long study of export production as determined from water
column 238U:234Th disequilibrium. New production will be measured by 15NO3
uptake. Net community production will be estimated from measurements of the
O2:Ar ratio in seawater. Sampling will be carried out weekly from October to
April at a regularly-occupied and long-studied (since 1993) site 5 km from
Palmer Station, in close conjunction with ongoing research by the Palmer,
Antarctica Long Term Ecological Research project (PAL). Sediment traps will be
deployed weekly at two depths to collect particles for determination of the
ratios of C:N:234Th on sinking particles. This study will be among the first to
obtain detailed concurrent time series of new, export and net community
production. Current estimates of particle export in coastal Antarctica are
limited to a few offshore sites and may underestimate the true export by an
order of magnitude. In addition, seasonal and interannual variability are not
quantitatively related to corresponding variations in primary production, sea
ice cover nor zooplankton stocks. These shortcomings may result from sediment
trap collection deficiencies and a spatiotemporal disconnect between sampling
the plankton community and particle flux that blurs relationships. If these
suppositions are correct, the project will provide a new, robust estimate of
export production in the Antarctic marine environment, and a new explanation of
how and why it varies during the Austral summer growing season. This project
will support a postdoctoral fellow and take advantage of the well-developed
infrastructure of the MBL and PAL-LTER Education and Outreach programs, to
inform two of the most influential groups for public education, K12 teachers and
science journalists, about the ocean carbon cycle and climate change in one of
the world's most captivating and rapidly changing ecosystems.