* 1341778
* EAGER: Wireless, Peptide-Immobilized Diamond Bioelectronic Sensor for Monitoring Gas Molecules
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2015
* Yue Cui, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 06/30/2015
* USD 75,000.00

The ability to monitor gas molecules in a patients breath would open up
significant opportunities to improve the treatment and management of a variety
of diseases. The focus of this EAGER proposal is to design a wireless, peptide-
immobilized diamond film-based electronic sensor on SiO2 and to demonstrate the
feasibility by sensing of acetic acid. Various gas molecules have been
identified as disease biomarkers, such as acetone for diabetes, acetic acid for
asthma, ammonia for real-time clinical status of patients during haemodialysis.
Diamond has a wide electrochemical potential window, a low and stable background
current, long-term response stability, biocompatibility, great fouling
resistance, and chemical inertness; it is an ideal material for electronic
sensors. Peptide bioreceptors are of particular interest for use with electronic
sensors, since they are robust biorecognition molecules with broad chemical
diversity. The PI will first fabricate the wireless diamond sensor by
integrating a diamond electrode with wireless telemetry on SiO2. Then, the PI
will synthesize and immobilize an acetic acid-diamond bifunctional peptide onto
the diamond. The PI has recently identified a diamond-binding peptide, and an
acetic acid binding peptide has been reported in literature. PI proposes to
investigate and exploit the sensing behavior of the device as it monitors acetic
acid molecules, collect the impedance signal for the wireless detection of
acetic acid, and use the slope of impedance vs. time graph for continuous
monitoring of different concentrations of acetic acid. The goal is to
investigate the sensitivity and selectivity of the device, as well as the
sensing response time and saturation time. The success of this proposal will
lead to the development of a variety of wireless, flexible, diamond-based
biomimetic nanosensors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;This
work will fill critical gaps in understanding interactions between the gas
molecules and the peptide-functionalized diamond electronics. It will also
enhance fundamental knowledge of diamond-based bioelectronics. The objective of
this project is to create a transformative approach to enable continuous, real-
time, and selective monitoring of trace amounts of gas molecules. The proposed
research will advance healthcare monitoring options, thereby improving the
treatment and management of a variety of diseases, such as cancers, diabetes,
and asthma. The work will deepen the understanding of wireless diamond
bioelectronics and provide a prototype demonstration for the further development
of a variety of wireless, flexible diamond-based biomimetic
nanosensors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;The project will
provide significant opportunities to improve the diagnosis and treatment of
diseases through the development of enabling technology for continuous,
sensitive, and selective monitoring of gases. The success of this EAGER proposal
will venture into emerging research concepts regarding the creation of a variety
of wireless, flexible diamond biomimetic nanosensors. The proposed research will
promote the participation of high school students, undergraduate, and graduate
students, specifically targeting women and underrepresented groups through
ongoing activities.