* 1341362
* You are what you eat: The Role of Kleptoplasty in an Antarctic Dinoflagellate
* GEO,OPP
* 11/01/2013,10/31/2017
* Rebecca Gast, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Christian Fritsen
* 10/31/2017
* USD 656,606.00

Kleptoplasty, the temporary acquisition and use of functional chloroplasts
derived from algal prey, is viewed as an important model for the early evolution
of the permanent, endosymbiotically-derived chloroplasts found in all
permanently photosynthetic eukaryotes. This project will study the evolutionary
history and expression of plastid-targeted genes in an abundant Antarctic
dinoflagellate that steals chloroplasts from an ecologically important alga, the
haptophyte Phaeocystis. Algae play an important role in the fixation and export
of CO2 in the Southern Ocean, and this project will explore the genetic basis
for the function of these chimeric cells with regard to their functional
adaptation to extreme environments and will study the evolutionary history and
expression of plastid-targeted genes in both the host and recipient. The project
seeks to determine whether the kleptoplastidic dinoflagellate utilizes ancestral
plastid proteins to regulate its stolen plastid, and how their transcription is
related to environmental factors that are relevant to the Southern Ocean
environment (temperature and light). To accomplish these goals, the project will
utilize high throughput transcriptome analysis and RNA-sequencing experiments
with the dinoflagellate and Phaeocystis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will
help biologists understand the environmental success of this alternative
nutritional strategy, and to assess the potential impact of anthropogenic
climate change on the organism. The project will also contribute to the
maintenance of a culture collection of heterotrophic, phototrophic and
mixotrophic Antarctic protists that are available to the scientific community,
and it will support the mentoring of a graduate student and a postdoctoral
fellow. The work is being accomplished as an international collaboration between
US and Canadian scientists, and in addition to publishing results in peer-
reviewed journals, the investigators will incorporate aspects of this work into
public outreach activities. These include field data analysis opportunities for
middle school students and science-based art projects with local schools and
museums.