* 1341677
* Collaborative Research:  Studies of ULF Waves Associated with Solar Wind Coupling to the Magnetosphere and Ionosphere.
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Marc Lessard, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Vladimir Papitashvili
* 08/31/2018
* USD 447,564.00

Title: Collaborative Research: Studies of ULF waves associated with solar wind
coupling to the magnetosphere and ionosphere&lt;br/&gt;PLR-1341677 PI: Marc
Lessard, University of New Hampshire (Lead)&lt;br/&gt;PLR-1341493 PI: Mark
Engebretson, Augsburg College (Non-Lead)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since the
beginning of the space age, increasingly sophisticated efforts have been made to
explore and understand Earth?s space environment. Because those parts of Earth?s
magnetic field that reach farthest out into space intersect the ground at high
latitudes, arrays of ground magnetometers and auroral imagers at these polar
regions have long been a valued means of monitoring processes in remote parts of
Earth's magnetosphere. This award is to continue to operate and analyze data
from six ground-based induction (search coil) magnetometers located in
Antarctica (U.S. stations at South Pole and McMurdo, and the British Halley and
Rothera stations), and two in the Arctic (Sondrestromfjord, Greenland, and
Iqaluit, Canada). This research includes also the comparative analysis of search
coil data from the array of automatic geophysical observatories (AGOs), a widely
spaced array at Southern Polar Cap latitudes ranging from the auroral zone to
near the geomagnetic pole.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The stations in this project are
key links in arrays of ground-based ionospheric and magnetospheric observatories
in both the Arctic and Antarctic regions. With data from other instruments
located at these sites and utilizing data from Antarctic arrays of automated
instruments and from both low-altitude and high-altitude NASA spacecraft, these
instruments play a significant role in a variety of studies of geospace
phenomena including the solar wind-magnetosphere interaction and geomagnetic
storms and substorms. Taken together, these instruments make it possible to
study the entire range of Ultra Low Frequency (ULF) variations, from Pc1 and Pi1
pulsations down to Pc5 pulsations, magnetic impulse events, sudden
electromagnetic impulses, and substorm disturbances with high sensitivity.
Studies of these waves in conjunction with other instruments and spacecraft
observations greatly enhance the scientific potential of the wave observations
to provide new physical insights into Geospace
dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Solid science, collaborative effort,
international partners, and travel to Antarctica provide an ideal opportunity to
achieve education and outreach goals. Operation of the search coil magnetometers
at the U.S. Antarctic stations provides excellent opportunities for graduate and
undergraduate students at the University of New Hampshire and Augsburg College
in Minnesota to make meaningful contributions to cutting-edge
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Search coils data are broadly employed by other
research groups, with applications in studying solar-terrestrial relationships,
magnetospheric physics, and space weather. These instruments are critical for
the study of Earth's space environment, which has become increasingly important
to our technologically advanced society. Improving the capability to forecast
and characterize major space weather events has direct societal benefit.