* 1341344
* Student Travel Support for the SIGCOMM 2013 Conference
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Augustin Chaintreau, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Lyles
* 05/31/2014
* USD 25,000.00

This project supports the travel of 10 graduate students and 2 postdoctoral
students from U.S. institutions to the SIGCOMM 2013 conference. The ACM SIGCOMM
2013 Conference will be held between August 12 and August 16, 2013, in Hong
Kong. ACM SIGCOMM is the flagship annual conference of the Special Interest
Group on Data Communications, a special interest group of the Association for
Computing Machinery. SIGCOMM is a very highly selective (&lt;14%), high-quality
conference sponsored by the ACM. The conference is a major forum for
presentation and discussion of important research results in networking.
Recipients of the travel grants will be selected via a widely advertised
competitive process involving submitting a travel grant application and review
by a travel grant committee associated with the SIGCOMM
organization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project integrates research and
education of students through exposure to a premier technical meeting in
computer networks and communications. Students will have the opportunity to
observe high-quality presentations and interact with senior researchers in the
field. The proposed student participation is expected to have a positive impact
on the students' research interests and quality. Second, the project will
promote diversity by encouraging and enabling women and other underrepresented
minorities to participate. Furthermore, the truly international flavor of
SIGCOMM as an annual conference is well-known and reflected in the composition
of the Technical Program Committee (TPC) as well as in the authors of the
submitted and accepted papers. As such, it cultivates international research
interactions and presents a tremendous opportunity to students to increase their
breadth of ideas, research approaches, and technical perspectives.