* 1341284
* Origin and Climatic Significance of Rock Glaciers in the McMurdo Dry Valleys: Assessing Spatial and Temporal Variability
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2017
* Kate Swanger, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Jackson
* 07/31/2017
* USD 331,002.00

Paragraph for Laypersons:&lt;br/&gt;This research focuses on the history of rock
glaciers and buried glacial ice in the McMurdo Dry Valleys region of Antarctica.
Rock glaciers are flowing mixtures of ice and sediments common throughout alpine
and high-latitude regions on Earth and Mars. Despite similar appearances, rock
glaciers can form under highly variable environmental and hydrological
conditions. The main research questions addressed here are: 1) what
environmental and climatological conditions foster long-term preservation of
rock glaciers in Antarctica, 2) what role do rock glaciers play in Antarctic
landscape evolution and the local water cycle, and 3) what can rock glaciers
reveal about the extent and timing of previous glacial advances? The project
will involve two Antarctic field seasons to image the interior of Antarctic rock
glaciers using ground-penetrating radar, to gather ice cores for chemical
analyses, and to gather surface sediments for dating. The Dry Valleys host the
world?s southernmost terrestrial ecosystem (soil, stream and lake micro-
organisms and mosses); rock glaciers and ground-ice are an important and poorly-
studied source of meltwater and nutrients for these ecosystems. This research
will shed light on the glacial and hydrological history of the Dry Valleys
region and the general environmental conditions the foster rock glaciers,
features that generally occur in warmer and/or wetter locations. The research
will provide support for five graduate/undergraduate students, who will actively
gather data in the field, followed by interpretation, dissemination and
presentation of the data. Additionally, the researchers will participate in a
range of educational activities including outreach with local K-12 in the
Lowell, MA region, such as summer workshops and classroom visits with hands-on
activities. A series of time-lapse images of hydrological processes, and videos
of researchers in the field, will serve as a dramatic centerpiece in community
and school presentations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Paragraph for Scientific
Community:&lt;br/&gt;Rock glaciers are common in the McMurdo Dry Valleys, but
are concentrated in a few isolated regions: western Taylor Valley, western
Wright Valley, Pearse Valley and Bull Pass. The investigators hypothesize that
the origin and age of these features varies by region: that rock glaciers in
Pearse and Taylor valley originated as buried glacier ice, whereas rock glaciers
in Wright Valley formed through permafrost processes, such as mobilization of
ice-rich talus. To address these hypotheses, the project will: 1) develop
relative and absolute chronologies for the rock glaciers through field mapping
and optically stimulated luminescence dating of overlying sediments, 2) assess
the origin of clean-ice cores through stable isotopic analyses, and 3) determine
if present-day soil-moisture and temperature conditions are conducive to rock
glacier formation/preservation. The proposed research will provide insight into
the spatial and temporal distribution of buried glacier ice and melt-water-
derived ground ice in the McMurdo Dry Valleys, with implications for glacial
history, as well as the potential role of rock glaciers in the regional
hydrologic cycle (and the role of ground-ice as a source for moisture and
nutrient for local ecosystems). The project will provide general constraints on
the climatic and hydrologic conditions that foster permafrost rock glaciers,
features that generally occur under warmer and wetter conditions than those
found in the present-day McMurdo Dry Valleys. The application of OSL and
cosmogenic exposure&lt;br/&gt;dating is novel to rock glaciers, geomorphic
features that have proven difficult to date, despite their ubiquity in
Antarctica and their potential scientific importance. The research will provide
support for five graduate/undergraduate students, who will participate in the
field work, followed by interpretation, dissemination and presentation of the
data. The researchers will participate in a range of educational activities
including outreach with local K-12 in the Lowell, MA region, such as summer
workshops and classroom visits with hands-on activities.