* 1341985
* Enabling Nanomanufcaturing for Rapid Innovation (ENRI). To Be Held in  Napa Valley, August 18-21, 2013.
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/15/2013,11/30/2013
* David Ricketts, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Mona Zaghloul
* 11/30/2013
* USD 40,181.00

Nanotechnology is at the center of much of the emerging scientific breakthroughs
of our time.&lt;br/&gt;The ability to manipulate matter at the almost atomic
scale enables a wide range of scientific and&lt;br/&gt;engineering discoveries.
Key to the realization of many breakthroughs is the ability to
rapidly&lt;br/&gt;fabricate and test devices and concepts at the nanoscale. This
proposal seeks to bring together a&lt;br/&gt;diverse body of experts to examine
and move forward the state-of-the art of
nanomanufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Objective: The main objective of this
workshop is to bring together industry, government and academic leaders in
manufacturing and nanotechnology for a two day interactive discussion on
prototyping of emerging devices enabled by precisely integrating nano-scale
structures and materials. The goal of this workshop is to explore ways to take
the techniques and methods developed in the lab and translate them into
nanomanufacturing systems on a scale and cost that allows them to be widely
adopted by organizations, large and small.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: Nanotechnology is at the center of much of the emerging scientific
breakthroughs of our time. The ability to manipulate matter at the almost atomic
scale enables a wide range of scientific and engineering discoveries. Key to the
realization of many breakthroughs is the ability to rapidly&lt;br/&gt;fabricate
and test devices and concepts at the nanoscale. This proposal seeks to bring
together a&lt;br/&gt;diverse body of experts to examine and move forward the
state-of-the art of nanomanufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
While transformative in the lab, nanotechnology has not made its way into the
every-day tool set of aspiring companies. Key to their ability to innovate is
the development of rapid prototypes of nanoscale devices, sensors and
structures. This workshop will bring together experts to enable collaborations
and also cross pollination of ideas. Furthermore, the workshops directive is to
develop a roadmap and action plan for accelerating the development of
nanomanufacturing infrastructure. The workshop will present a report on its
findings and will archive the discussions and paper proceedings for world-wide
distribution.