* 1341649
* Quantifying How Bioenergetics and Foraging Determine Population Dynamics in Threatened Antarctic Albatrosses
* GEO,OPP
* 05/01/2014,05/31/2017
* Sadie Ryan, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Christian Fritsen
* 05/31/2017
* USD 552,327.00

Albatrosses (family Diomedeidae) are among the most threatened of bird species.
Of the 22 species that are currently recognized, all are considered at least
Threatened or Near-Threatened, and 9 are listed as Endangered or Critically
Endangered. Because of the decline in albatross populations and the birds' role
as a top predator in the pelagic ecosystem, it is vitally important to
understand the factors affecting the population dynamics of these birds to
better inform strategies for conservation and mitigating environmental change.
The goal of this project is to answer the question: What are the population
consequences of albatross bioenergetics and foraging strategies? The
investigators will take a two pronged approach: 1) constructing, parameterizing,
and validating an Individual Based Model (IBM) that rests on Dynamic Energy
Budget theory and state dependent foraging theory; and 2) undertaking an in-
depth meta-analysis of existing individual tracking and life history data from
multiple albatross species across successive life stages. This theoretical work
will be grounded with a unique and extensive data set on albatrosses provided by
collaborator Richard Phillips from the British Antarctic Survey. The IBM
approach will incorporate details such as adult energetic state, chick needs and
energetics, reproductive stage, and spatial and temporal variation in prey
availability within a single framework. This facilitates exploration of emergent
patterns, allowing the investigators to explicitly link behavior, energetic, and
population dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bioenergetics constrain a variety of
behaviors. A more complete understanding of how individuals use energy can give
insight into how behaviors from foraging to breeding and survival, and resulting
population attributes, might change with environmental factors, due to
anthropogenic and other drivers. This work will further a general understanding
of how bioenergetics shapes behavior and drives population level processes,
while providing an approach that can be used to guide conservation strategies
for endangered populations. The research findings and activities will be made
accessible to public audiences through websites and on a blog maintained for the
project by a postdoctoral researcher. The project will involve undergraduate and
high school researchers in the project, within formal laboratory groups and also
through in-classroom presentations and activities. This project also involves
outreach to local elementary schools, as the albatross-Antarctic bioenergetics
system provides a charismatic and tangible teaching tool, for exploring a
complex conservation issue, and demonstrating the utility of quantitative
biological research approaches. All project publications will be open access,
the resulting open source software will be released to the public, and metadata
and analyses will be fully documented and made available through the Knowledge
Network for Biodiversity, to promote further collaborative exploration of this
system.