* 1341026
* CC-NIE Network Infrastructure: KGAP: Bridging th Gap in Network Flexibility and Performance for Genomics and Data-Intensive Research at Kansas State University
* CSE,OAC
* 11/01/2013,10/31/2015
* Doina Caragea, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 10/31/2015
* USD 499,113.00

This project utilizes NSF support to enhance the networking capabilities at
Kansas State University to support high-end applications in science and
engineering, particularly bioinformatics, with applications in OpenFlow research
and privacy/security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project adds a pair of high-
performance, low-latency OpenFlow-compatible enterprise routers to provide a
foundation for upgrading KSU's campus core network to 40GbE, and 10GbE to most
major research buildings on campus. KSU is adding another router to set up a
science DMZ for research in OpenFlow and Smart Grid research. This impacts over
24 departments in 16 locations, 8,000 undergrad majors, 2,000 grad students, 700
faculty, and $88M in funded research. This system, along with the expertise
provided by related personnel, serves as a common hybrid network technology
platform for a number of research groups in genomics, smart grids,
GIS/environmental modeling and computer security at K-State and off-campus
partners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project increases KSU's ability to look
deeper in modeling genomes, Smart Grids, GIS economies and computer security
through bringing much greater bandwidth and flexibility to bear, attacking grand
challenges like forecasting responses of ecological systems to genetic changes.
KSU expects to help protect the nation through developing better understanding
of threats to key agricultural products, like the Hessian fly, which attacks
wheat. KSU also plans to gain insight into advanced networking and its
interaction with controlling the effects of brownouts or sabotage on the
electrical grid; and significantly enhance and integrate educational efforts at
all levels for data-driven computing, particularly in bioinformatics.