* 1341427
* Collaborative Research: Climatic and Environmental Constraints on Aboveground-Belowground Linkages and Diversity across a Latitudinal Gradient in Antarctica
* GEO,OPP
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2018
* David Van Horn, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Burns
* 09/30/2018
* USD 242,620.00

The Antarctic Peninsula is experiencing rapid environmental changes, which will
influence the community of organisms that live there. However, we know very
little about the microscopic organisms living in the soil in this region. Soil
biology (including bacteria, fungi, and invertebrates) are responsible for many
important processes that sustain ecosystems, such as nutrient recycling. Without
understanding the environmental conditions that influence soil biodiversity
along the Antarctic Peninsula, our ability to predict the consequences of global
change is strongly limited. This project will identify the soil community at
many sites along the Antarctic Peninsula to discover how the community changes
with environmental conditions from north to south. The project will also
identify how the soil community at each site differs under different types of
plants. Understanding more about the ways in which plant cover and climate
conditions influence soil biodiversity will allow predictions of how communities
will respond to future changes such as climate warming and invasive plant
species. The project will also further the NSF goals of making scientific
discoveries available to the general public and of training new generations of
scientists. The investigators will engage with outreach to K-12 students and the
general public both directly and through a blog and will participate in
workshops for K-12 teachers. Additionally, the project will provide the
opportunity for many undergraduate and graduate students of diverse backgrounds
to be trained in interdisciplinary research.

The investigators will determine the nature and strength of plant-soil linkages
in influencing soil community composition and diversity over a latitudinal
gradient of environmental and climatic conditions. The goals are to (1) increase
our understanding of current biogeography and diversity by providing in-depth
knowledge of soil community composition and complexity as it relates to
environmental and climatic characteristics; and (2) determine the nature of
aboveground-belowground community linkages over varying spatial scales. The team
will identify the composition and diversity of soil communities under key
habitat types (grass, moss, algae, etc.). Microbial communities (bacteria,
fungi, archaea) will be investigated using pyrosequencing for community
composition analysis and metagenomic sequencing to identify functional
capabilities. Invertebrates (nematodes, tardigrades, rotifers, microarthropods)
will be extracted and identified to the lowest possible taxonomic level. Soil
chemistry (pH, nutrient content, soil moisture, etc.) and climate conditions
will be measured to determine the relationship between soil communities and
physical and chemical properties. Structural equation modeling will be used to
identify aboveground-belowground linkage pathways and quantify link strengths
under varying environmental conditions.