* 1341717
* Collaborative Research:  Seasonal Sea Ice Production in the Ross Sea, Antarctica
* GEO,OPP
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2019
* Robin Bell, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Burns
* 05/31/2019
* USD 661,350.00

Proposal Title: Collaborative Research: Seasonal Sea Ice Production in the Ross
Sea, Antarctica (working title changed from submitted
title)&lt;br/&gt;Institutions: UT-San Antonio; Columbia University; Naval
Postgraduate School; Woods Hole Oceanographic Institute;
UC@Boulder&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The one place on Earth consistently showing
increases in sea ice area, duration, and concentration is the Ross Sea in
Antarctica. Satellite imagery shows about half of the Ross Sea increases are
associated with changes in the austral fall, when the new sea ice is forming.
The most pronounced changes are also located near polynyas, which are areas of
open ocean surrounded by sea ice. To understand the processes driving the sea
ice increase, and to determine if the increase in sea ice area is also
accompanied by a change in ice thickness, this project will conduct an
oceanographic cruise to the polynyas of the Ross Sea in April and May, 2017,
which is the austral fall. The team will deploy state of the art research tools
including unmanned airborne systems (UASs, commonly called drones), autonomous
underwater vehicles (AUVs), and remotely operated underwater vehicles (ROVs).
Using these tools and others, the team will study atmospheric, oceanic, and sea
ice properties and processes concurrently. A change in sea ice production will
necessarily change the ocean water below, which may have significant
consequences for global ocean circulation patterns, a topic of international
importance. All the involved institutions will be training students, and all
share the goal of expanding climate literacy in the US, emphasizing the role
high latitudes play in the Earth's dynamic climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
main goal of the project is to improve estimates of sea ice production and water
mass transformation in the Ross Sea. The team will fully capture the spatial and
temporal changes in air-ice-ocean interactions when they are initiated in the
austral fall, and then track the changes into the winter and spring using ice
buoys, and airborne mapping with the newly commissioned IcePod instrument
system, which is deployed on the US Antarctic Program's LC-130 fleet. The
oceanographic cruise will include stations in and outside of both the Terra Nova
Bay and Ross Ice Shelf polynyas. Measurements to be made include air-sea
boundary layer fluxes of heat, freshwater, and trace gases, radiation, and
meteorology in the air; ice formation processes, ice thickness, snow depth, mass
balance, and ice drift within the sea ice zone; and temperature, salinity, and
momentum in the ocean below. Following collection of the field data, the team
will improve both model parameterizations of air-sea-ice interactions and remote
sensing algorithms. Model parameterizations are needed to determine if sea-ice
production has increased in crucial areas, and if so, why (e.g., stronger winds
or fresher oceans). The remote sensing validation will facilitate change
detection over wider areas and verify model predictions over time. Accordingly
this project will contribute to the international Southern Ocean Observing
System (SOOS) goal of measuring essential climate variables continuously to
monitor the state of the ocean and ice cover into the future.