* 1341339
* Collaborative Research:  The Chemical Ecology of Shallow-water Marine Macroalgae and Invertebrates on the Antarctic Peninsula
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Bill Baker, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Burns
* 07/31/2019
* USD 919,067.00

The coastal environments of the western Antarctic Peninsula harbor rich
assemblages of marine animals and algae. The importance of the interactions
between these groups of organisms in the ecology of coastal Antarctica are well
known and often mediated by chemical defenses in the tissues of the algae. These
chemicals are meant to deter feeding by snails and other marine animals making
the Antarctic Peninsula an excellent place to ask important questions about the
functional and evolutionary significance of chemical compound diversity for
marine communities. This project will focus on three main objectives: the first
objective is to expand the current understanding of the relationship between
algae and their associated marine animals. The second objective focuses on the
diversity of chemical compounds used to defend algae from being consumed. The
third objective seeks to understand how marine animals can benefit from these
compounds by consuming the algae that contain them, and then using those
compounds to chemically deter predators. The field components of this research
will be performed during three expeditions to the US Palmer Station, Antarctica.
During these expeditions, a variety of laboratory feeding bioassays,
manipulative field and laboratory experiments, and on-site chemical analyses
will be performed. The investigators will also foster opportunities to integrate
their NSF research with a variety of educational activities. As in the past they
will support undergraduate research, both through NSF programs as well as home,
university-based, programs, and they will also continue to support and foster
graduate education. Through their highly successful University of Alabama in
Antarctica interactive web program (two time recipient of awards of excellence
from the US Council for Advancement and Support of Education), they will
continue to involve large numbers of teachers, K-12 students, and other members
of the community at large in their scientific endeavors in Antarctica. In
addition, the investigators have hosted K-12 teachers on their Antarctic field
teams through the former NSF Teachers Experiencing Antarctica and the Arctic
program and will pursue participation in PolarTREC, the successor to this
valuable program. Moreover, they will actively participate in outreach efforts
by presenting numerous talks on their research to local school and community
groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The near shore environments of the western
Antarctic Peninsula harbor rich assemblages of macroalgae and
macroinvertebrates. The importance of predator-prey interactions and chemical
defenses in mediating community-wide trophic interactions makes the western
Antarctic Peninsula an excellent place to ask important questions about the
functional and evolutionary significance of defensive compound diversity for
marine communities. This project will focus on three main objectives which are a
direct outcome of the past studies of the chemical ecology of shallow-water
marine macroalgae and invertebrates on the Antarctic Peninsula by this group of
investigators. The first objective is to expand the current understanding of a
community-wide mutualism between macroalgae and their associated amphipods to
include gastropods, which are also abundant on many macroalgae. The second
objective focuses on the diversity of chemical compounds used to defend
macroalgae from being consumed, particularly in the common red alga Plocamium
cartilagineum. The third objective seeks to understand the relationship between
P. cartilagineum and the amphipod Paradexamine fissicauda, including the
ecological benefits and costs to P. fissicauda resulting from the ability to
consume P. cartilagineum and other chemically defended red algae. The
investigators will focus on the costs and benefits related to the ability of P.
fissicauda to sequester defensive compounds from the alga P. cartilagineum and
use those chemicals to defend itself from predation. The field components of
this research will be performed during three expeditions to Palmer Station,
Antarctica. During these expeditions, a variety of laboratory feeding bioassays,
manipulative field and laboratory experiments, and on-site chemical analyses
will be performed. Phylogenetic analyses, detailed secondary metabolite chemical
analyses and purifications, and other data analyses will also be performed at
the investigators' home institutions between and after their field seasons.