* 1341215
* RAPID Linked geomorphic-ecological disturbance response as a driver of alterations in aquatic-to-terrestrial energy flux: consequences of dam removal on a mid-size river
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2015
* Mažeika Sulliván, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 07/31/2015
* USD 50,000.00

Dam removal provides an excellent opportunity to study how rivers respond to
environmental disturbance. Despite the increasing popularity of dam removal as a
river restoration approach, many ecosystem responses remain largely unknown.
This RAPID project will investigate the influences of dam removal on short-term
(&lt;1.5 years) responses in channel geomorphology and aquatic- to-terrestrial
flows of carbon and energy. To do this, linked aquatic-terrestrial food webs
will be studied in a mid-size river in Columbus, OH, where a large, lowhead dam
was recently removed. The study team is well positioned to conduct this
research, having collected data in the study system three years prior to dam
removal. The geomorphic influence of dam removal on aquatic-terrestrial
connections, food webs, and riparian ecosystem communities represents novel
research that builds on documented community shifts in fish and other aquatic
biota following dam removal. The intellectual merit of the proposed work lies in
establishing how the disturbance of dam removal drives linked river-riparian
responses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By advancing our understanding of the short-term
effects of the disturbance of dam removal on ecosystem function, this study will
contribute to efforts to maintain and/or restore rivers in human-dominated
environments. The project includes involvement of undergraduate and graduate
students and inclusion of study findings in The Ohio State University (OSU)
coursework. Additionally, local high school students not traditionally exposed
to research and STEM activities will be engaged in project research activities
through an existing partnership with OSU's Upward Bound program. The study team
will also deliver a dam-removal workshop run out of OSU's Shiermeier Olentangy
River Wetland Research Park. This workshop will address ecological consequences
of dam removal and will involve the public, local watershed groups, city
planners, and agency personnel.