* 1341701
* Evolutionary Fates of Hemoglobin and Heme Scavengers in White-blooded Antarctic Icefishes
* GEO,OPP
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2017
* Chi-Hing Cheng, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Christian Fritsen
* 04/30/2017
* USD 362,699.00

This work will broaden our knowledge and insights into genetic trait loss or
change accompanying species evolution in general as well as within the uniquely
isolated and frigid Southern Ocean. The system of oxygen-carrying and related
proteins being studied is very important to human health and the two proteins
being specifically studied in this work (haptoglobin and hemopexin) have crucial
roles in preventing excess iron loading in the kidneys. As such, the project has
the potential to contribute novel insights that could be valuable to medical
science. The project will also further the NSF goals of training new generations
of scientists and of making scientific discoveries available to the general
public. The lead principal investigator on the project is an early career
scientist whose career development will be enhanced by this project. It will
also support the training of several undergraduate students in molecular
biology, protein biochemistry, and appreciation of the unique Antarctic fish
fauna and environment. The project will contribute to a content-rich web site
that will bring to the public the history of biological discoveries and sciences
on fishes of the Southern Ocean and through this project the investigators will
contribute to an annual polar event at a children's science museum.

The Antarctic icefishes have thrived despite the striking evolutionary loss of
the normally indispensable respiratory protein hemoglobin in all species and
myoglobin in some. Studies over the past decades have predominately focused on
the mechanisms behind hemoprotein losses and the resulting compensatory
adaptations in these fish, while evolutionary impact of such losses on the
supporting protein genes and functions has remained unaddressed. This project
investigates the evolutionary fate of two important partner proteins, the
hemoglobin scavenger haptoglobin and the heme scavenger hemopexin (heme groups
are the iron-containing functional group of proteins such as hemoglobin and
myoglobin). With the permanent hemoglobin-null state in Antarctic icefishes, and
particularly in dual hemoglobin- and myoglobin-null species, the preservation of
a functional haptoglobin would seem unessential and the role of hemopexin likely
diminished. This project seeks to resolve whether co-evolutionary loss or
reduction of these supporting proteins occurred with the extinction of the
hemoglobin trait in the icefishes, and the molecular mechanisms underlying such
changes. The investigators envisage the cold and oxygen rich marine environment
as the start of a cascade of relaxation of selection pressures. Initially this
would have obviated the need for maintaining functional oxygen carrying
proteins, ultimately leading to their permanent loss. These events in turn would
have relaxed the maintenance of the network of supporting systems, leading to
additional trait loss or change.