* 1341211
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Mumun Households and the Rise of Inequality in Korea
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2015
* Ji Rachel Lee, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2015
* USD 25,195.00

Under the direction of Dr. Carla Sinopoli, Ji Rachel Lee will examine how
incipient rank affected households in Mumun Period (1780-350 cal. B.C.) Korea.
Salvage excavations in the last 20 years have uncovered some of Korea's earliest
villages, but the development of sociopolitical complexity in Korea is just
beginning to be understood. Significant changes occurred during the Mumun
Period, including a shift to intensive agriculture, an increase in craft
production, and more elaborate burials, leading scholars to conclude that social
inequality had developed by the Middle Mumun Period (850-540 cal. B.C.). Changes
in pithouses also occurred, namely the transition from long, rectangular houses
to small, rounded houses, signaling a shift in household organization. However,
no explanatory framework exists for Mumun households during this period of
important sociopolitical developments. The Nam River Valley in south-central
Korea is ideal for examining these issues, with the largest settlement,
Daepyeong, yielding more than 300 Mumun pithouses. Through excavations, soil
analysis, and spatial analysis, this project will evaluate whether incipient
ranking initiated change or promoted continuity among households at Daepyeong
and two smaller settlements - Pyeonggeo-dong and Chojeon-dong via three
analytical spheres: household morphology, household activity, and household
ideology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will provide a unique look at how
social inequality develops through the lens of one of the most enduring social
formations -the household. Beyond just closing a data gap in the East Asian
anthropological and archaeological record, this project will contribute research
that is original by documenting the process of becoming unequal at multiple
temporal and spatial scales. Household change and continuity through almost
1,000 years of Mumun Period occupation will be examined. Added to this temporal
axis, I will also examine how incipient rank affected households from both elite
and non-elite contexts. This project will thus provide multiple perspectives on
household evolution - (1) before the emergence of rank, (2) after the emergence
of rank, (3) elite contexts, (4) non-elite contexts, (5) large village
settlement, and (6) small village settlement. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through
research partnerships with Korean cultural resource management companies, this
project will provide training to Korean archaeologists in micromorphology and
micro-artifact analysis, offering ways in which detailed household data can be
obtained even within the context of fast-paced salvage archaeology. This project
will also be instrumental in training Korean archaeologists in Geographic
Information Systems (GIS), helping to facilitate a faster and more efficient way
data can be stored and managed. Finally, household data from more than 300
pithouses will be organized in a GIS and shared with Korean archaeologists who
are interested in Mumun Period household research.