* 1341803
* Education and Outreach in Climate Dynamics
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2018
* Hanne Mauriello, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 09/30/2018
* USD 210,000.00

This award sets aside funds at the Joint Office for Science Support (JOSS) at
the University Corporation for Atmospheric Research (UCAR) to support travel for
early-career scientists seeking to participate in meetings and field campaigns
related to the NSF Climate and Large-scale Dynamics (CLD) program. Travel
support will also be provided for senior scientists to engage in teaching and
mentoring activities intended to further the careers of junior scientists. The
travel support to be provided through this grant is motivated by the fact that
educational, mentoring, and outreach opportunities often arise quickly, and the
financial resources needed to enable these activities are often not readily
available. With funding of this proposal, JOSS can react quickly to provide
junior and senior scientists subsidies for travel and related costs to
participate in a field project or scientific gathering in any part of the world.
Requests for travel support would be evaluated on the basis of the quality of
scientific opportunities at the workshop, meeting, or project; the academic
merit of the junior scientist, including demonstrated independence, projected
achievement and probability of success; and a credible plan for the solicitation
and selection of applicants, including appropriate emphasis on diversity and
geographical distribution. Requests typically come from the organizers of
workshops or field campaigns, who contact CLD staff to discuss their needs and
eligibility.

The broader impact of the proposed activity lies in the benefit to the climate
dynamics and related scientific communities in providing opportunities for
students and junior scientists to gain 1) exposure to cutting edge research; 2)
a broader view of the connections between their work and the larger scientific
issues of the day; 3) access to senior scientists with valuable insights on
scientific and professional issues; and 4) a chance to network with their peers
at different institutions. In addition to these benefits to the scientific
community, the work has societal benefit due to the increasing demand for
expertise in climate science from stakeholders and policy makers concerned about
the human consequences of climate variability and change.