* 1341038
* CC-NIE Networking Infrastructure: UCI LightPath: A Dedicated Campus Science DMZ Network for Big Data Transfer
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2015
* Anyes Taffard, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 12/31/2015
* USD 499,999.00

This project establishes a new Science DMZ network infrastructure with increased
bandwidth (UCI LightPath) at the University of California, Irvine to address the
increasing demand for bandwidth and data-transfer performance within and beyond
campus. The project also implements a new 10Gbps link from campus to the High
Performance Research tier of the California Research and Education Network
(CalREN-HPR) to boost science data transfer and analysis. Together these
improvements to the networking infrastructure significantly enhance and expedite
scientific data transfer by avoiding bottlenecks and potential performance
impacting devices in the data-transfer path. The project allows campus IT
personnel to explore and deploy new technologies such as the Software Defined
Network (SDN) and IPv6, and to collaborate with researchers to better support
their research activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The improved Science DMZ network
infrastructure directly impacts a variety of cutting-edge data intensive
research efforts across campus by enabling more complex modeling and analysis of
big data sets, and facilitating data exchange among collaborative research
groups in the areas of Experimental Particle Physics at the Large Hadron
Collider, Genomics and Bioinformatics, Hydrologic Modeling and Remote Sensing,
Flow and Combustion Dynamics of Liquid Fuels, Biomolecular Simulations, Climate
Modeling, and Cosmology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project integrates IT
research and education through an organized IT work-study program in the Office
of Information Technology, which provides a platform to train future network
engineers and operators. The project also supports existing K-12 outreach
programs by enabling the transfer of data created in the lab to the programs for
use in their curricula.