* 1341777
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant:  Human Adaptations to Arid Climates
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2015
* Theodore Marks, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2015
* USD 20,255.00

While there is clear evidence of human occupation of the hyper-arid Namib Desert
of western Namibia stretching back more than a hundred thousand years ago to the
Middle Pleistocene epoch, very little is known about how early people were able
to adapt to the harsh climatic conditions there. The newly discovered site of
Erb Tanks Rockshelter, the only known archaeological site from the Central Namib
region with dated layers from both the Middle and Later Stone Ages of the
Pleistocene, offers the opportunity to provide insight about how human groups
adapted to life in the desert through their patterns of land use and resource
acquisition strategies. Since, primarily for historical reasons, most
paleoanthropological research in southern Africa has focused on regions with
much milder environmental conditions, new research in the extreme conditions of
the Namib will greatly enhance understanding of the full range of adaptive
capabilities possessed by early modern human groups. This, in turn, will
contribute to answering fundamental anthropological questions of how, why, and
when humans gained the abilities to successfully adapt to nearly any environment
on Earth and survive through major climatic shifts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the
Fall of 2013, advised by Dr. James Enloe and with the collaboration of
colleagues and students from the University of Namibia and the Swakopmund
Municipal Museum, Theodore Marks will undertake a field survey to identify and
locate the sources of raw materials that people at Erb Tanks used for
manufacturing stone tools. In the field and with samples in the laboratory, Mr.
Marks will employ cutting-edge geochemical analyses, including portable X-Ray
Fluorescence (pXRF), Inductively-Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometry (ICP-MS), and
Neutron Activation Analysis (NAA), to identify the chemical "fingerprints" of
the individual sources of stone that people exploited in the past for making
tools. By comparing the chemical fingerprints of source samples with the
chemical fingerprints of stone raw materials in the archaeological collection at
Erb Tanks, the research team led by Dr. Enloe and Mr. Marks will be able to
identify where particular rocks in the prehistoric toolkit were sourced and
begin to re-trace the movements of ancient populations across the desert
landscape. These data will enable the team to learn a great deal about where
human hunter-gatherers focused their activities on the landscape, how they went
about acquiring vital resources, and how these patterns changed through time,
possibly in response to long-term climatic changes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Apart
from addressing basic regional and global research questions, this project will
have broader impacts for both American and Namibian scientists. For Mr. Marks,
the project will serve as his doctoral dissertation research and form the
culmination of his graduate training. The project will also involve side-by-side
collaboration with senior Namibian colleagues and training of undergraduate
students from the University of Namibia. This partnership will enhance
international scientific relationships as well as help develop independent
research capacity and familiarity with modern analytical methods for the next
generation of Namibian archaeologists.