* 1341018
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Population genomics of a baboon hybrid zone in Zambia
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Jane Phillips-Conroy, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2016
* USD 24,138.00

Hybridization, defined as interbreeding between genetically distinct
populations, is increasingly recognized as a common occurrence in plants and
animals that is important for understanding the speciation process. While most
speciation probably results from physical barriers to genetic interchange, this
separation is not always absolute and the possibility of hybridization is ever-
present. In primates, ongoing hybridization has been identified in most major
taxonomic groups and recent studies are increasingly detecting episodes of
ancient hybridization in the genomes of living primates, including humans. The
mechanisms of hybridization and its role in shaping primate evolutionary
histories, however, remain unresolved.

This research by doctoral student Kenneth Chiou (Washington University in St.
Louis), under the supervision of Dr. Jane Phillips-Conroy, uses hybridization as
a 'natural experiment' for understanding the spatial structure of genetic
variation in Kinda and gray-footed chacma baboons, which hybridize in and around
Kafue National Park, Zambia. Like humans, baboons inhabit diverse environments,
have long life histories and complex social organizations, and share a recent
common ancestor, making them ideal models for understanding global patterns of
genetic variation in humans. Using the latest DNA sequencing techniques, tens of
thousands of markers from across the nuclear and mitochondrial genomes are typed
from individuals across the hybrid zone. These markers are used to better
understand the roles of local adaptation and of differences in social
organization in structuring genetic variation within species, between species,
and in interspecific hybrids.

This study provides an innovative framework for characterizing the influences of
various processes on genetic variation. As one of the first genomic studies of a
wild primate hybrid zone, this study increases our understanding of natural
hybridization and generates the first genetic data for large areas of a major
baboon contact zone. DNA sequence data are deposited in public databases and all
software is made freely available under open source licenses. By creating
opportunities for collaboration and outreach in both the United States and
abroad, this project helps promote scientific literacy and the maintenance of
biodiversity.