* 1341368
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:   Terrestrial Exposure-Age Constraints on the last Glacial Maximum Extent of the Antarctic Ice Sheet in the Western Ross Sea
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2014,10/31/2014
* Nathaniel Lifton, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Kurz
* 10/31/2014
* USD 90,680.00

The investigators will map glacial deposits and date variations in glacier
variability at several ice-free regions in northern Victoria Land, Antarctica.
These data will constrain the nature and timing of past ice thickness changes
for major glaciers that drain into the northwestern Ross Sea. This is important
because during the Last Glacial Maximum (15,000 - 18,000 years ago) these
glaciers were most likely flowing together with grounded ice from both the East
and West Antarctic Ice Sheets that expanded across the Ross Sea continental
shelf to near the present shelf edge. Thus, the thickness of these glaciers was
most likely controlled in part by the extent and thickness of the Ross Sea ice
sheet and ice shelf. The data the PIs propose to collect can provide constraints
on the position of the grounding line in the western Ross Sea during the Last
Glacial Maximum, the time that position was reached, and ice thickness changes
that occurred after that time. The primary intellectual merit of this project
will be to improve understanding of a period of Antarctic ice sheet history that
is relatively unconstrained at present and also potentially important in
understanding past ice sheet-sea level interactions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal will support an early career researcher's ongoing program of
undergraduate education and research that is building a socio-economically
diverse student body with students from backgrounds underrepresented in the
geosciences. This proposal will also bring an early career researcher into
Antarctic research.