* 1341432
* Collaborative Proposal: A Field and Laboratory Examination of the Diatom N and Si Isotope Proxies: Implications for Assessing the Southern Ocean Biological Pump
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2021
* Mark Brzezinski, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Jackson
* 12/31/2021
* USD 505,512.00

Collaborative Proposal: A field and laboratory examination of the diatom N and
Si isotope proxies: Implications for assessing the Southern Ocean biological
pump&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The rise in atmospheric carbon dioxide concentrations
and associated climate changes make understanding the role of the ocean in large
scale carbon cycle a priority. Geologic samples allow exploration of potential
mechanisms for carbon dioxide drawdown during glacial periods through the use of
geochemical proxies. Nitrogen and silicon isotope signatures from fossil diatoms
(microscopic plants) are used to investigate changes in the physical supply and
biological demand for nutrients (like nitrogen and silicon and carbon) in the
Southern Ocean. The project will evaluate the use the nitrogen and silicon
isotope proxies through a series of laboratory experiments and Southern Ocean
field sampling. The results will provide quantification of real relationships
between nitrogen and silicon isotopes and nutrient usage in the Southern Ocean
and allow exploration of the role of other factors, including biological
diversity, ice cover, and mixing, in altering the chemical signatures recorded
by diatoms. Seafloor sediment samples will be used to evaluate how well the
signal created in the water column is recorded by fossil diatoms buried in the
seafloor. Improving the nutrient isotope proxies will allow for a more
quantitative understanding of the role of polar biology in regulating natural
variation in atmospheric carbon dioxide. The project will also result in the
training of a graduate student and development of outreach materials targeting a
broad popular audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to test the
fidelity of the diatom nitrogen and silicon isotope proxies, two commonly used
paleoceanographic tools for investigating the role of the Southern Ocean
biological pump in regulating atmospheric CO2 concentrations on glacial-
interglacial timescales. Existing ground-truthing data, including culture
experiments, surface sediment data and downcore reconstructions, all suggest
that nutrient utilization is the primary driver of isotopic variation in the
Southern Ocean. However, strong contribution of interspecific variation is
implied by recent culture results. Moreover, field and laboratory studies
present some contradictory results in terms of the relative importance of
interspecific variation and of inferred post-depositional alteration of the
nutrient isotope signals. Here, a first order test of the N and Si diatom
nutrient isotope paleo-proxies, involving water column dissolved and particulate
sampling and laboratory culturing of field-isolates, is proposed. Southern Ocean
water, biomass, live diatoms and fossil diatom sampling will be conducted to
investigate species and assemblage related variability in diatom nitrogen and
silicon isotopes and their relationship to surface nutrient fields and early
diagenesis. Access to fresh materials produced in an analogous environmental
context to the sediments of primary interest is critical for making robust
paleoceanographic reconstructions. Field sampling will occur along 175Â°W,
transecting the Antarctic Circumpolar Current from the subtropics to the
marginal ice edge. Collection of water, sinking/suspended particles and multi-
core samples from 13 stations and 3 shipboard incubation experiments will be
used to test four proposed hypotheses that together evaluate the significance of
existing culture results and seek to allow the best use of diatom nutrient
isotope proxies in evaluating the biological pump.