* 1341406
* Support for Student and Postdoc Participation in the 9th IEEE International Conference on Automation Science and Engineering (IEEE CASE 2013)
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Leyuan Shi, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Edwin Romeijn
* 12/31/2013
* USD 10,008.00

This grant provides travel support to enable students and postdocs to attend the
9th IEEE International Conference on Automation Science and Engineering (IEEE
CASE 2013) that will be held in Wisconsin, Madison, 17-21 August 2013. These
funds will go a long way in reducing the travel cost burden on students and
postdocs and thereby improve student and postdoc participation in the
conference. It is expected that 20 students and postdocs will benefit from these
travel funds. Students and postdocs form an integral part of the IEEE community
and conferences. They participate in different ways, including presenting papers
and posters related to graduate and undergraduate research, attending technical
sessions, participating in paper competitions, scholarship award functions and
so on. Strong student and postdoc participation at IEEE CASE has motivated some
to pursue graduate school options and even academic careers. NSF support will
help ensure a high student and postdoc participation in IEEE CASE 2013.

IEEE CASE provides an excellent opportunity for students and postdocs to broaden
the impact of their work. Being an important annual conferences in the field of
IE, it is a venue for US and international researchers in both academia and
industry to showcase research results and exchange ideas. The venue of IEEE CASE
will bring together practitioners, vendors, and researchers in all related
disciplines in industry, academia, government, and other organizations. IEEE
CASE is an excellent opportunity for students and postdocs to network with
peers, potential employers, or future collaborators. Through the travel grant,
the IEEE community will be able to increase the student and postdoc
participation in the conference.

&#8195;