* 1341918
* Collaborative Research: SuperDARN Space Weather Radar - Operations, Research, and Community Support
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/2015,06/30/2022
* J. Michael Ruohoniemi, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Mangala Sharma
* 06/30/2022
* USD 2,821,605.00

The coupling of the solar wind with Earth's magnetic field gives rise to a range
of disturbance effects in Earth's near-space environment. Some of the most
dramatic and technologically harmful aspects of this space weather occur in the
ionosphere from mid-latitudes to the polar cap. The HF radar technique as
implemented in the Super Dual Auroral Radar Network (SuperDARN) has demonstrated
its value for making always-on, global-scale observations of ionospheric space
weather and for advancing our understanding of the underlying geophysical
processes. The participants in the international SuperDARN collaboration jointly
operate networks in both the northern and southern hemispheres that now total 35
radars. Over the past five years the scope of SuperDARN has greatly increased
with the NSF-sponsored construction of a mid-latitude chain of radars that spans
the United States. The collaboration on this award counts Virginia Tech as the
lead-PI institution and Dartmouth College, University of Alaska Fairbanks, and
the Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory as collaborating PI
institutions. Significant benefits are expected from combining efforts and
sharing expertise within this consortium that brings together, for the first
time, all the NSF-funded SuperDARN groups within one organizational structure.
The award will ensure the continued operation of the 11 radars in North America
that this group collectively is responsible for. The US SuperDARN group also
provides leadership of the international SuperDARN collaboration. The radar
measurements of the rapidly expanding SuperDARN network constitute a unique
dataset that will support many important science investigations within a wide
range of Geospace research areas. In addition, the project will support the
education and training of students and postdocs at all of the participating
institutions as well as many others in a broad variety of scientific,
engineering, and team-building aspects of space science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SuperDARN utilizes coherent backscatter techniques to
track the ExB drift of ionospheric plasma, and in its standard mode of
operation, each radar measures the line-of-sight plasma velocity at 75 ranges
along each of 16 beam directions covering an area of about 3500 km in range and
about 56 degrees in azimuth. The radars operate continuously, 24 hours per day
and 7 days per week and deliver images of the high-latitude convection pattern
with a two-minute time resolution. The network of SuperDARN radars constitutes a
unique global-scale instrument to observe and understand the system-level
effects of solar wind-magnetosphere-ionosphere coupling and to study space
weather in the ionosphere. By providing direct measurements of convection
velocities over large regions, SuperDARN provides the best means available to
determine ionospheric convection patterns. Through this award operations of the
system will be secured for the next five years, including both routine
maintenance as well as some necessary technical upgrades. The measurements will
be provided together with advanced and improved analysis tools to enable and
facilitate research by the broader community to make major advances on a broad
range of science questions at the forefront of ionospheric research. Planned
topics of investigations include: magnetosphere-ionosphere coupling, improved
models of storm-time ionospheric plasma convection, ionosphere-thermosphere
interactions, magnetic conjugacy studies, and ionospheric plasma instabilities
and irregularities.