* 1341878
* Assimilation of Doppler Radar Data with an Ensemble-based Variational Method for Storm-scale Numerical Weather Prediction
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/2014,02/28/2019
* Jidong Gao, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 02/28/2019
* USD 480,941.00

Most currently employed convective-scale data assimilation (DA) schemes were
developed primarily for application to larger-scale atmospheric flows and
weather phenomena, in which sharply contrasting balances and constraints are
relevant. Moreover, at convective scales Doppler radar is the only widely
available means of providing extensive observations of sufficiently high spatial
and temporal resolution needed to facilitate dynamic prediction of high-impact
weather phenomena such as severe thunderstorms. As such, the effective
assimilation of Doppler radar data into convection-resolving models is of
increasing importance, yet underutilized. Building upon their previous work on
convective-scale DA, these researchers will explore new approaches to optimally
assimilate operationally-collected WSR-88D Doppler radar data available from a
newly-upgraded national network employing dual-polarization technology, and in
particular will: (i) Determine how to best use reflectivity observations in
addition to radial velocity data; (ii) examine the usefulness of the background
tendency information in a storm-scale DA system; and (iii) implement an
efficient ensemble-based hybrid three-dimensional variational/Ensemble Kalman
Filter (3DVAR/EnKF) framework that incorporates existing mesoscale ensemble
forecast information into a storm-scale three-dimensional variational DA
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Intellectual Merit of this effort centers upon
developing a novel DA strategy that makes optimal use of both radar reflectivity
and radial velocity fields, which are uniquely suitable for specifying rapidly
evolving convective-scale flows, in order to provide initial conditions for
high-resolution storm-scale NWP models such as the NSF/NCAR Weather Research and
Forecasting (WRF) model--a system that enjoys use in both research and
operational settings. This approach seeks to improve our physical understanding
of convective storm-scale dynamics and is further aimed toward improved
detection and anticipation of thunderstorm-related hazards as well as more
accurate quantitative precipitation forecasts needed for hydrological
applications. This work may also help to solve the initial "balance problem"
that is inherent in convective numerical weather prediction (NWP), but has
heretofore been largely overlooked by the research community. Broader Impacts of
this work include deriving maximum benefit from the considerable U.S. investment
in the nationwide WSR-88D radar network by accelerating the use of these data in
both operational and research-based NWP. This project will embody educational
benefits through mentoring of graduate students and a postdoctoral research
associate, and emerging results will be integrated into teaching materials and
publications reaching broad audiences.