* 1341742
* The Functional role of Moss in structuring Biotic interactions, and Terrestrialization of Antarctica
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2019
* Sarah Eppley, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Peter Milne
* 06/30/2019
* USD 498,561.00

Despite the harsh conditions, over one hundred plant species occur in
Antarctica, although they are restricted to the milder areas on the Antarctic
Peninsula and coastal islands. As the Antarctic continent becomes warmer and
wetter due to climate change, plants are colonizing newly exposed ground, and
are predicted to become more dominant. However, little is known about how
warming will affect Antarctic plant communities or how increasing overall
terrestrial communities of a continent, as is occurring in Antarctica via
warming, will progress. Using experiments to artificially increase temperatures
in plant communities in an international collaboration with biologists from
Chile, this project will focus on understanding how warming will affect
reproduction and chemistry of Antarctic plants. Through understanding the
impacts of warming on plant biology, the project will address the critical issue
of how a warming climate will impact the on-going re-vegetation of a rapidly
changing continent. The project will further the NSF goal of training new
generations of scientists by training multiple graduate and undergraduate
students. As a central part of this research effort, the investigators will
develop graduate student training and collaboration between institutions in
Chile and the U.S including bringing students from Chile to be trained in new
techniques in their laboratories in the U.S as well as allowing U.S. students to
travel to Chile for research collaboration.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Climate change
is shifting species distributions worldwide, and as temperatures continue to
increase an unprecedented large-scale effect on these shifting species
assemblages is predicted. Mosses are the dominant vegetation in polar regions
but in contrast to Arctic systems, we know relatively little about the role of
Antarctic mosses in organizing communities and less still on how warming
influences Antarctic moss communities. The investigators will use Open Top
Chamber passive warming experiments, which have been installed for five years by
their Chilean collaborator on King George and Livingston Islands, and will
concentrate on how warming impacts bryophyte productivity, sexual systems, and
secondary chemistries, and on how these changes affect community processes. A
suite of ecological, physiological, and molecular approaches will be used to
examine how warming impacts species-specific moss function, community assembly,
and ultimately, the moss-mediated engineering of the Antarctic ecosystem. The
team will test three integrated research hypotheses: 1) Warming will alter moss
species composition, moss sex ratio, and differentially impact moss productivity
and reproductive success in Antarctica; 2) Warming will impact the production of
moss secondary compounds, influencing the dynamics of biotic interactions and
biosphere-atmosphere exchange in terrestrial Antarctica; and 3) Warming will
alter moss-microbe interactions, resulting in alterations to the moss food web
and community dynamics in terrestrial Antarctica. These data will be the first
comprehensive measures of how Antarctic mosses engineer their environment and
thereby drive terrestrial responses to warming.