* 1341990
* CAREER: Spin-Torque Oscillator Arrays
* ENG,ECCS
* 12/23/2012,12/31/2016
* David Ricketts, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 12/31/2016
* USD 326,316.00

This research investigates magnetostatic spin-wave generation, propagation,
interaction and absorption in multi-layer Giant magnetoresistance (GMR) and
Tunnel magnetoresistance (TMR) spin-torque oscillator (STO) arrays. With the
recent demonstration of spin-torque transfer and self-sustained oscillators, a
new class of oscillator has emerged with extreme tunability and potential for
excellent RF performance. Recent results have shown, however, that the potential
of these new devices is limited by the large phase noise of individual devices
due to the small amount of energy stored in a single device. A potential
solution is the phase-locking of many STOs in a large array. This research
focuses on the fundamental science of STO-STO interaction in multi-device arrays
with the goal of laying the foundation for controllable, scalable arrays of STO
oscillators. Specifically, this research proposal focuses on three tasks
investigating fundamental science of spin-wave STO interaction: 1) Study of
magnetostatic surface wave dynamics on multi-layer STO stacks, 2) Study of
magnetostatic surface wave stimulated emission by an STO, and 3) Spatial
dependence and scaling of STO-STO interactions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: This research will develop fundamental
knowledge about magnetostatic spin wave propagation in multi-layer GMR/TMR
stacks such as dependence of wavenumber, decay, directionality on various
parameters and also the best possible film configuration for transferring spin
wave energy to adjacent STOs. In addition the proposed study on STO-wave
interaction will develop new understanding about spin wave emission efficiency
of a single STO, spin wave scattering/absorption/amplification by a single STO,
frequency pulling effect of a STO under spin wave field as well as non-linear
interaction of an excited particle (STO) with a continuous plane wave.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: This research will develop STO arrays,
with low phase noise oscillators and high tunability for spectrum-agile RF
systems. Combined with these research programs is an integrated effort for the
development of new interdisciplinary courses that focus on the fundamentals of
device physics and their applications, the creation of virtual laboratories that
enable students around the globe to explore these fundamental concepts, and the
introduction of elementary and high school students in local communities to the
exciting field of magnetics and electronics. Furthermore, an integrated research
and educational program will provide direct access for students, in local
communities and around the globe, to investigate fundamentals of nanoscale
devices through web-deployed virtual laboratories and educational tutorials. The
educational efforts will focus on developing experiential learning activities
for students via virtual labs to enable students to learn concepts through
experimentation and exploration, complimenting traditional lecture based
educational methods.