* 1341984
* Travel Support for Mobile Micro-Robotics Challenge at IEEE ICRA 2013
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2013,08/31/2014
* Dan Popa, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Chirikjian
* 08/31/2014
* USD 10,000.00

This project proposes to provide competitive travel support for student teams
wishing to compete in the Mobile Micro-Robotics Challenge. The challenge
involves advances in the design and fabrication of microelectromechanical
systems (MEMS) enabling the development of mobile micro-robots that can
autonomously navigate and manipulate in controlled environments. It is expected
that this technology will be critical in applications as varied as intelligent
sensor networks, in vivo medical diagnosis and treatment, and adaptive
microelectronics. However, many challenges remain, particularly with respect to
locomotion, power storage, embedded intelligence, and motion measurement,
therefore, it is valuable to help enable participation by defraying travel
costs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this grant include the
ability of research teams to showcase working demonstrations that support the
challenge themes of micro-scale actuation, manipulation and locomotion. Travel
assistance will increase the exposure of US student teams to international
competitors, likely increasing the knowledge and competitiveness of the US-based
teams since this event has traditionally been dominated by teams from Europe.
The multi-day competitions will be held during the IEEE ICRA conference
providing an excellent opportunity to engage a broad technical audience. The
competitions are open to the general public to raise awareness of the state-of-
the-art. The competitions provide an opportunity for students and leaders to
learn how micro-robotics can play an important role in society.