* 1341474
* Collaborative Research:  Phytoplankton Phenology in the Antarctic: Drivers, Patterns, and Implications for the Adelie Penguin
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Heather Lynch, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Burns
* 07/31/2018
* USD 108,019.00

The aim of study is to understand how climate-related changes in snow and ice
affect predator populations in the Antarctic, using the Adélie penguin as a
focal species due to its long history as a Southern Ocean 'sentinel' species and
the number of long-term research programs monitoring its abundance,
distribution, and breeding biology. Understanding the environmental factors that
control predator population dynamics is critically important for projecting the
state of populations under future climate change scenarios, and for designing
better conservation strategies for the Antarctic ecosystem. For the first time,
datasets from a network of observational sites for the Adélie penguin across the
entire Antarctic will be combined and analyzed, with a focus on linkages among
the ice environment, primary production, and the population responses of Adélie
penguins. The project will also further the NSF goals of making scientific
discoveries available to the general public and of training new generations of
scientists. The results of this project can be used to illustrate intuitively to
the general public the complex interactions between ice, ocean, pelagic food web
and top predators. This project also offers an excellent platform to demonstrate
the process of climate-change science - how scientists simulate climate change
scenarios and interpret model results. This project supports the training of
undergraduate and graduate students in the fields of polar oceanography,
plankton and seabird ecology, coupled physical-biological modeling and
mathematical ecology. The results will be broadly disseminated to the general
oceanographic research community through scientific workshops, conferences and
peer-reviewed journal articles, and to undergraduate and graduate education
communities, K-12 schools and organizations, and the interested public through
web-based servers using existing infrastructure at the investigators'
institutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key question to be addressed in this
project is how climate impacts the timing of periodic biological events
(phenology) and how interannual variation in this periodic forcing influences
the abundance of penguins in the Antarctic. The focus will be on the timing of
ice algae and phytoplankton blooms because the high seasonality of sea ice and
associated pulsed primary productivity are major drivers of the Antarctic food
web. This study will also examine the responses of Adélie penguins to changes in
sea ice dynamics and ice algae-phytoplankton phenology. Adélie penguins, like
many other Antarctic seabirds, are long-lived, upper trophic-level predators
that integrate the effects of sea ice on the food web at regional scales, and
thus serve as a reliable biological indicator of environmental changes. The
proposed approach is designed to accommodate the limits of measuring and
modeling the intermediate trophic levels between phytoplankton and penguins
(e.g., zooplankton and fish) at the pan-Antarctic scale, which are important but
latent variables in the Southern Ocean food web. Through the use of remotely
sensed and in situ data, along with state of the art statistical approaches
(e.g. wavelet analysis) and numerical modeling, this highly interdisciplinary
study will advance our understanding of polar ecosystems and improve the
projection of future climate change scenarios.