* 1341882
* EAGER: Building Learning in Urban Extended Spaces
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Kevin Leander, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Sushil K Prasad
* 08/31/2016
* USD 299,657.00

In this Cyberlearning: Transforming Education-funded EAGER Project, the PIs are
carrying out first steps in understanding how to use the archives of cities to
draw inner-city youth into inquiry and expressive activities in the context of
documenting the interesting history, geography, civics, and so on, of the places
they live. The work is being carried out in Nashville, Tennessee. It is a
collaborative effort of Vanderbilt University and city of Nashville, represented
by The Country Music Hall of Fame and The Nashville Library System. The project
uses what is known about how people learn to inform the design of technology and
pedagogy in support of "place-based education" -- education that takes advantage
of the place where learners live to promote learning and sustain their
engagement. In this approach to place-based education, learners are taking on
the curatorial practices of museum and library curators and using those
practices to learn both the history of their city and also how to synthesize
across information sources and express themselves in ways that are engaging and
educational for others. New knowledge is being created about youth authoring and
its potential for promoting learning and also about bringing the wealth of
interesting city and cultural archives to the people who live in a city and its
visitors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Social media and "curation" applications have
drawn the interest of many youth. The PIs in this project recognize potential in
these technologies and in the interests of young people in curating collections
for promoting learning of history, civics, geography, and other content and at
the same time learning to synthesize across information sources and express
themselves well. They envision a technical and socio-technical infrastructure
for a new kind of informal after-school learning environment in which technology
provides structure and aid as learners explore the archives of their city and
compose compelling narratives to teach others, and social and interaction
structures (the pedagogy) empower learners to engage in telling the stories of
their city. The work is timely, as the tools that bring location-aware media
together with mobile, personal information devices are becoming more capable and
sophisticated at a rapid rate. The tool designs and pedagogy that are created
through this project and follow-on projects will be applicable to supporting
youth initiatives, both formal and informal, throughout our country and
internationally.