* 1341067
* Physical and Mathematical Principles of Brain Structure and Function - Spring 2013 in Arlington, VA
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2014
* Herbert Levine, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 04/30/2014
* USD 182,520.00

The Workshop: "Physical and Mathematical Principles of Brain Structure and
Function" will take place between May 5 and May 7, 2013 in Arlington, VA.
Understanding how the human brain works has emerged as a major international
focus of research in the coming decade, identified as such in President Obama's
State of the Union Address in February 2013 and further developed in President
Obama's BRAIN initiative announced on April 2, 2013. This workshop will bring
together more than one hundred scientists to discuss how to enable major
progress in understanding the brain, an important intellectual challenge of the
21st century. This conference of leading neuroscientists, mathematicians,
physicists, materials scientists etc. will identify the specific intellectual
challenges that can be met in the coming decades with focused effort. Panels of
neuroscientists with expertise in different experimental approaches and model
systems will identify important long-term goals that would transform their
respective fields and drive progress across neuroscience. In addition, many
important questions in neuroscience cannot be pursued with current tools.
Bringing together neuroscientists and technologists will catalyze discussions
that spur us towards transformative new scientific insights. Advances in systems
neuroscience made by integrating existing technologies and devising new methods
will provide an intellectual foundation. The workshop will also include many
young scientists along with the established leaders in the
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being jointly supported by the
Physics of Living Systems program in the Division of Physics in the Mathematical
and Physical Sciences Directorate and by the Division of Integrative Organismal
Systems in the Directorate for Biological Sciences.