* 1341888
* AHSS: Development of Novel Finite Element Simulation Tools that Implement Crystal Plasticity Constitutive Theories Using an Efficient Spectral Framework
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/31/2012,08/31/2014
* Surya Kalidindi, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Siegmund
* 08/31/2014
* USD 157,014.00

Predictive tools used in simulating wrought alloy manufacturing processes and
final product performance predominantly employ phenomenological constitutive
theories. Such models are proving inadequate for various applications. On the
other hand, physics based crystal plasticity models have enjoyed remarkable
success in predicting anisotropic mechanical response and the concurrent
evolution of the underlying crystallographic texture in finite plastic
deformation of several polycrystalline metals. However, these tools are
extremely computationally expensive. It is proposed to develop spectral crystal
plasticity based finite element tools for simulating deformation processing
operations and mechanical performance of Advanced High Strength Steels (AHSS)
with computational times that are comparable to the tools currently used by the
industry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;AHSS represent a broad class of steels with
dramatic improvements in properties over traditional steels. The proposed
collaboration with two major industries will ensure that the tools developed
will be rapidly adopted into the commercial environment. The proposed
interdisciplinary research cuts across materials science, mechanical engineering
and applied mathematics and will contribute significantly to the development of
skilled human resources in critical science and technology fields. Furthermore,
funding for this proposal will positively impact the initiatives already
underway at Drexel University to ensure inclusion of traditionally under-
represented minorities and women in engineering.&lt;br/&gt;