* 1341789
* CNIC: U.S.-Swedish Engineering Research on Spin Blockaded Transport and Onset of Wigner Crystallization in All Electric Spin Valves
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2014
* Marc Cahay, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 08/31/2014
* USD 53,304.00

To realize the full potential of spin-based devices, ways must be found to
inject, manipulate, and detect the spin of the electron by purely electrical
means. Recently, the Principal Investigator (PI) successfully demonstrated that
lateral spin orbit coupling (LSOC) can be used to create a strongly spin-
polarized current by purely electrical means; that is, in the absence of any
applied magnetic field. The PI proposes to extend these studies to spin valve
structures composed of a quantum dot or wire coupled to the source and drain via
asymmetrically biased quantum point contacts (QPCs). With an asymmetric bias on
the gates of the two QPCs, their spin filtering, when combined with Coulomb
blockaded transport through the active channel, should lead to spin-blockaded
transport through the spin valve. When operated close to threshold, all
electrical spin valves could also be used to investigate new many-body effects,
such as electrically controlled spontaneous spin polarization, Wigner
crystallization and formation of spin lattices in nanoscale devices, which are
burgeoning fields of spintronics research.

Intellectual Merit: The proposed planning visit to initiate research with
Swedish partners at the University of Linkoping to provide the first theoretical
investigation of the Coulomb/Spin Blockades and Wigner Crystallization regimes
of operation in all-electric spin valves in the presence of LSOC. Since these
many-body effects cannot be modeled using a one-particle Hamiltonian approach,
the cooperative technical approach will be to develop a theoretical framework
based on a multi-particle Fock space and steady-state rate equations, and to
calculate the conductance of these spin valves. Theoretical efforts will
complement recent experimental efforts at the University of Cincinnati to create
all electric spin valves and other recent reports on quantum manipulation of
single spins in quantum dots which rely on subtle spin correlation effects
leading to intriguing non-linear transport phenomena such as Negative
Differential Region (NDR), multiple NDR, and bistability.

Broader Impacts: A thorough understanding of the Coulomb and Spin Blockades, and
Wigner crystallization in all electric spin valves in the presence of LSOC would
be a major milestone in the field of spintronics. A deep understanding of these
non-linear effects in strongly correlated systems will contribute to future
advancement in fields where non-equilibrium dynamics are involved. If
successful, this project is likely to theoretically produce the first simulator
that includes the effects of Coulomb and Spin blockade and models spin transport
in nanoscale devices in the presence of LSOC. The software developed will be
useful to investigate heterostructure parameters for design and fabrication of
all electric spin valves for applications in spin-based sensors, spin filters,
multilevel logic circuits and data storage applications.

The project described is intended to catalyze new collaboration between the
School of Electronics and Computing Systems at the University of Cincinnati and
the Department of Physics, Chemistry and Biology in Linkoping, Sweden. This
effort will serve as a precursor for long-term collaboration between Cincinnati
and Linkoping Universities to engage undergraduate and graduate
physics/engineering students in both countries through a research exchange
program during which the students would benefit from the guidance of engineers
and physicists with complementary expertise.