* 1341680
* Ancient landscape-active Surfaces: Periglacial Hyperinflation in soils of Beacon Valley, Antarctica
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2018
* Ronald Sletten, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Jackson
* 12/31/2018
* USD 239,093.00

Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will yield new
information on the long term Antarctic climate and landscape evolution from
measurements of cosmogenic nuclides in quartz sand from two unique permafrost
cores collected in Beacon Valley, Antarctica. The two cores have already been
drilled in ice-cemented, sand-rich permafrost at 5.5 and 30.6 meters depth, and
are currently in cold storage at the University of Washington. The cores are
believed to record the monotonic accumulation of sand that has been blown into
lower Beacon Valley and inflated the surface over time. The rate of accumulation
and any hiatus in the accumulation are believed to reflect in part the advance
and retreat of the Taylor Glacier. Preliminary measurements of cosmogenically-
produced beryllium (10Be) and aluminum (26Al) in quartz sand in the 5.5 meter
depth core reveal that it has been accreting at a rate of 2.5 meter/Myr for the
past million years. Furthermore, prior to that time, lower Beacon Valley was
most likely covered (shielded from the atmosphere thereby having no or very low
production of cosmogenic nuclides in quartz) by Taylor Glacier from 1 to 3.5 Myr
BP. These preliminary measurements also suggest that the 30.6 meter core may
provide a record of over 10 million years. The emphasis is the full
characterization of the core and analysis of cosmogenic nuclides (including
cosmogenic neon) in the 30.6 meter permafrost core to develop a burial history
of the sands and potentially a record the waxing and waning of the Taylor
Glacier. This will allow new tests of our current understanding of surface
dynamics and climate history in the McMurdo Dry Valleys (MDV) based on the dated
stratigraphy of eolian sand that has been accumulating and inflating the surface
for millions of years. This is a new process of surface inflation whose extent
has not been well documented, and holds the potential to develop a continuous
history of surface burial and glacial expansion. This project will provide a new
proxy for understanding the climatic history of the Dry Valleys and will test
models for the evolution of permafrost in Beacon
Valley.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
landscape history of the McMurdo Dry Valleys is important because geological
deposits there comprise the richest terrestrial record available from
Antarctica. By testing the current age model for these deposits, we will improve
understanding of Antarctica?s role in global climate change. This project will
train one graduate and one undergraduate student in geochemistry, geochronology,
and glacial and periglacial geology. They will participate substantively in the
research and are expected to develop their own original ideas. Results from this
work will be incorporated into undergraduate and graduate teaching curricula,
will be published in the peer reviewed literature, and the data will be made
public.