* 1341174
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Risk perception and anti-predator strategies in an Amazonian primate
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2013,12/31/2016
* Dawn Kitchen, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 12/31/2016
* USD 25,186.00

Predation risk is assumed to be a critical factor influencing primate behavior;
however, because predation events are rarely witnessed, the degree to which
predation pressure affects primate sociality is poorly understood. Furthermore,
the data that do exist on primate predator-prey interactions are focused on
primates, with little co-consideration of predator behavior. The question
remains: How do primates cope with the possibility of predation and do these
coping mechanisms thwart hunting by predators?

This study by doctoral student Dara Adams (Ohio State University), under the
guidance of Dr. Dawn Kitchen, will incorporate experimental methods to
investigate predator-prey dynamics between bald-faced saki monkeys (Pithecia
irrorata) and their predators - including one of their main felid predators,
ocelots (Leopardus pardalis) - at a field site in Amazonia Peru where both
predators and prey live at high densities. The project will utilize 1)
ecological and behavioral data to assess whether habitat structure, including
tree height, understory and canopy coverage, affect perceived predation risk and
anti-predator behaviors in these primates; 2) remote camera traps and GPS
telemetry on radio-collared ocelots to determine whether sakis adjust behavior
in relation to felid movement and activity; and 3) predator models (ocelot,
snakes and eagles) and audio playback experiments to determine how sakis respond
to alarm calls, what information may be conveyed in these calls, and whether
these calls are salient to ambush-style predators and result in changes to their
hunting behavior.

Incorporation of data on both primate and predator behavior will provide a more
holistic picture that lends itself to comparisons across species and ecological
contexts. Such an approach rarely has been applied to primate studies and will
contribute much-needed empirical data to the debate regarding the degree to
which predation pressures have impacted primate ecology and evolution.

This doctoral dissertation project will support academic training of a female
graduate student and Peruvian undergraduates, strengthen research connections
between Peruvian, Brazilian, and US universities, and promote interest among
children in science and conservation through an educational program at a local
school in Peru. Finally, monitoring of saki monkeys and predators, including
ocelots, at the field site will support local conservation initiatives. The
conservation implications are particularly important because the region is
undergoing rapid development, including increased logging and mining.