* 1341485
* Collaborative Research:  Body Size, Oxygen, and Vulnerability to Climate Change in Antarctic Pycnogonida
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Bret Tobalske, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Christian Fritsen
* 08/31/2018
* USD 277,559.00

Beginning with the earliest expeditions to the poles, scientists have noted that
many polar taxa grow to unusually large body sizes, a phenomenon now known as
'polar gigantism.' Although scientists have been interested in polar giants for
many years, many questions still remain about the biology of this significant
form of polar diversity. This award from the Antarctic Organisms and Ecosystems
program within the Polar Sciences Division at the National Science Foundation
will investigate the respiratory and biomechanical mechanisms underlying polar
gigantism in Antarctic pycnogonids (commonly known as sea spiders). The project
will use a series of manipulative experiments to investigate the effects of
temperature and oxygen availability on respiratory capacity and biomechanical
strength, and will compare Antarctic sea spiders to related species from
temperate and tropical regions. The research will provide insight into the
ability of polar giants to withstand the warming polar ocean temperatures
associated with climate change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The prevailing hypothesis
to explain the evolution of gigantism invokes shifts in respiratory
relationships in extremely cold ocean waters: in the cold, oxygen is more
plentiful while at the same time metabolic rates are very low. Together these
effects alleviate constraints on oxygen supply that restrict organisms living in
warmer waters. Respiratory capacity must evolve in the context of adaptive
tradeoffs, so for organisms including pycnogonids there must be tradeoffs
between respiratory capacity and resistance to biomechanical stresses. The
investigators will test a novel hypothesis that respiratory challenges are not
associated with particular body sizes, and will answer the following questions:
What are the dynamics of oxygen transport and consumption in Antarctic
pycnogonids; how do structural features related to oxygen diffusion trade off
with requirements for body support and locomotion; how does body size influence
vulnerability to environmental hypoxia and to temperature-oxygen interactions;
and does the cold-driven high oxygen availability in the Antarctic raise the
limit on body size by reducing trade-offs between diffusivity and structural
integrity? The research will explore the effects of increased ocean temperatures
upon organisms that have different body sizes. In addition, it will provide
training for graduate and undergraduate students affiliated with universities in
EPSCOR states.&lt;br/&gt;