* 1341286
* Disentangling Pseudogap from Superconductivity in the Cuprates by Scanning Tunneling Microscopy
* MPS,DMR
* 09/28/2011,07/31/2015
* Eric Hudson, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 07/31/2015
* USD 376,285.00

****TECHNICAL ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The nature and behavior of
electronic states in high temperature superconductors (HTS) are the center of
much debate. The pseudogap state, observed above the superconducting transition
temperature, is seen by some as a precursor to the superconducting state. Others
view it as a competing phase. Despite much experimental and theoretical work,
this question remains highly debated and central to our understanding of HTS in
general. This individual investigator award supports the investigation of this
relationship by temperature dependent scanning tunneling microscopy (STM).
Experiments will be performed in both Bi2Sr2CuO6+x, in which we have previously
observed evidence for a competing phase, and YBa2Cu3O6+x, which is more commonly
studied but has not been investigated with recently developed STM techniques.
Ultrahigh vacuum, variable temperature scanning tunneling microscopy is a
demanding experimental technique; HTS, as part of the broad class of strongly
correlated electron systems, are at the center of much condensed matter physics.
Hence this project will be an excellent training ground for students.
Furthermore, this award will support science outreach to broad audiences driven
by the compelling scientific mystery and technological promise of high
temperature superconductivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****NON-TECHNICAL
ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Superconductors are materials that can carry
current without resistance and resultant energy losses through heat generation.
Unfortunately, this technologically useful property only turns on at very low
temperatures, below a "transition temperature." Just over twenty years ago a new
class of "High Temperature Superconductors" were discovered, with transition
temperatures near 100 K. This is still very cold compared to room temperature
(300 K), but has led to intense technological, such as energy infrastructure,
and scientific development. This individual investigator award supports the
experimental investigation of high temperature superconductors with the goal of
understanding the relationship between their unconventional properties above the
transition temperature (even above room temperature in some materials) and
superconductivity. It has been proposed that these higher temperature properties
compete, or interfere, with superconductivity, and that by understanding and
controlling them transition temperatures may be significantly increased. While
investigating this proposal, students will be trained in a wide range of
experimental techniques. Furthermore, the compelling scientific mystery and
technological promise of high temperature superconductivity enables scientific
outreach to broad audiences, also supported by this award.