* 1341006
* CC-NIE Networking Infrastructure: Enhancing the OrangeGrid - Upgrading the Syracuse Campus Network to Enable High Throughput Research Computing
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2015
* Duncan Brown, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 12/31/2015
* USD 498,452.00

Syracuse University's OrangeGrid uses the HTCondor High Throughput Computing
System and a custom virtual machine manager to allow idle computers in offices
and student labs to run research-computing tasks. With over 7000 CPU cores, and
growing, OrangeGrid is used by Syracuse University's research and teaching
community for science and engineering applications. Science drivers for
OrangeGrid come from a diverse range of projects, including gravitational-wave
astronomy, biological physics, theoretical condensed-matter physics,
computational fluid dynamics, high-energy physics, Earth sciences, soft matter
physics, and biomedical and chemical engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CC-
NIE Networking Infrastructure project at Syracuse University upgrades the campus
network infrastructure to support data-intensive research computing on
OrangeGrid. This project increases the campus backbone bandwidth from 10Gbps to
40Gbps and provides 10Gbps links to the buildings providing the largest number
of OrangeGrid cores. This project directly affects the usability and
productivity of OrangeGrid, opening it to a wider-range of science and
engineering projects from SU researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OrangeGrid is an
important resource for Syracuse University's faculty and students. The
combination of easy access and power make OrangeGrid especially important to
beginning researchers and small groups who do not have their own computing
resources. Undergraduate and graduate students from the College of Engineering
and Computer Science and the College of Arts and Sciences have access to
OrangeGrid, giving them early experience with high-throughput research
computing. The experiences gained from running OrangeGrid provide a road map for
other universities who wish to leverage unused cycles from desktop computing for
scientific research.