* 1341973
* BRIGE: Photovoltaic Mapping of Gradients to Determine Structure-Function Relationships in Organic and Nanocrystalline Solar Cells
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2013,10/31/2016
* Darren Lipomi, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 10/31/2016
* USD 175,000.00

Technical description:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Organic and nano-crystalline solar
cells require an order of magnitude less active material than other ?thin-film?
photovoltaic devices. This BRIGE project will introduce a new experimental
framework in which to study organic solar cells, with three goals: (1) to
improve the quality and reproducibility of data obtained from organic and
nanocrystalline solar cells, (2) to reduce drastically the time and resources
needed to characterize them, and ultimately (3) to increase their photovoltaic
efficiencies. At the core of the proposed framework are the generation of
compositional or morphological gradients within semiconductor thin films and the
measurement of spatially resolved photovoltaic "maps" of these gradients using a
new type of non-damaging liquid metal probe. We refer to the proposed technique
as photovoltaic mapping (PVMAP) of gradients. PVMAP, once developed, can be used
to pose hypotheses about ultrathin photovoltaic films that cannot be tested
using serial techniques. PVMAP will be used to determine the extent to which
thermal annealing below the melting temperature of a semiconducting polymer-
fullerene composite film increases the fraction of crystallites oriented with
their รฐ-stacking axes perpendicular to the electrodes. PVMAP can also be used
for the systematic optimization of organic solar cells by iterative mapping of
different gradients (analogous to "directed
evolution").&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader significance and
importance:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Global capacity for photovoltaic electricity
has increased at a rate of sixty percent per year for the last five years.
Continuation of this trend requires new devices that operate with high
efficiencies at low cost. One candidate is solar panels based on plastic
materials. One of the reasons that these devices are not yet competitive with
those based on silicon is that the details of their operation cannot be
understood efficiently using current experimental techniques. This project will
allow researchers to gather information about organic solar cells much more
quickly than is currently possible. The proposed technique works by combining
many materials and characteristics in a single device, in which different areas
containing different combinations of properties can be measured separately. The
technical portion of this proposal, along with its efforts to integrate
research, education, and opportunity for underrepresented students, will help
remediate the environment and create jobs in an economy that includes renewable
energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broadening Participation
activities:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI is the Diversity Officer in the
Department of NanoEngineering at UCSD. This proposal would support: (1) paid
summer internships for IDEA (Diversity) Center Scholars; (2) an outreach event
for middle school students from predominantly Hispanic neighborhoods in San
Diego; and (3) a program for high school girls hosted by the UCSD Society for
Women Engineers. A fourth effort focuses on the outcomes of these activities on
the educational and career choices of participants. The PI will work with the
IDEA Center at UCSD to develop surveys, sent periodically to participants.
Results and a quantitative analysis will be submitted to a peer-reviewed
journal, such as the Journal of Engineering Education. A quantitative
understanding of the factors that lead underrepresented students toward careers
in science and engineering (and the factors that cause them to withdraw or
change fields) will be critical to the PI's efforts to expand opportunity and
will play a major role in being able to secure funding from NSF for additional
scientific projects and for innovative programs to broaden
participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has been funded through the
Broadening Participation Research Initiation Grants in Engineering solicitation,
which is part of the Broadening Participation in Engineering Program of the
Engineering Education and Centers Division.