* 1341128
* Collaborative Research: CDI Type II: Dynamics and Control of Cardiac Tissue
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/13/2012,08/31/2016
* Flavio Fenton, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Culbertson
* 08/31/2016
* USD 551,791.00

Complex spatiotemporal dynamics underlie many arrhythmic disorders of the heart.
Despite decades of biomedical research and the development of increasingly
detailed computational models, the mechanisms that induce and sustain these
arrhythmias remain elusive. We seek to improve our fundamental understanding of
these mechanisms by developing a radical and urgently needed paradigm shift from
computationally intensive direct numerical simulations to a description of
cardiac dynamics in terms of a finite repertoire of spatiotemporal patterns.
Using cutting-edge numerical algorithms, we will compute a hierarchy of exact
steady and time-periodic solutions of detailed ionic models of cardiac dynamics.
These unstable solutions describe cardiac dynamics in terms of a finite
repertoire of spatiotemporal patterns that are currently hidden from view. Their
determination for fully resolved cardiac tissue models is computationally
intensive, but once these solutions are obtained, they yield a radically new
understanding of the spatiotemporally chaotic dynamics as a walk through a
repertoire of corresponding recurrent patterns. This representation also allows
development of nonlinear control of cardiac dynamics using electrical
stimulation that may require lower voltages than current defibrillation
approaches. Numerical computations will be tightly integrated with experiments
involving both cardiac tissue and cell cultures. The experiments will be used
both to validate the proposed computational analysis and to test the control
approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cardiac arrhythmias are a major cause of
mortality in the industrialized world, and any reduction in their incidence
derived from a deeper understanding of their behavior could have a significant
societal impact. By combining state-of-the-art numerical, analytical, and
experimental approaches to the study of cardiac tissue, this project aims to
initiate a radical paradigm shift: we propose to use direct numerical simulation
as a tool to develop a new kind of quantitative template description of the
dynamics of cardiac tissue. In this approach, the dynamics of arrhythmias is
understood as a set of possible transitions between different cardiac rhythms,
leading not only to a deeper dynamical understanding of the initiation and
evolution of cardiac arrhythmias, but also to improved strategies for their
prevention or termination. Although the focus is on cardiac dynamics, the
methods developed will impact other fields dealing with high-dimensional complex
systems that exhibit unstable recurrent patterns, such as neural disorders,
dynamics of fluids and plasmas, and climate studies.