* 1341008
* CC-NIE Integration: Bridging, Transferring and Analyzing Big Data over 10Gbps Campus-Wide Software Defined Networks
* CSE,OAC
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Joel Tohline, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 08/31/2017
* USD 947,860.00

This CC-NIE Integration project performed at the Louisiana State University is
developing a cyber-infrastructure integrating six different large scale
scientific research groups with high performance computing (HPC) clusters at LSU
using software defined network technology and Hadoop and MPI (Message Passing
Interface) based parallel frameworks.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project consists
of three objectives: (i) Building 10Gbps software-defined network (SDN) with
OpenFlow switches and controllers to provide multiple virtual network slices to
each group; (ii) Transferring Big Data with automatically tuned operation
through multiple optical paths over the SDN network achieving at most 20Gbps of
aggregated disk-to-disk transfer rate; and (iii) Analyzing Big Data by
developing data-intensive distributed computing frameworks with Hadoop and MPI
technologies parallelizing large number of jobs over HPC clusters.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Those three components are integrated with a web portal service and a
GENI-enabled network management system. To achieve high disk-to-disk transfer
rate at 20Gbps, the project has an industrial partnership with Samsung
Electronics that contributes 70TB Solid State Drive (SSD) storage and optimizes
the I/O bandwidth.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The cyber-infrastructure accelerates
the current Big Data research projects spanning a wide range of research areas
including gene sequencing research at Biology and Vet School, computational
chemistry, big data mining at Computer Science, coastal hazard simulation
research at civil and environmental engineering. In the end, the project will
establish a methodology to build integrated cyber-infrastructures consisting of
high speed networks, high performance computing, and high speed storage for the
Big Data Science and Engineering.