* 1341388
* 2013-14 Albert Einstein Distinguished Educator Fellowship Program
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2014
* Jessica Bridges, Triangle Coalition for Science and Technology Education
* Standard Grant
* Celestine Pea
* 09/30/2014
* USD 1,959,574.00

The Albert Einstein Distinguished Educator Fellowship Program provides a unique
professional development opportunity for K-12 educators to inform national STEM
policy and improve communication between the STEM education community and
national leaders. Albert Einstein Fellows spend eleven months working at the
National Science Foundation, bringing extensive knowledge and classroom
experience to STEM education programs. In addition, fellows are provided with an
extensive program of professional development training during their cohort year.
The Albert Einstein Fellows program is run by the non-profit Triangle Coalition
for Science and Technology Education on behalf of the Department of Energy
Office of Science. Other federal participants in the fellowship program include
NASA, NOAA, and the U.S. Congress. In 2013-14, NSF will host seventeen Albert
Einstein Fellows.

The Albert Einstein Fellows program is designed to provide substantial STEM work
experience beyond the confines of the classroom, as well as extensive training
in the individual fields of science, technology, and engineering, STEM education
policy, and STEM program outcomes. During the eleven-month fellowship, the
Triangle Coalition provides programming that supports professional development
in three broad goal areas: 1) development of leadership skills; 2) development
as a STEM educator; and, 3) addressing grand challenges in STEM education. The
Triangle Coalition engages a third-party evaluator to measure the efficacy of
the professional development programming and the overall impact of the program.
The evaluators will collect and analyze data that addresses the cumulative
impact of the Albert Einstein Fellows program upon the participants and STEM
programs with which they engage. The analysis will provide insight into fellows'
diversity of experiences post-fellowship that can inform program analyses and
research into STEM issues such as resource allocation, teacher preparedness,
student interest, and minority participation in STEM.

The Albert Einstein Distinguished Educator Fellows Program advances knowledge of
STEM disciplines and the critical role educators play in advancing STEM learning
and career development. The program increases STEM knowledge and pedagogical
skills, provides an opportunity for building leadership capabilities as STEM
experts, and assists educators with understanding the policy process. The
fellowship equips educators to be STEM capacity-builders and problem-solvers for
social, economic, and political challenges created or exacerbated by lack of
STEM comprehension. The program also encourages broader diversity in STEM by
recruiting in demographic sectors (race, ethnicity, location, etc.) that are
historically underrepresented.