* 1341428
* Collaborative Research: Simulating Iceberg Calving from Ice Shelves using a Damage Mechanics Model
* GEO,OPP
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2018
* Ravindra Duddu, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 04/30/2018
* USD 200,000.00

Bassis/1341568&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the development of a model that can
simulate both the flow and fracture of glacier ice, (including the slow creeping
of that ice) as it spreads under its own weight all the way to the complete
failure and detachment (calving) of icebergs from glaciers and ice shelves
(floating expanses of glacier ice). Because iceberg calving accounts for nearly
50% of the mass lost from ice shelves, it plays an important role in the mass
balance of glaciers and ice sheets, but remains a poorly understood process.
Iceberg calving is also not yet accounted for in the current generation of
continental-scale ice sheet models, which are used in state-of-the-art climate
simulations and sea level rise projections, because simulating iceberg calving
requires that we understand the initiation and propagation of fractures within
the ice over timescales that can range from a few seconds to decades or even
centuries. To address this problem, the primary objective of this project is to
address this gap in our understanding by translating physical and computational
approaches originally developed to simulate the fracture of quasi-brittle
materials, like metals and concrete, to the fracture of glacier ice. Since it is
both impossible and impractical to simulate the propagation of each individual
crack in an ice sheet, we will seek a "continuum damage mechanics" approach that
handles collections of cracks in a physically and thermodynamically consistent
way to simulate failure at the large scale. This will be accomplished by using
an approach that can simulate what happens to fractures after they form at the
interface with the ocean.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to advance
our ability to predict the fate of the Greenland and Antarctic ice sheets and to
quantify the ice sheet contribution to sea level rise in the coming centuries.
Accomplishing this requires that we have a better understanding of why icebergs
that can exceed the size of small New England States, detach and drift away from
ice shelves. The broader impacts of the project also include graduate and
undergraduate education through directed research projects and targeted
engagement of under-represented minorities in low-income regions at the
elementary and high school levels. Engagement with under-represented minorities
will include counseling and planning for future career paths in the STEM fields
and mentoring selected students during summer internship programs hosted by the
University of Michigan, Vanderbilt University and Columbia University.