* 1341955
* Collaborative Research: A Deep-AUV Magnetic and Seismic Study of the Hawaiian Jurassic Crust - The Global Significance of Jurassic Magnetic Anomalies
* GEO,OCE
* 03/02/2013,08/31/2016
* William Sager, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Candace Major
* 08/31/2016
* USD 85,083.00

Funds are provided for a two-year study, initially involving a 42-day cruise to
collect two high-resolution seismic profiles and near-bottom magnetic field data
from the Hawaiian Lineation Jurassic Magnetic Quiet Zone (JMQZ) using an AUV.
The PIs plan to obtain 800 km long magnetic profiles as well as local seismic
reflection and refraction data using a portable multichannel seismic system and
sonobuoys. Seismic data will allow them to evaluate whether the Jurassic crust
has been affected by later intra-plate Cretaceous volcanism. This magnetic data
will be compared to the previously studied JMQZ data from the Japanese
Lineation. The latter reveals rapid reversal and decreasing field intensity as
well as a period of apparently incoherent anomalies with short wave lengths and
low amplitudes. If real and global (as opposed to a local bad signal) this low
amplitude zone represents an very unusual field behavior in Earth?s magnetic
field history. The new data from Hawaii and its comparison with Japanese results
will allow testing the hypothesis that this unusual field behavior was indeed
global, which has important implications for dynamics of the deep Earth and for
the construction of a robust geomagnetic polarity time scale for the Mid-
Jurassic period.&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts include discovery while promoting
teaching and training at sea for graduate and undergraduate students. Public
outreach is also planned through internet and WHOI exhibits. The scientific
results could have far reaching implications for Earth dynamics, magnetic field
behavior and geomagnetic polarity time scale and useful to other workers in the
field.