* 1341040
* CC-NIE Networking Infrastructure: Enhancing Network Capabilities to Foster Big Data Science at the University of Idaho
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2015
* James Foster, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 09/30/2015
* USD 447,969.00

This project removes specific network infrastructure bottlenecks to support big
data science at the University of Idaho (UI). This project implements a set of
10-fold bandwidth upgrades to: 1) the UI campus core network; 2) the Northwest
Knowledge Network data repository; and 3) the DoE Idaho National Laboratory
(INL) for replication/mirroring of NKN data with proximate access to significant
High Performance Computing (HPC) and visualization resources for researchers.
This complements previous institutional and NSF-funded improvements and enables
true 10 Gigabit per second (Gbps) end-to-end data transfers to support all
researchers at the UI.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The enhancements enable big data
movement at both the Institute for Bioinformatics and Evolutionary Studies
(IBEST) and the Northwest Knowledge Network (NKN) specifically, but also for all
researchers at the University of Idaho. The NKN supports data management
activities and accessibility to research datasets in response to new data
management requirements by NSF and other funding agencies. This also allows
distributed researchers to work effectively in collaborative teams and enables
big data analysis, visualization and sharing of distributed datasets with HPC
clusters. This permits rapid processing of very large datasets such as
downscaled climate scenarios, high-throughput genomics and remote sensing data
encompassing both Idaho and the Pacific Northwest. It removes network
bottlenecks for real-time connections to distributed campus locations
(complementing recent NSF investments) and K-12 schools and educational networks
for STEM training.