* 1341831
* Workshop on Cyberinfrastructure for Polar Sciences
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2016
* Jonathan Pundsack, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Neil R. Swanberg
* 06/30/2016
* USD 99,998.00

The Polar Cyberinfrastructure Program at the National Science Foundation has the
potential&lt;br/&gt;to transform polar research, by facilitating the
transmission and integration of &lt;br/&gt;tools and knowledge across the polar
and cyberinfrastructure communities. Community input is essential&lt;br/&gt;to
the process of realizing these goals, to ensure that the infrastructure
investments meet&lt;br/&gt;the on-the-ground requirements of scientists working
in each domain. &lt;br/&gt;In this regard, the PI proposes to organize a
workshop to identify and define&lt;br/&gt;priorities for how to further and
enable better polar science through cyberinfrastructure. &lt;br/&gt;The workshop
will produce a final report to the Polar Cyberinfrastructure Program. The
workshop and report will address&lt;br/&gt;engagement and building bridges
between computer and polar sciences, what can be accomplished&lt;br/&gt;in the
short-term (1-5 years) and long-term (5-10+ years). Topics that will be
discussed include&lt;br/&gt;big data and data access, software tools for data
and metadata acquisition, workflow support,&lt;br/&gt;data analysis, data
visualization, and modeling, computing capabilities,
interoperability&lt;br/&gt;with data from other domains, as well as policies and
procedures that address the polar scientists?&lt;br/&gt;and engineers? concerns
regarding, for example, data sharing, data citation,
intellectual&lt;br/&gt;property, and career advancement. Participants from the
broadest range of science domains will be engaged, including early career
scientists. &lt;br/&gt;The format of the workshop will be similar to those
organized through the EarthCube program, with presentations and breakout
sessions.