* 1341966
* CAREER:  M-ary Distributed Detection in Wireless Sensor Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 08/31/2012,07/31/2019
* Azadeh Vosoughi, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 07/31/2019
* USD 324,517.00

This research focuses on integrating M-ary distributed detection and
&lt;br/&gt;communications, and makes a significant impact on the theory and
&lt;br/&gt;practice of wireless sensor networks (WSNs) and cognitive radio
networks &lt;br/&gt;(CRNs). In particular, the following four problems are
tackled.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(1) M-ary distributed detection: The PI develops
fusion rules and local &lt;br/&gt;decision rules for M-ary distributed detection
systems with different &lt;br/&gt;wireless channel models, and studies how the
erroneous channels &lt;br/&gt;fundamentally limit the performance of these
systems. Furthermore, two &lt;br/&gt;composite M-ary distributed detection
problems that have applications in &lt;br/&gt;WSNs and CRNs are investigated:
joint detection and localization of &lt;br/&gt;multiple acoustic sources and
spectrum sensing in a multi-channel &lt;br/&gt;system. (2) Sequential methods
for wireless distributed detection &lt;br/&gt;systems: Striving to gain a
profound understanding of the tradeoffs &lt;br/&gt;between static and sequential
distributed detection in wireless &lt;br/&gt;networks, the PI designs two
sequential distributed detection systems &lt;br/&gt;with i) sequential tests
only at the sensors and ii) sequential test &lt;br/&gt;only at the fusion
center, and studies how the detection reliability and &lt;br/&gt;delay of static
and sequential detection systems are affected by the &lt;br/&gt;adopted wireless
channel model. (3) Impact of imperfect channel state &lt;br/&gt;information on
the performance of wireless distributed detection &lt;br/&gt;systems: The PI
studies the effects of channel estimation errors on the &lt;br/&gt;designs of
static and sequential distributed detection systems and &lt;br/&gt;investigates
how these errors further limit the system detection &lt;br/&gt;performance. (4)
Cooperation in wireless distributed detection systems: &lt;br/&gt;For both
static and sequential distributed detection systems cooperative
&lt;br/&gt;schemes are developed, based on local information passing among
&lt;br/&gt;neighboring nodes, and conditions under which cooperation provides
gain, &lt;br/&gt;in terms of both detection reliability and delay, are explored
and the &lt;br/&gt;relationships between the cooperative gain and different
channel models &lt;br/&gt;are sought.