* 1341251
* West Coast Algebraic Topology Summer School
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Ralph Cohen, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 07/31/2017
* USD 93,000.00

This award will fund the West Coast Algebraic Topology Summer School, a series
of programs in the summers from 2013-2016 aimed at early-career mathematicians
who work in algebraic topology and related areas. The programs will actively
engage the participants, and alternate between larger and smaller scale. In the
larger week-long programs, aiming for between 50 and 100 participants, a large
organizing committee will plan lectures which some participants will prepare and
then present. There will only be about 15 lectures for the week, leaving time
for participants to work on problems formulated by the organizing committee, to
ask questions of each other (especially the presenters) and the organizers, to
read supporting materials and go over their own notes, to talk informally with
each other about their work related to the program, etc. The smaller three-day
programs will be primarily organized by graduate students from institutions
providing both in-kind and additional financial support, namely Stanford
University, the University of Oregon, the University of Washington, and the
University of British Columbia. In September 6-8, 2013 at the University of
Oregon the program will be on Infinity Categories, a topic which has recently
become a key technical piece of some of the most significant recent
breakthroughs in algebraic topology and its applications to algebraic geometry
and geometric topology. With the upcoming yearlong program at the Mathematical
Sciences Research Institute in Berkeley, the student organizers have chosen to
learn about arguably the most important new machinery developed in the subject
in recent years. In July 2014, the week-long program at the University of
British Columbia (with significant additional financial and in-kind support from
the Pacific Institute for the Mathematical Sciences), the program will be on
Topological Field Theories. Development of these theories requires interplay
both between the mathematics and physics communities, and within mathematics
between algebraic topologists, geometric topologists, differential geometers,
and representation theorists among others. A program designed to address the
different aspects of the theory while being coherent will aid a generation of
researchers in interfacing with a remarkably fruitful subfield. The topics in
2015 and 2016 will continue to be chosen based on their importance and
timeliness and connections with other fields. The 2016 program will likely focus
on Chromatic Homotopy Theory, while determining the topic for the 2015 program
will involve the participants. At all of these programs, we will have additional
opportunities for professional learning addressing needs for early-career
mathematicians to develop as teachers and to position themselves for career
growth.

Knowledge of topology is essential for example in studying the structure of the
early universe, in designing a robot arm with a minimal number of controllers,
and in new kinds of data analysis. In its role as a basic study of shape,
algebraic topology has significant ramifications in other areas of mathematics,
from basic counting problems (combinatorics) to solutions of equations (algebra)
to applications and extensions of the calculus (analysis). The West Coast
Algebraic Topology Summer School chooses topics with such connections in mind.
Early career mathematicians have a great need for research-level professional
learning, which can open up new research pathways, and for enlarging their
professional networks, which can open up new collaborations. Without such early-
career opportunities, research programs can narrow or stall out altogether.
These needs can be more prominent for early career mathematicians in the western
half of the United States, which is more geographically isolated than other
regions, and for mathematicians from under-represented groups, who are actively
recruited to be participants. These summer schools build on a series of
successful programs which have exceeded expectations in both the depth of
learning and the strength of professional relationships fostered. Many
participants have reported them to be transformative experiences, and we expect
those kinds of experiences to continue in our series from 2013-2016. The active
learning aspects of these experiences inform not only the research programs of
participants but their approach to pedagogy as well. Thus the program's impact
goes beyond mathematical and scientific research to postsecondary and even K-12
education.