* 1341729
* Paleomagnetism and Magnetostratigraphy of the James Ross Basin, Antarctica
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Joseph Kirschvink, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Kowalewski
* 08/31/2017
* USD 415,056.00

Non-Technical Summary:&lt;br/&gt; About 80 million years ago, the tip of the
Antarctic Peninsula in the vicinity of what is now James Ross Island experienced
an episode of rapid subsidence, creating a broad depositional basin that
collected sediments eroding from the high mountains to the West. This depression
accumulated a thick sequence of fossil-rich, organic-rich sediments of the sort
that are known to preserve hydrocarbons, and for which Argentina, Chile, and the
United Kingdom have overlapping territorial claims. The rocks preserve one of
the highest resolution records of the biological and climatic events that led to
the eventual death of the dinosaurs at the Cretaceous-Tertiary boundary (about
66 million years ago). A previous collaboration between scientists from the
Instituto Ant√°rtico Argentino (IAA) and NSF-supported teams from Caltech and the
University of Washington were able to show that this mass extinction event
started nearly 50,000 years before the sudden impact of an asteroid. The
asteroid obviously hit the biosphere hard, but something else knocked it off
balance well before the asteroid hit. &lt;br/&gt; A critical component of the
previous work was the use of reversals in the polarity of the Earth?s magnetic
field as a dating tool ? magnetostratigraphy. This allowed the teams to
correlate the pattern of magnetic reversals from Antarctica with elsewhere on
the planet. This includes data from a major volcanic eruption (a flood basalt
province) that covered much of India 65 million years ago. The magnetic patterns
indicate that the Antarctic extinction started with the first pulse of this
massive eruption, which was also coincident with a rapid spike in polar
temperature. The Argentinian and US collaborative teams will extend this
magnetic polarity record back another ~ 20 million years in time, and expand it
laterally to provide magnetic reversal time lines across the depositional basin.
They hope to recover the end of the Cretaceous Long Normal interval, which is
one of the most distinctive events in the history of Earth?s magnetic field. The
new data should refine depositional models of the basin, allow better estimates
of potential hydrocarbon reserves, and allow biotic events in the Southern
hemisphere to be compared more precisely with those elsewhere on Earth. Other
potential benefits of this work include exposing several US students and
postdoctoral fellows to field based research in Antarctica, expanding the
international aspects of this collaborative work via joint IAA/US field
deployments, and follow-up laboratory investigations and personnel exchange of
the Junior scientists.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description of
Project &lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will extend the stratigraphic record in
the late Cretaceous and early Tertiary sediments (~ 83 to 65 Ma before present)
of the James Ross Basin, Antarctica, using paleo-magnetic methods. Recent
efforts provided new methods to analyze these rocks, yielding their primary
magnetization, and producing both magnetic polarity patterns and paleomagnetic
pole positions. This provided the first reliable age constraints for the younger
sediments on Seymour Island, and quantified the sedimentation rate in this part
of the basin. The new data will allow resolution of the stable, remnant
magnetization of the sediments from the high deposition rate James Ross basin
(Tobin et al., 2012), yielding precise chronology/stratigraphy. This approach
will be extended to the re-maining portions of this sedimentary basin, and will
allow quantitative estimates for tectonic and sedimentary processes between
Cretaceous and Early Tertiary time. The proposed field work will refine the
position of several geomagnetic reversals that occurred be-tween the end of the
Cretaceous long normal period (Chron 34N, ~ 83 Ma), and the lower portion of
Chron 31R (~ 71 Ma). Brandy Bay provides the best locality for calibrating the
stratigraphic position of the top of the Cretaceous Long Normal Chron, C34N.
Although the top of the Cretaceous long normal Chron is one of the most
important correlation horizons in the entire geological timescale, it is not
properly correlated to the southern hemisphere biostratigraphy. Locating this
event, as well as the other reversals, will be a major addition to understanding
of the geological history of the Antarctic Peninsula. These data will also help
refine tectonic models for the evolution of the Southern continents, which will
be of use across the board for workers in Cretaceous stratigraphy (including
those involved in oil exploration).&lt;br/&gt;This research is a collaborative
effort with Dr. Edward Olivero of the Centro Austral de Investigaciones
Cientificas (CADIC/CONICET) and Prof. Augusto Rapalini of the University of
Buenos Aires. The collaboration will include collection of samples on their
future field excursions to important targets on and around James Ross Island,
supported by the Argentinian Antarctic Program (IAA). Argentinian scientists and
students will also be involved in the US Antarctic program deployments, proposed
here for the R/V Laurence Gould, and will continue the pattern of joint
international publication of the results.