* 1341894
* Collaborative Research: Exploiting the Syntegron Technology Platform for Assembly and 0ptimisation of Complex Genetic Ensembles
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Jay Keasling, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 08/31/2016
* USD 720,400.00

Engineered microorganisms may serve as factories to convert renewable starting
materials, such as sugars and plant-derived biomass, into valuable products
including chemicals, fuels, and medicines. Although the feasibility and utility
of this approach is now well established, engineering microorganisms and plants
to produce novel products through the introduction of specific genes remains
technically challenging and resource-intensive. Consequently, these barriers to
bringing new biological synthesis platforms to commercial feasibility and
efficiency limit the rate at which new technologies create public benefits and
economic impacts. Moreover, it is not yet possible to efficiently harness
sources of vast biodiversity, such as libraries of genetic information from
plants and communities of organisms, because identifying and utilizing genetic
"diamonds in the rough" remains too costly and technically intensive to conduct
in most laboratories. To meet these needs, this project will develop a
technology suite that enables researchers to efficiently assemble, evaluate, and
optimize novel biological synthesis systems by harnessing evolutionary
mechanisms to both generate and select for functional assemblies of genetic
parts. This work includes novel approaches for identifying promising genes from
plant genomes, biological sensors that enable engineers to monitor and control
biomanufacturing within cells, and computational design tools that will enable
the broader research community to apply these capabilities to a broad range of
applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Together, this work will
create tools that catalyze the development of sustainable biological
manufacturing platforms and enable the production of new medically and
industrially useful molecules, thus contributing significantly to the Nation's
economy. The project will also provide multi-disciplinary training of students
and postdoctoral researchers in a rapidly emerging field.