* 1341527
* Collaborative Research:   Reconstruction and Understanding of Antarctic Circulation Variability and Trends since 1905
* GEO,OPP
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2018
* Clara Deser, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Peter Milne
* 04/30/2018
* USD 328,498.00

Patterns of variability in sea level pressure (SLP) are a potential diagnostic
of the Antarctic atmospheric circulation, and may be used to model polar forcing
mechanisms such as stratospheric ozone depletion, greenhouse gas (GHG)
increases, tropical SST changes and intrinsic extra-tropical climate dynamics.
Previous work has shown some skill in gridded reconstructions of temperature
over Antarctica, yet no similar Antarctic-focused data sets exist for SLP. A few
studies have recognized the fact that SLP variability over the Antarctic is the
largest of any comparably sized region on Earth. This implies low signal-to-
noise ratios. For both modeling and observation-based studies, long time periods
need to be considered, not just the data-rich instrumented period since ~1979,
in order to assess the roles of various types of forcing and to detect their
signals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project seeks to answer two sets of
questions: (1) How has the Antarctic circulation changed during the last
century, both at individual stations and across the continent? Are changes in
the past three decades unique in the last 100+ years? (2) What mechanisms are
associated with these changes, both in the zonal mean and regional circulation
patterns? What is the range of natural (internal) variability, and what role do
changes in SSTs, GHG forcing, and/or ozone depletion play in driving any of
these changes?