* 1341418
* EarthCube Domain End-User Workshop:  Engaging the Ocean Science -Omics Community to Archive, Access, and Analyze Massively Parallel Environmental Genomic Data
* GEO,OCE
* 07/15/2013,06/30/2014
* Katrina Edwards, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Antonius Post
* 06/30/2014
* USD 94,918.00

Genomics, bioinformatics, and allied technologies are having wide-sweeping and
dramatic impact on observation and experimentation in ocean science. "Omics"
technologies and approaches are being rapidly adopted and employed by the ocean
science research community. "Omics" are being broadly and effectively used in
areas that include mapping the distributions of taxa and biogeography, time
series analyses and biogeochemistry, regional process studies, assessing
environmental change and anthropogenic impacts, and ecosystem modeling. Rapidly
evolving technologies combined with exponentially decreasing costs have
"democratized" DNA sequencing and are enabling the generation of massive ocean
"omic" datasets by individual researchers, and collaborative efforts by the
ocean science community as a whole. These massive "omic" datasets and their
associated metadata require new cyberinfrastructures (CI) that can coordinate
and facilitate data and metadata access, analyses, and modeling. The NSF
EarthCube initiative recently solicited proposals for domain workshops "designed
to listen to the needs of the end-user groups that make up the geosciences and
to understand better how data-enabled science can help them achieve their
scientific goals." This workshop will bring together ocean scientists and
computer scientists to inform and engage them about EarthCube activities with
the following objectives:&lt;br/&gt;1. Inform and engage 40-45 ocean scientists
with CI experience and/or needs, and explore potential Earth cube opportunities
to help solve common CI challenges and needs for ocean "omic" data mining and
analyses.&lt;br/&gt;2. Inform and engage 10-15 bioinformatic and CI scientists
about ocean "omics" needs and applications and opportunities in EarthCube
activities to help address them.&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of the workshop
would be to develop a set of unifying CI requirements of ocean "omic"
scientists, that could integrate their data and efforts, and connect and engage
both domain and cyber scientists to pursue cyber solutions for ocean "omics"
analyses.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit :&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will engage of a
broad "omic" data user group in the ocean science community that stands to
benefit from understanding new cyber-infrastructure possibilities, envisioning
present and future solutions to their current needs and engaging in the
EarthCube process. The EarthCube cyberscience community will benefit from
understanding the challenges and needs of a broad, rapidly evolving,
multidisciplinary group of ocean science omic and environmental data
users.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts :&lt;br/&gt;Cyber-infrastructure developed for
ocean "omic" scientists have potential for broad public impact. Examples include
improved infrastructures to develop more accurate climate models that
incorporate biological processes, improve our understanding of the effects of
environmental change, expand our knowledge of life in extreme habitats, and
better assess ecosystem structure, function and dynamics.