* 1341401
* Collaborative Research: Geomagnetic Navigation by Weddell Seals Beneath Antarctic Ice
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2020
* Terrie Williams, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Peter Milne
* 06/30/2020
* USD 366,532.00

The remarkable ability of many animals to navigate accurately over long
distances has defied scientific explanation despite decades of research on
species such as homing pigeons. Evidence that marine mammals use the Earth's
magnetic field for navigation is less clear but numerous reports infer this
sensory capability in a variety of marine mammals. Mistakes in this mechanism
may be involved in mass strandings of whales and dolphins and a better
understanding of marine mammal navigation ultimately may be useful in preventing
or forecasting these events. Weddell seals precisely locate breathing holes in
Antarctic sea ice after traveling hundreds of meters in darkness and a
navigation mistake can result in death. In this project, the investigators will
test a novel idea about marine mammal sub-ice navigation and orientation using
geomagnetic fields by employing a custom-designed video and data recorder
capable of monitoring fine-scale animal behaviors and movements when diving. The
project will also further the NSF goals of making scientific discoveries
available to the general public and of training new generations of scientists.
The general public will be involved via web sites, a lecture series targeting
underrepresented groups, and development of nationally disseminated K-12
teaching materials. A number of graduate and undergraduate students will be
trained in the techniques of scientific discovery over the course of the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With limited oxygen stores during under-ice
diving, Weddell seals are under strong selective pressure to navigate accurately
and efficiently to locate breathing holes. The investigators hypothesize that
geomagnetic navigation is both necessary and sufficient for Weddell seals to
return to the vicinity of breathing holes. This project will be the first to
rigorously field test geomagnetic navigation in a marine mammal as well as the
first to measure the energetic cost of geomagnetic navigational behavior and
evaluate how body oxygen stores and breath-hold duration influence spatial
orientation and navigational strategies in a diving mammal. The investigators
will measure changes in the behavioral and energetic responses of individual
seals to different geomagnetic field properties and test those responses against
precise predictions. By conducting tests during periods of high light
intensity/long day length and low light intensity/reduced day length while
simultaneously documenting sound sources and water currents, the experimental
design provides a powerful technique for identifying a geomagnetic response as
other sensory modalities are manipulated. These costs will be compared to those
of other vertebrates to assess the evolutionary drivers for geomagnetic
navigation. Demonstration of geomagnetic navigation in seals would also provide
new insights into fine scale activities of other diving animals and the
mechanisms that enable long distance migrations. Thus, the results have the
potential to transform our understanding of navigation in all diving animals.