* 1341585
* Subsidence, Tilting, Sedimentation, and Oligocene-middle Miocene paleo-depth of Ross Sea
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2017
* Christopher Sorlien, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Kowalewski
* 12/31/2017
* USD 170,539.00

Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;This project will produce a new compilation of
Ross Sea seismic stratigraphy, including new interpretations, that can be used
to provide boundary conditions on the tectonic and glacial evolution of West
Antarctica and the Ross Sea. The principal goals include compilation of, and
interpretation of, all available existing seismic reflection data for the
Western Ross Sea, coupled with geophysical modeling to produce paleo-bathymetric
reconstructions for the entire 800 km-wide Ross Sea. Specific tasks will
include: extending existing work on mapping travel time to reflectors,
identifying relations in the seismic data that indicate subsidence through sea
level, constructing velocity models for converting travel time to thickness, and
using the velocity models to estimate density and porosity of sediments for
backstripping analysis. Modeling/backstripping efforts will be used to constrain
past bathymetry. Digital interpretations and stratigraphic grids will be
provided as supplements to publications. In that way the results of this study
can be used in thermal subsidence modeling and restoration of eroded rock to
other parts of Ross Embayment and Marie Byrd Land by others. Digital products
may be provided in advance of publication to modelers in a way that will not
hurt publication chances.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: &lt;br/&gt;The
results of this work will be important for paleo-geographic reconstructions of
Antarctica and will therefore be of use to a broad range of researchers,
particularly those working in the Ross Sea region. The digital products can be
used to test models for the past fluctuations of West Antarctic ice sheets, and
in planning for future sediment drilling projects. Two undergraduates to be
chosen from applicants will be involved in summer internships held at the
University of Rhode Island. Outreach will also include a new website and one or
more Wikipedia entries related to Ross Sea sub-sea floor characteristics. The
project includes an international collaboration with Dr. Chiara Sauli and others
at Instituto Nazionale di Oceanografia e di Geofisica Sperimentale (OGS) in
Italy.