* 1341078
* Toward 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems Education
* CSE,CNS
* 06/15/2013,09/30/2017
* Jon Eisenberg, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2017
* USD 770,000.00

Cyber-physical systems (CPS), are smart networked systems that have cyber
technologies, both hardware and software, deeply embedded in, and interacting
with, physical components. CPS represent a core opportunity area and source of
competitive advantage for the U.S. innovation economy in the 21st century. A
highly skilled science and engineering workforce is needed to design and build
CPS, in which cyber and physical components must be tightly integrated into
complex, networked systems that must respond in real (physical) time and
interoperate safely and securely. This NSF award supports a study, conducted by
the Computer Science and Telecommunications Board under the auspices of the
National Research Council of the National Academies, that will examine current
and future needs in education for Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two workshops are being convened to gather input and
foster dialogue, yielding a brief interim report prepared to highlight emerging
themes. The committee's final report will articulate a vision for a 2l-st
century CPS-capable U.S. workforce. It will explore the corresponding
educational requirements, examine efforts already under way, and propose
strategies and programs to develop faculty and teachers, materials, and
curricula. It would consider core, cross-domain, and domain-specific knowledge.
It would consider the multiple disciplines that are relevant to CPS and how to
foster multidisciplinary study and work. In conducting the study, the committee
would focus on undergraduate education and also consider implications for
graduate education, workforce training and certification, community colleges,
the K-12 pipeline, and informal education. It would emphasize the skills needed
for the CPS scientific, engineering, and technical workforce but would also
consider broader needs for CPS fluency.