* 1341309
* Doctoral Consortium and Student Travel Support for 2013 ACM/IEEE-CS Joint Conference on Digital Libraries (JCDL 2013)
* CSE,IIS
* 06/15/2013,05/31/2015
* John Downie, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 05/31/2015
* USD 18,972.00

This award supports travel stipends for students to participate in Doctoral
Consortium (July 22, 2013) and in the 2013 ACM/IEEE-CS Joint Conference on
Digital Libraries (JCDL 2013), to be held in Indianapolis, Indiana, June 23-25,
2013 (http://www.jcdl2013.org). The selected PhD students are in the early
stages of their dissertation work and several international students are
included in order to provide breadth in exchanging ideas. The goal of the
consortium is to help students develop their dissertation proposals and research
plans through feedback and guidance from prominent researchers and experienced
practitioners from the field of digital library research and development. The
JCDL Doctoral Consortium provides a forum for Ph.D. students to interact with
major leaders in the digital library community. These international leaders
exemplify a broad set of expertise, diversity of perspectives, and wealth of
knowledge. The consortium provides students with an opportunity to have broad
audience and interact intellectually with professionals who would otherwise be
difficult to meet with. Participating students will be selected on the basis of
a paper describing their research. At the consortium, participants will have
approximately 40 minutes to present their research plans and receive feedback
from the panel. After the consortium the students will revise their papers based
on the consortium's feedback and then they will be published in the IEEE
Technical Committee on Digital Libraries publication "TCDL Bulletin"
(http://www.ieee-tcdl.org/mediawiki/TCDL/index.php/IEEE-TCDL).

Participation in JCDL 2013 Doctoral Consortium and conference will expose the
selected students as well as other attending students to a larger community,
extend their opportunities for intellectual engagement, and encourage scholarly
discourse and networking among new entrants into the field. The goal is to help
shape ongoing and future teaching, research, and development projects in the
field of digital libraries by providing wider exposure for the students to
innovative ideas which may generate new research questions in the future, and to
foster a sense of community among these young researchers at a critical stage in
their professional development. The organizers will also take special steps to
solicit participation from institutions with underrepresented groups to extend
the potential benefits and broaden the horizon of expertise in the field.