* 1341500
* RUI: Antarctic Paleobotany: Permian Floral Characteristics in a Sedimentary Setting
* GEO,OPP
* 05/01/2014,06/30/2017
* Patricia Ryberg, Park University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Kowalewski
* 06/30/2017
* USD 168,091.00

This project will involve examination of Glossopteridales, fossil plants from
Upper Permian deposits, in samples from the central Transantarctic Mountains and
Southern Victoria Land, Antarctica. The glossopterids are an important fossil
group because they are possible ancestors to the flowering plants. Permian
sedimentary rocks (295-270 Ma before present) are important because they record
a time of rapid biotic change, as the Late Paleozoic Age ended and the Mesozoic
greenhouse environment began. The proposed research will rely entirely on
specimens collected during recent field excursions to the central Transantarctic
Mountains (CTM; 2010?2011) and southern Victoria Land (SVL; 2012?2013). Only a
few of the specimens have been studied, but already have yielded anatomically
well-preserved glossopterids with a complete pollen cone, which has never been
found before. Additionally, several seed-bearing structures, which have never
before been observed in Antarctica, have been found in both CTM and SVL. The
project will allow comparison of whole-plant fossil glossopterids from the CTM
with other paleo-latitudes, and will document the floral diversity within and
between two depositional basins (CTM &amp; SVL) during a time of global change,
with the overall goal of linking environmental changes with fossil morphology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: &lt;br/&gt;The Broader Impacts of this
project will include mentoring undergraduates in research projects, at an
institution with a substantial minority enrollment. Public outreach will focus
on involving middle/high school students through the ?Expanding Your Horizons?
programs in Kansas and Missouri, as well as interactive presentations at schools
in the Kansas City Area. The lead PI is an early-career scientist at an
institution that serves minorities.