* 1341161
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Hydration Strategies, Nutrition, and Health During Lifestyle Transitions
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2014
* Susan Tanner, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2014
* USD 15,013.00

The search for safe water remains an important challenge in the 21st century as
more than 1.1 billion people lack access to clean water. Globally, many
populations are experiencing rapid economic and environmental change, including
many in the South American Amazon region. While the social sciences emphasize
that lifestyle transitions, or changes to dietary, economic, and cultural
activities, affect health, disease patterns, and body composition, the role of
dietary water use has been widely overlooked during these transitions. Hydration
strategies, or how people meet their daily dietary water needs through a full
spectrum of foods and liquids, may serve as dietary adaptations that balance
nutrition and risk of infection. Lifestyle transitions may create a mismatch
between hydration strategies and the nutritional landscape. This research will
explain how hydration strategies are related to variation in hydration levels,
pathogen exposure, and nutritional status among Tsimane' Amerindians in lowland
Bolivia, where access to clean water is scarce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study
by doctoral candidate Asher Rosinger (University of Georgia), under the guidance
of Dr. Susan Tanner, will collect dietary, anthropometric, ethnographic, and
biological biomarker data to address the following aims: 1) Determine if
differences in hydration strategies are associated with variation in hydration
levels, water-related diseases and immune activation, and body composition; 2)
Investigate how market participation is related to variation in hydration
strategies; and 3) Document how people without access to clean water interact
with their environment to meet their daily water
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Responses to lifestyle transitions are critical to
understand because they provide insight into past and future trends of human
variation in nutrition and health. Because dietary hydration sources can expose
people to pathogens but also provide calories, this research will provide
insight into both diarrheal prevalence and the recent pattern of over-nutrition
in Amazonia, information which can guide global health interventions. This study
will inform water intake recommendations, which rely almost exclusively on data
from industrialized countries. In addition to supporting the training and
professional development of a US doctoral student, the project's results will be
discussed with communities, turned into research posters to be disseminated to
Tsimane' schools, and published in academic journals.