* 1341822
* CAREER: Engineering topological phases of matter in solid state systems
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,02/28/2017
* Jason Alicea, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 02/28/2017
* USD 331,584.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports theoretical
research that explores new routes to topological phases of matter in solid-state
systems. Topological states are interesting due to the exotic physics they
harbor and their technological promise for quantum computation, among other
applications. The PI will pursue three areas in this burgeoning field:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) Investigating realistic new methods for engineering
non-Abelian topological phases in solid-state devices, which may eventually
serve as the backbone of a decoherence-free quantum computer.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2) Devising approaches for generating topological
insulator phases in systems that would ordinarily be conventional metals or
insulators. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3) Exploring novel quantum phases in
frustrated magnets exhibiting strong spin-orbit coupling. In particular,
qualitatively new spin-liquid phases that exist solely due to spin-orbit
coupling will be studied, with emphasis on possible experimental realizations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Education and outreach activities are aimed to
simultaneously promote diversity and improve science education at the high
school, undergraduate, and graduate levels. By partnering with physics teachers
from high schools with many students of low-socioeconomic status, the PI will
work to revamp the curriculum by incorporating modern topics of scientific and
societal importance, examples include quantum computing, global warming, and
energy independence. In particular, the PI will introduce the concept of
emergence into high-school classrooms, using familiar ideas such as bird
flocking to convey the organizational principles at work in condensed matter.
Low-cost, sustainable labs that teachers can independently run in future classes
will also be implemented into the courses. Undergraduate and graduate curricula
will be similarly modernized, and undergraduates will form an integral component
of the PI's research group. A new informal condensed matter seminar for UC
Irvine's students and post-docs will also be instituted to help train a new
generation of researchers with broad backgrounds and exceptional communication
skills. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports theoretical research that
explores exotic new phases of matter and searches for practical ways of
realizing them in the laboratory. Inside of any solid lies a colossal number of
electrons which, choreographed by the laws of quantum mechanics, can organize
themselves in truly spectacular ways. This organization underlies a wealth of
phenomena - metals, semiconductors, magnets, and superconductors being
noteworthy examples. At sufficiently low temperature, superconductors have the
property that electricity can flow them without resistance. Understanding the
collective behavior of electrons in a solid not only reveals profound
fundamental properties of nature, but in some cases can lead to transformative
technologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Systems in which electrons exhibit a very
subtle type of organization known as "topological order" are a current major
focus of condensed matter physics. Materials exhibiting such "topological
phases" are widely coveted for their exotic properties and technological
promise. In particular, these materials may hold the key to building a new
generation of computers that employ quantum mechanics to drastically outperform
today's fastest computers for certain tasks. So far few topological phases have
been identified in nature. The PI's research will seek to circumvent this
problem by investigating experimentally feasible ways of engineering topological
phases in devices whose constituents are all well-understood. New routes to
generating topological order in insulators, superconductors, and magnets will
all be studied. This research may lead to the exciting discovery of new emergent
particles and facilitate the eventual synthesis of a "quantum computer".
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Education and outreach activities are aimed to
simultaneously promote diversity and improve science education at the high
school, undergraduate, and graduate levels. By partnering with physics teachers
from high schools with many students of low-socioeconomic status, the PI will
work to revamp the curriculum by incorporating modern topics of scientific and
societal importance, examples include quantum computing, global warming, and
energy independence. In particular, the PI will introduce the concept of
emergence into high-school classrooms, using familiar ideas such as bird
flocking to convey the organizational principles at work in condensed matter.
Low-cost, sustainable labs that teachers can independently run in future classes
will also be implemented into the courses. Undergraduate and graduate curricula
will be similarly modernized, and undergraduates will form an integral component
of the PI's research group. A new informal condensed matter seminar for UC
Irvine's students and post-docs will also be instituted to help train a new
generation of researchers with broad backgrounds and exceptional communication
skills.