* 1341090
* US collaboration with Argentina, Chile, and Uruguay: Modular Forms in the Southern Cone
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/2013,12/31/2015
* Nathan Ryan, Bucknell University
* Standard Grant
* Lina Patino
* 12/31/2015
* USD 17,775.00

This CNIC proposal aims to support research between Dr. Nathan Ryan of Bucknell
University and his collaborators, Dr. Ariel Pacetti of the Universidad de Buenos
Aires, Argentina, Dr. Gonzalo Tornaria of the Universidad de la Republica in
Uruguay, and Dr. Yves Martin of the Universidad de Chile, in Santiago, Chile, on
the theoretical and computational study of modular forms of higher rank. Modular
forms are an important subject within number theory. After Andrew Wiles proved
Fermat?s Last Theorem in the nineties, much work of foundational and
computational nature has led to a fairly complete understanding of the
relationships between modular forms of rank one, elliptic curves, and their
L-functions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI and his collaborators would like to
extend that understanding to modular forms of higher rank. Each of the
collaborators brings different expertise to the project and thus they will be
able to tackle a number of different approaches and topics. They will also
attempt to disseminate and advance the study of modular forms through contacts
between researchers in the area from North and South America and by bringing
three graduate students from historically underrepresented groups from the
United States to interact with their peers in Uruguay, while involved in
computational and theoretical research projects related to modular forms of rank
greater than one.