* 1341024
* CC-NIE Networking Infrastructure: Caltech's High-performance OPtical Integrated Network (CHOPIN)
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2016
* Harvey Newman, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 09/30/2016
* USD 499,561.00

The Caltech High-performance OPtical Integrated Network (CHOPIN) delivers the
most advanced networking technologies to the Caltech campus as a single concept
in support of several leading research groups. CHOPIN deploys Software-Defined
Networking (SDN) capable switches on the campus, as well as a 100Gbps link
between Caltech and CENIC, supporting direct connectivity to the California
OpenFlow Testbed Network (COTN), a connection to the Internet2 Advanced Layer 2
Services (AL2S) network, as well as other major Research and Education networks.
In this way, CHOPIN supports leading edge Research and Development activities in
the networking area, as well as high-throughput computing (HTC) based
applications and research using large data volumes and
velocities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ScienceDMZ concept integrated into the
design allows for a unified, flexible, yet high-performance system supporting
both the campus General Purpose Network and HTC applications on the same
underlying infrastructure. The new 100G capability paves the way for integration
also with routed high performance services such as the CENIC HPR-L3 and
Internet2 Advanced Layer 3 Services. The uplink is complemented by 100G and 40G
links to a set of OpenFlow capable switches to each of several major research
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The infrastructure improvements and leveraged
software and methods benefit all of the Caltech campus, and explicitly groups
involved in Big Data and high-throughput research, such as high energy physics,
astronomy (LIGO, LSST), seismology, geodetic Earth satellite observations and
many other pure and applied science disciplines, including computer science and
applied mathematics.