* 1341120
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Molar topographic shape as a system for inferring paleoecology and developmental patterning in cercopithecoid evolution
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Frederick Grine, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2016
* USD 30,740.00

Primates use their molar teeth to break down food as a first step to its
digestion and the acquisition of its nutrients. As might be expected, molar
shapes are observed to be tightly linked to the types of foods a species
consumes. Additionally, it has been found that the shapes of molar teeth are
produced in embryo by an elegant patterning mechanism whereby first molar
development has a cascade effect over later-developing teeth. Because teeth are
durable and dominate most fossil assemblages, molars are an excellent model
system by which to elucidate the biology of extinct animals. This project,
conducted by doctoral student Julia Winchester (SUNY Stony Brook University)
under the guidance of Dr. Frederick Grine, examines molar shape in living and
extinct old world monkeys in order to better understand their evolutionary
dietary adaptations, and the embryological developmental patterning of these
species. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Old world monkeys exhibit what is referred to as
a bilophodont form of molar cusp organization, and questions persist regarding
the type of dietary items that might provided the selective force for the
evolution of bilophodonty. Is it an adaptation to diets that consisted largely
of leaves or durable nuts, seeds, and/or fruits? In addition, very little is
known regarding early dental development, even of living old world monkeys. This
research will use technologies such as X-ray microtomography to create virtual
models of molars of living and fossil primates, and cutting-edge analytical
techniques from computer science will quantify whole tooth molar shape. For
living species with known diets, comparative datasets will be built and used to
infer dietary evolutionary transitions in extinct species. Relative shape and
form across intra-individual molar teeth in species will be compared with
experimental studies of rodents in order to make the first conclusions regarding
dental developmental patterning in monkeys. Through these methods, the use of
molar teeth as a key to unlock questions regarding dietary adaptations and
embryological development in living and fossil primates will be developed,
supporting understanding of the ways in which embryological dental development
may be related to adaptive function, and how evolutionary adaptation is
constrained by available developmental mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In its
broader impacts, this project will (1) broaden participation of under-
represented groups by training a graduate woman in science, (2) enhance the
infrastructure for research via free software development and participation in
open, online-accessible databases of dental shape data, and (3) support
scientific dissemination through public outreach to enhance scientific
understanding.