* 1341929
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: SAVI:   Leveraging the Ocean Data Interoperability Platform (ODIP) for International Marine Science
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2013,11/30/2015
* Robert Arko, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* James Holik
* 11/30/2015
* USD 99,967.00

Leveraging US-R2R and EU-ODIP Informatics for International Marine Science
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since the 2009 launch, the Rolling Deck to Repository
(R2R; http://rvdata.us/) program has made dramatic progress in routinely
capturing shipboard data from the entire US academic fleet of 25 active service
vessels. The R2R team has developed innovative technology to overcome the wide
diversity of data practices, naming conventions and data formats across the
fleet, which is managed by 18 independent operating institutions, large and
small. As of September 2012, R2R had cataloged 11,026,386 data files from 2,644
cruises. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These NSF-funded accomplishments clearly benefit
the US research community, but inquiries in the marine sciences are becoming
more global in scope. While other nations and regions, notably the Europeans and
the Australians, have also made tremendous progress in gathering data sets and
placing them online, inevitably barriers to discovery and access can exist for a
host of reasons, from basic awareness of resources to conflicts in search and
access protocols, naming conventions and data formats.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rather than continuing to independently develop
(expensive) wheels, ODIP proposes to establish formal collaboration mechanisms
to synchronize US, European and Australian efforts with a series of technical
workshops designed to make practical advances, rather than a series of meetings
in which PI?s stand up and make presentations. The Ocean Data Interoperability
Platform (ODIP) has been launched as a combined US-EU-Australian project
specifically because ocean data interoperability must span national boundaries.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;R2R is a collaborative NSF program, funded through 31
August 2014, combining the efforts of LDEO, SIO, WHOI and FSU. The R2R team
requests funding to (1) enhance the flexible discovery and harvesting of R2R
content through implementing a ?Linked Data? approach; (2) map key vocabularies
used by R2R to their EU counterparts, allowing users to search across US and EU
resources using the terms with which they are familiar; and (3) upgrade existing
R2R ISO 19115 metadata records to be compliant with the EU INSPIRE schema, which
specifically addresses documenting quality. These efforts will be carried out in
coordination with a number of other current interoperability projects, such as
the work of the EarthCube Interoperability Concept Group, Unidata, and the
COOPEUS project.