* 1341824
* 2013 Science of Adhesion GRC/GRS
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2013,11/30/2013
* Kenneth Shull, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 11/30/2013
* USD 7,000.00

TECHNICAL AND NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award, supported
by the Division of Materials Research and the Division of Civil, Mechanical, and
Manufacturing Innovation provides partial funding for the 2013 Gordon Research
Conference on the Science of Adhesion along with an associated Gordon Research
Seminar. The Gordon Research Conference is being held from July 14-19, 2013 at
Mount Holyoke College, Hadley, MA. graduate student-led Gordon Research Seminar
on Adhesion Science will be held at the same location on July 13-14. In both
conferences special efforts will be made by the chairs to increase the
attendance of underrepresented groups and people with
disabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The field of adhesion science is quite
interdisciplinary, drawing on concepts from physics, chemistry, and engineering.
In recent years adhesion science has rapidly expanded into the biological
sciences, providing a more quantitative undestanding for a range of
important&lt;br/&gt;biological phenomena. As a result, there is great need for
traditional adhesion scientists to collaborate with scientists trained in a
variety of disciplines, which include the biological and biomedical sciences.
The goal of the 2013 GRC (Gordon Research Conference) on Adhesion Science is to
strengthen the interdisciplinary environment that has been fostered by
scientists working in all areas related to adhesion science. This goal is
reflected in the program which consists of sessions on structural adhesives,
soft material physics and mechanics, bio-inspired adhesives, and biomaterials
development. The invited speakers come from diverse backgrounds and are leading
researchers in their areas of expertise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To extend the
broader impact on education, a GRS (Gordon Research Seminar) on adhesion science
will be held one day before the GRC at the same location. The goal of the GRS is
to provide a highly stimulating and non-intimidating environment for graduate
students and postdoctoral fellows to discuss their research in talks and poster
sessions, and to build informal networks with their peers that may lead to a
lifetime of collaboration and scientific achievement. The GRS is organized by a
graduate student with the support of the chair and the vice chair of the GRC on
Adhesion Science. All GRS participants are strongly encouraged to attend the
following GRC.