* 1341390
* Insights into the Burial, Tectonic, and Hydrologic History of the Cenozoic Succession in McMurdo Sound, Antarctica through Analysis of Diagenetic Phases
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2014,06/30/2017
* Tracy Frank, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Kowalewski
* 06/30/2017
* USD 196,534.00

Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;This project will use sediment cores from the
Victoria Land Basin (VLB), Antarctica, to study secondary (diagenetic) carbonate
minerals, as indicators of the basin?s fluid-flow history, within the well-
constrained tectonic, depositional, and climatic context provided by sediment
cores. This study will provide insights into subsurface processes in Victoria
Land Basin, Antarctica and their relationships with the region?s climatic,
cryospheric, and tectonic history. The work will utilize cores previously
recovered by US-sponsored stratigraphic drilling projects (CIROS, CRP, and
ANDRILL projects). This work is motivated by the unexpected discovery of dense
brine in the subsurface of Southern McMurdo Sound during drilling by the ANDRILL
Southern McMurdo Sound project. The presence of the brine is intriguing because
it contradicts previous models for the origin of subsurface fluids that called
upon large contributions from glacial melt water. Project objectives involve
documenting the distribution of the brine (and potentially other fluids) via
characterization of diagenetic precipitates. The approach will involve
integration of petrographic and geochemical data (including conventional carbon,
oxygen, and ?clumped? isotopes) to fully characterize diagenetic phases and
allow development of a robust paragenetic history. This work will provide novel
insights into the Cenozoic evolution of the VLB and, more broadly, the role of
glacial processes in generating subsurface fluids. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts: &lt;br/&gt;Results from this project will help understand the origins
of brines, groundwater and hydrocarbon reservoirs in analogous modern and
ancient deposits elsewhere, which is of broad interest. This project will
support the training of one graduate and one undergraduate student at the
University of Nebraska-Lincoln (UNL) providing learning opportunities in
sedimentary geology and diagenesis, fields with wide applicability. This
proposal emphasizes rapid dissemination of results to the scientific community
via conference presentations and contributions to peer-reviewed publications.
The results will be integrated into education activities designed to develop
skills in petrography and diagenesis, which are highly sought after in the
energy sector. The project will generate a well-constrained dataset that allows
direct linkage of diagenetic phases to environmental and tectonic change across
a large sedimentary basin which will provide the basis for a comprehensive case
study in an upper-level course (Sedimentary Petrography and Diagenesis) at UNL.
In addition, online exercises will be developed and submitted to an open-access
site (SEPM Stratigraphy Web) dedicated to sedimentary geology.&lt;br/&gt;