* 1341974
* Chicago Summer of Learning Self-Paced Online Badging Evaluation
* EHR,DRL
* 07/15/2013,06/30/2014
* Nichole Pinkard, DePaul University
* Standard Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 06/30/2014
* USD 199,565.00

The City of Chicago will embark on an innovative summer of learning (CSOL) in
the summer of 2013, initiated by the Mayor?s office. CSOL engages a variety of
youth serving oroganizations across the city in both self-paced and face-to-face
STEM learning activites enabling students to earn STEM badges.

This RAPID project creates an approach for tracking STEM program participation
among young people by using youth's badging and online participation histories.
While there is considerable interest and enthusiasm around the idea of STEM
badges, there is actually a relatively thin set of evaluation/research findings
around badges. This project can begin to fill in a piece of that gap by
providing information on youth?s participation in CSOL, the degree to which
social media plays a role, and a small follow-up study around youth's continued
interest and engagement in the beginning of the school year. The team will use
the data to look at patterns for student engagement that can lead to profiles of
participation by different types of students along with patterns of behavior.
All data will be made publicly available and will enable researchers to engage
in inquiry about the impact of STEM informal learning participation on longer-
term STEM outcomes. The evaluation study can lead to a useful research and
evaluation infrastructure that can build knowledge about the impact of summer
learning on youth's interest and engagement in STEM.