* 1341148
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: The Influence of development and homology on hominin molar morphological diversity
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2015
* Shara Bailey, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2015
* USD 3,056.00

------

Award Abstract #1341148 Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: The Influence of
development and homology on hominin molar morphological diversity Dental
features are frequently used in species diagnoses and phylogenetic
reconstructions of hominins (humans and their fossil relatives). The study of
teeth has also played an important role in reconstructing hominin diets, as well
as biological relationships among recent human populations. However, dental
variation is the result of not only phylogenetic and functional interactions,
but also the developmental processes controlling tooth morphogenesis.
Interestingly, the role of development on the morphological diversity in the
hominin dentitions has generally been overlooked. Research by doctoral candidate
Alejandra Ortiz (New York University), under the supervision of Dr. Shara
Bailey, will investigate how development has shaped the evolution of hominin
tooth forms. Specifically, this project will examine several dental traits drawn
from a large sample of molars in order to explore the developmental basis of
homology (defined as similarity due to common ancestry) and determine patterns
of developmental integration in members of our lineage. By examining trait
homology and independence, this integrative approach will attempt to identify
dental features of high phylogenetic valence and help solve the long-standing
problem in anthropology associated with the ambiguity of past hominin
phylogenetic hypotheses. The use of developmental information will also
contribute to the taxonomic identification of unknown hominin specimens.

High-resolution micro-computed tomography (microCT) will be used to visualize
the internal and external surface of teeth at the enamel-dentine junction and
outer enamel surface, respectively. This research will be undertaken in
approximately 500 molars assigned to a number of species from the genera Pan,
Australopithecus, Paranthropus and Homo. Data will be analyzed both
qualitatively and quantitatively via visual assessments, three-dimensional
geometric morphometrics, and linear and area measurements.

This project will promote international collaboration within the scientific
community and provide training opportunities for undergraduate students. Support
for this project will encourage diversity within the biological sciences, as the
co-PI is a female from an underrepresented group in science. Importantly, this
project will contribute to the development of a virtual collection of microCT
scans, the use of which will minimize data collection errors and limit the
manipulation of fragile fossil material. These microCT scans will be available
for public access according to individual agreements with participating museums.
Furthermore, metric data derived from this project will be made freely available
online. Since questions related to human evolution are of broad public interest,
results of this study will be presented at academic conferences, as well as
disseminated in technical and popular publications. This project will seek to
create linkages among multiple fields of research, including dental
anthropology, paleoanthropology, systematics and evolutionary developmental
biology.