* 1341425
* Collaborative Research:  High-Resolution Underway Air-Sea Observations in Drake Passage for Climate Science
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Britton Stephens, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Peter Milne
* 08/31/2017
* USD 180,424.00

The Drake Passage is the body of water between South America and the Western
Antarctic Peninsula, thus connecting the Southern Atlantic and Southern Pacific
Oceans through the unimpeded flow of the immense Antarctic Circumpolar Current
(ACC).

Using the relatively frequent ferry crossings of the Drake Passage by the RV/AS
LMGould, the USAP supply ship, this proposal will continue the of collection of
upper ocean XBT temperature and XTCD salinity data in this natural chokepoint
for the ACC. This will yield additional hydrographic observations on seasonal to
interannual timescales, and on spatial scales ranging from the current core to
mesoscale eddies. These high-resolution, multi-repeat transects (up to 6 ~7
crossings per year) are quality controlled, archived and made available to the
broader community in order to facilitate study of the modes of variability of
the dominant oceanic current on the planet (the ACC). The Drake Passage XBT/XCTD
transect time series now extends back to 1996, and continues to add to a number
of quantitative estimates of the long term trends in Southern Ocean fronts,
surface water mass properties, their response to atmospheric forcing on climate
relevant time scales. This proposal also seeks renewal of a near decadal time
series effort measuring the underway surface partial pressure of carbon dioxide
(pCO2) in regular transects across the Drake Passage.