* 1341393
* Collaborative Research: Winter Survival Mechanisms and Adaptive Genetic Variation in an Antarctic Insect
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2019
* David Denlinger, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Burns
* 07/31/2019
* USD 437,622.00

Polar regions are deserts that are not only cold but also lack access to free
water. Antarctic insects have unique survival mechanisms including the ability
to tolerate freezing and extensive dehydration, surviving the loss of 70% of
their body water. How this is done is of interest not only for understanding
seasonal adaptations of insects and how they respond to climate change, but the
molecular and physiological mechanisms employed may offer valuable insights into
more general mechanisms that might be exploited for cryopreservation and long-
term storage of human tissues and organs for transplantation and other medical
applications. The investigators will study the proteins that are responsible for
removing water from the body, cell level consequences of this, and how the
responsible genes vary between populations. The project will also further the
NSF goals of making scientific discoveries available to the general public and
of training new generations of scientists. Each year a K-12 teacher will be a
member of the field team and assist with fieldwork and outreach to school
children and their teachers. Educational outreach efforts include presentations
at local schools and national teacher meetings, providing lesson plans and
podcasts on a website, and continuing to publish articles related to this
research in education journals. In addition, undergraduate and graduate students
will receive extensive training in all aspects of the research project with
extended experiences that include publication of scientific papers and
presentations at national meetings.

This project focuses on deciphering the physiological and molecular mechanisms
that enable the Antarctic midge Belgica antarctica to survive environmental
stress and the loss of most of its body water in the desiccating polar
environment. This extremophile is an ideal system for investigating mechanisms
of stress tolerance and local geographic adaptations and its genome has recently
been sequenced. This project has three focal areas: 1) Evaluating the role of
aquaporins (water channel proteins) in the rapid removal of water from the body
by studying expression of their genes during dehydration; 2) Investigating the
mechanism of metabolic depression and the role of autophagy (controlled
breakdown of cellular components) as a mediator of stress tolerance by studying
expression of the genes responsible for autophagy during the dehydration
process; and 3) Evaluating the population structure, gene flow, and adaptive
variation in physiological traits associated with stress tolerance using a
genetic approach that takes advantage of the genomic sequence available for this
species coupled with physiological and environmental data from the sampled
populations and their habitats.