* 1341068
* Design Studios: CS Professional Development
* CSE,CNS
* 05/15/2013,04/30/2014
* Martin Gartzman, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 04/30/2014
* USD 30,005.00

The Center for Elementary Mathematics and Science Education (CEMSE) at the
University of Chicago proposes a "Design Studio" for computer science education
professional development (PD) providers. Attendees will have an opportunity to
collaborate with each other and experts from the University of Chicago with the
goal of addressing key issues in computer science PD raised by CEMSE's landscape
study of computer science PD. That study, "Building an Operating System for
Computer Science Education," released in December 2012, contained 14
recommendations for improving computer science education professional
development. After findings from that study were presented to PIs from the
National Science Foundation's Computing Education for the 21st Century (CE21)
program in January 2013, many of the CS 10K practitioners expressed interest in
further exploring these recommendations, and the implications for their
work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Design Studio will advance the recommendations of
the landscape study by working with a variety of computer science professional
development providers in a collaborative process to explore existing literature
on effective professional development, review examples of success from other
disciplines, and identify opportunities to improve CS professional development
for high school teachers. The PD providers will collaborate with each other, as
well as with experts from the University of Chicago in a structured and
facilitated manner to explore three key questions that have implications for
individual PD sites and for the field as a whole:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. How
can we move computer science education professional development toward a more
coherent vision of what good computer science education and therefore
professional development looks like?&lt;br/&gt;2. How can we move computer
science education professional development toward better fitting the needs of
the groups that will comprise the computer science teacher
workforce?&lt;br/&gt;3. How can we move computer science education professional
development to focus more on teaching and learning in the classroom?