* 1341343
* Support for the Participation of U.S. Scientists in the International Conference on Global Positioning System (GPS) Radio Occultation; Tao-Yuan, Taiwan; May 14-16, 2013
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2015
* Ying-Hwa Kuo, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 04/30/2015
* USD 46,628.00

This award funds the travel of US scientists to attend the Second International
Conference on GPS Radio Occultation (ICGPSRO) in Tao-Yuan, Taiwan. NSF has a
longstanding partnership, through the University Corporation for Atmospheric
Research, with the Taiwanese National Space Organization (NSPO), in the
development of space-based GPS radio occultation (RO) as a technology for
observing the atmosphere. This partnership produced the Constellation Observing
System for Meteorology, the Ionosphere, and Climate (COSMIC), a six-satellite
constellation of polar orbiting satellites with GPS receivers (launched in
2006). The COSMIC mission has beeh highly sucessful, and a follow-on mission,
COSMIC-2, is under development. COSMIC-2 will consist of two six-satellite
constellations, one in polar orbits and one in low-inclination tropical orbits,
and the new satellites contain substantial enhancements over the previous
generation.

The purpose of this award is to encourage the adoption of COSMIC-2 data by the
US research community. The COSMIC-2 tropical constellation, with a planned
launch date in Fiscal Year 2016, will provide unprecedented vertical profiles of
temperature and moisture in the tropics, as well as coverage of conditions in
the tropical ionosphere. This award will allow up to 10 US researchers to attend
the meeting and determine the optimal research uses of COSMIC-2 data, and will
work with their Taiwanese counterparts to identify areas of common interest and
potential US-Taiwanese collaboration.

This award is co-funded by the NSF Office of International Science and
Engineering