* 1341669
* Using Radiochemical Data from Collapsed Ice Shelf Sediments to Understand the Nature and Timing of the Benthic Response to High-Latitude Climate Change
* GEO,OPP
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Craig Smith, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Kowalewski
* 09/30/2017
* USD 449,567.00

Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;The PI requests support to analyze sediments from
multi-cores and mega-cores previously collected from beneath the former Larsen B
and Larsen A ice shelves. These unique cores will allow the PI to develop a
time-integrated understanding of the benthic response to ice shelf collapse off
the East Antarctic Peninsula over time periods as short as 5 years following ice
shelf collapse up to &gt;170 years after collapse. High latitudes are responding
to climate change more rapidly than the rest of the planet and the disappearance
of ice shelves are a key manifestation of climate warming. The PI will
investigate the newly created benthic environments and associated ecosystems
that have resulted from the re-initiation of fresh planktonic material to the
sediment-water interface. This proposal will use a new geochemical technique,
based on naturally occurring 14C that can be used to assess the distribution and
inventory of recently produced organic carbon accumulating in the sediments
beneath the former Larsen A and B ice shelves. The PI will couple 14C
measurements with 210Pb analyses to assess turnover times for sedimentary labile
organic matter. By comparing the distributions and inventories of labile organic
matter as well as the bioturbation intensities among different locations as a
function of time following ice shelf collapse/retreat, the nature and timing of
the benthic response to ice shelf collapse can be assessed.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: &lt;br/&gt;This study will provide
important information characterizing changes occurring on the seafloor after the
collapse of ice shelves. This research will support the research project of a
graduate student. This project brings together researchers from both the
European community and the LARISSA Project.