* 1341032
* Energy-Water Nexus Workshop, Arlington, VA, June 10-11, 2013
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2013,10/31/2013
* Danny Reible, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 10/31/2013
* USD 49,998.00

1341032 (Webber). This workshop seeks to facilitate networking and coordination
among professional organizations (particularly engineering societies),
practitioners, and researchers addressing energy-water nexus concerns and
issues. The goal of the workshop is to generate a coherent research agenda that
can be used to overcome infrastructure, technical, and societal challenges to
implementing solutions that address and mitigate emerging energy-water nexus
problems. The workshop will seek to identify research pathways for reducing the
water-intensity of providing energy, and the energy-intensity of providing
water. The four main specific topics for attention are: (1) managing water
demand for the production of power (?water for power?), (2) managing water
demand for the production of fuels (?water for fuel?), (3) managing the energy
demands of extracting, treating and transporting water (?energy for water?), and
(4) managing social, behavioral, policy, and economic structures to enhance
water and energy use efficiencies. The workshop will strive to identify the
barriers to technology acceptance (whether technical, economic or social) and
the research necessary to overcome those barriers. The topics of discussion will
include systems integration, materials, component design, information
technology, improved processes, social and behavioral sciences, economics, and
policy and regulations. The workshop will be organized around introductory talks
in each of the theme areas outlining the key challenges and opportunities as
they now exist and to provoke further thinking and discussion on current and
future needs and how they might be addressed. Then, the workshop will move to
small breakouts, with highly engaged participants submitting their input in
facilitated sessions. Participation in the workshop will be by invitation only.
The workshop is scheduled to be held at NSF on June 10-11, 2013.