* 1341409
* Workshop: AMIA Doctoral Consortium 2013
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Madhu Reddy, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 05/31/2014
* USD 19,965.00

This is funding to support a workshop of approximately 12 promising doctoral
students along with 5 distinguished research faculty. The event, the 6th
doctoral consortium on Sociotechnical Issues in Medical Informatics, will take
place in conjunction with the 2013 Annual Symposium of the American Medical
Informatics Association (AMIA) in Washington DC on November 16-20. Held every
fall, this is the premier AMIA conference and the largest biomedical informatics
conference in the United State, attracting researchers, professionals and
students from an array of occupational settings who are interested in all
aspects of health information technologies. More information about the
conference may be found at https://www.amia.org/amia2013.

One issue that is of particular importance within medical informatics is the
need to design/deploy systems with an understanding of how these systems fit
into organizational and social contexts. The term sociotechnical denotes the
importance of considering technical and organizational/social issues together
rather than in isolation. For instance, the medical informatics community has
long been interested in the technical features of the Electronic Medical Record
(EMR), but less attention has been paid to how the design of the EMR will be
affected by who the primary users of the system are, what context it is used in,
and what interactions it should support. Yet, to design effective EMR systems,
we need to understand how these different issues impact each other. The growing
need for integrating research across disciplines (e.g., HCI and Medical
Informatics) is the primary motivation for this doctoral consortium. Therefore,
student participants will span a broad range of disciplines and approaches that
inform medical informatics, including computer science, information science,
engineering, clinical sciences, law, management and related fields. The doctoral
consortium will take place on the weekend prior to the AMIA Symposium so the
students can also participate in the conference, which will introduce them to
the exciting breadth of research topics within the medical informatics
community. Conversely, bringing a new generation of scholars from different
disciplines into the medical informatics community will broaden that community's
understanding of what other research disciplines can offer medical informatics.

The consortium will provide a forum for doctoral students to share their work
and also network with other doctoral students and researchers. Student
participants will give short presentations during the consortium and will
receive constructive remarks and feedback on their research from prominent
researchers as well as through interaction with other students. The feedback is
designed to help students understand and articulate how their work is positioned
relative to related research, whether their topics are adequately focused for
thesis research projects, whether their methods are correctly chosen and
applied, and whether their results are appropriately analyzed and presented.
Thus, the consortium will help shape both these ongoing and future inter- and
multi-disciplinary research projects focusing on organizational and social
issues surrounding health-related technologies. The names and abstracts of the
accepted participants will be printed in the AMIA program guide, and will also
be made available to the public on a special website to be developed by the
organizers.

Broader Impacts: The doctoral consortium will bring together people from
different disciplines who might not otherwise engage with one another and will
expose them to different scientific research approaches and questions. It will
foster a sense of community among the young researchers by allowing them to
create a supportive mentoring and social network both among themselves and with
senior researchers at a critical stage in their professional development. The
organizers will make a concerted and proactive effort to ensure a diverse pool
of student participants including members of under-represented groups in the
STEM disciplines; this, in turn, will broaden the students' horizons to the
future benefit of the field.