* 1341661
* Phylogenomic Study of Adaptive Radiation in Antarctic Fishes
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2017
* Thomas Near, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Karla Heidelberg
* 06/30/2017
* USD 396,642.00

Understanding how groups of organisms respond to climate change is fundamentally
important to assessing the impacts of human activities as well as understanding
how past climatic shifts have shaped biological diversity over deep stretches of
time. The fishes occupying the near-shore marine habitats around Antarctica are
dominated by one group of closely related species called notothenioids. It
appears dramatic changes in Antarctic climate were important in the origin and
evolutionary diversification of this economically important lineage of fishes.
Deposits of fossil fishes in Antarctica that were formed when the continent was
experiencing milder temperatures show that the area was home to a much more
diverse array of fish lineages. Today the waters of the Southern Ocean are very
cold, and often below freezing, but notothenioids fishes exhibit a number of
adaptions to live in this harsh set of marine habitats, including the presence
of anti-freeze proteins. This research project will collect DNA sequences from
hundreds of genes to infer the genealogical relationships of nearly all 124
notothenioid species, and use mathematical techniques to estimate the ages of
species and lineages. Knowledge on the timing of evolutionary divergence in
notothenioids will allow investigators to assess if timing of previous major
climatic shifts in Antarctica are correlated with key events in the formation of
the modern Southern Ocean fish fauna. The project will also further the NSF
goals of making scientific discoveries available to the general public and of
training new generations of scientists. The project will support educational
outreach activities to teenager groups and to the general public through a
natural history museum exhibit and other public lectures. It will provide
professional training opportunities for graduate students and a postdoctoral
research scholar. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Adaptive radiation, where lineages
experience high rates of evolutionary diversification coincident with ecological
divergence, is mostly studied in island ecosystems. Notothenioids dominate the
fish fauna of the Southern Ocean and exhibit antifreeze glycoproteins that allow
occupation of the subzero waters. Notothenioids are noted as one of the only
examples of adaptive radiation among marine fishes, but the evolutionary history
of diversification and radiation into different ecological habitats is poorly
understood. This research will generate a species phylogeny (evolutionary
history) for nearly all of the 124 recognized notothenioid species to
investigate the mechanisms of adaptive radiation in this lineage. The phylogeny
is inferred from approximately 350 genes sampled using next generation DNA
sequencing and related techniques. Morphometric data are taken for museum
specimens to investigate the tempo of morphological diversification and to
determine if there are correlations between rates of lineage diversification and
the origin of morphological disparity. The patterns of lineage, morphological,
and ecological diversification in the notothenioid radiation will be compared to
the paleoclimatic record to determine if past instances of global climate change
have shaped the evolutionary diversification of this lineage of polar-adapted
fishes.