* 1341010
* CC-NIE Networking Infrastructure: Data Driven Networking - Keeping SFA on the Map
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2015
* Michael Coffee, Stephen F. Austin State University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 08/31/2015
* USD 497,346.00

The CC-NIE Networking Infrastructure project overcomes geographical and
technological barriers at Stephen F. Austin State University (SFA) with major
upgrades to network infrastructure, connectivity, and the science DMZ. These
upgrades support expanded research and teaching capabilities and improve
capacity for data-driven research across a variety of STEM
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Network enhancements under construction
consist of two fiber optic installation builds, one enabling a protected 10 Gb/s
Ethernet connection from the SFA main campus to the Internet2 and the Lonestar
Education and Research Network (LEARN) point-of-presence in Houston and the
other from the SFA main campus to the remote SFA Observatory and Walter C. Todd
Agricultural Research complex. Upgrades in progress increase the capacity of the
science DMZ from 1 Gb/s to 10 Gb/s to allow for the rapid exchange of large
datasets outside of the university's protective firewall. Installation of a 10
GB/s PerfSONAR node allows SFA to benchmark performance to relevant sites and to
monitor network performance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Applications include research
endeavors in physics and astronomy, agriculture, biology, biotechnology,
chemistry, computer science, mathematics and statistics, forestry, and
geospatial sciences that will directly benefit from the ability to manipulate,
manage, and transfer larger data sets. Additionally, the enhanced infrastructure
will improve capacity for collaborative research on campus, nationally, and
globally, and afford full use of existing networks, such as LEARN, internet2,
REDDnet and AmericaView. The networking improvements will also enhance both
graduate and undergraduate curricula in these and other STEM disciplines and
allow for increased student participation in data-intensive research.