* 1341479
* Iron and Light Limitation in Ecologically Important Polar Diatoms:   Comparative Transcriptomics and Development of Molecular Indicators
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Adrian Marchetti, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Burns
* 07/31/2018
* USD 260,170.00

The Southern Ocean surrounding Antarctica is changing rapidly in response to
Earth's warming climate. These changes will undoubtedly influence communities of
primary producers (the organisms at the base of the food chain, particularly
plant-like organisms using sunlight for energy) by altering conditions that
influence their growth and composition. Because primary producers such as
phytoplankton play an important role in global biogeochemical cycling, it is
essential to understand how they will respond to changes in their environment.
The growth of phytoplankton in certain regions of the Southern Ocean is
constrained by steep gradients in chemical and physical properties that vary in
both space and time. Light and iron have been identified as key variables
influencing phytoplankton abundance and distribution within Antarctic waters.
Microscopic algae known as diatoms are dominant members of the phytoplankton and
sea ice communities, accounting for significant proportions of primary
production. The overall objective of this project is to identify the molecular
bases for the physiological responses of polar diatoms to varying light and iron
conditions. The project should provide a means of evaluating the extent these
factors regulate diatom growth and influence net community productivity in
Antarctic waters. The project will also further the NSF goals of making
scientific discoveries available to the general public and of training new
generations of scientists. It will facilitate the teaching and learning of
polar-related topics by translating the research objectives into readily
accessible educational materials for middle-school students. This project will
also provide funding to enable a graduate student and several undergraduate
students to be trained in the techniques and perspectives of modern biology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although numerous studies have investigated how polar
diatoms are affected by varying light and iron, the cellular mechanisms leading
to their distinct physiological responses remain unknown. Using comparative
transcriptomics, the expression patterns of key genes and metabolic pathways in
several ecologically important polar diatoms recently isolated from Antarctic
waters and grown under varying iron and irradiance conditions will be examined.
In addition, molecular indicators for iron and light limitation will be
developed within these polar diatoms through the identification of iron- and
light-responsive genes -- the expression patterns of which can be used to
determine their physiological status. Upon verification in laboratory cultures,
these indicators will be utilized by way of metatranscriptomic sequencing to
examine iron and light limitation in natural diatom assemblages collected along
environmental gradients in Western Antarctic Peninsula waters. In order to fully
understand the role phytoplankton play in Southern Ocean biogeochemical cycles,
dependable methods that provide a means of elucidating the physiological status
of phytoplankton at any given time and location are essential.