* 1341143
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The striatum in the evolution of flexibile, learned vocal communication
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2015
* Chet Sherwood, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2015
* USD 12,122.00

Despite numerous hypotheses concerning language evolution, the neurobiological
origins of the human capacity to speak remain little understood. Studies suggest
that the striatum, a subcortical structure forming complex connections with the
cerebral cortex, may be important in the evolution of vocal learning - the
capacity to modify vocalizations in response to social experience - which is
necessary to acquire speech during development. The striatum also is a key site
of expression of FOXP2, a gene that underwent positive selection in modern
humans, and, in a mutated form, is responsible for a hereditary disorder
affecting language production. To date, however, evidence indicating a role of
the striatum in the evolution of speech and language mainly comes from
experimental species, such as birds and mice, which are evolutionarily distant
from humans. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of the current project by doctoral
student Serena Bianchi (George Washington University), under the guidance of Dr.
Chet Sherwood, is to identify neural features of the non-human primate striatum
that may have been associated with the evolution of the capacity for vocal
learning that characterizes human speech. To this end, this project uses non-
invasive neuroimaging techniques, and post-mortem histological and molecular
analyses, to examine the striatum of captive chimpanzees for which the use of
learned, voluntarily controlled vocalizations produced to attract the attention
of the experimenter (attention-getting vocalizations) has been documented.
Specific aims include assessing whether the striatum of chimpanzees who produce
attention-getting vocalizations differs from chimpanzees that do not exhibit
this vocal phenotype in 1) morphology, and pattern of connections with motor and
language-related regions of the cerebral cortex; and 2) neuronal plasticity and
expression of proteins associated with synaptic functions and FOXP2.
Investigating the neurobiology of vocal communication in an animal model
evolutionarily close to humans may help identify precursors to speech production
within a Darwinian framework of language origins as 'descent with modifications'
of existing neural structures in the non-human primate brain.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As part of this project, dissemination of knowledge about
the evolution of the brain and language will be fostered through collaboration
with the outreach program of the Smithsonian National Museum of Natural History,
and the development of on-line resources and teaching materials. In addition,
the histological collection created by this project will be made available to
other researchers.