* 1341033
* CC-NIE Networking Infrastructure: Network Infrastructure and DMZ for Oregon State University
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2016
* Solomon Yim, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 09/30/2016
* USD 499,954.00

Oregon State University is upgrading key components of the campus core network
infrastructure, enabling 10-40 Gbps network connections between research units
within a Science DMZ, with interconnects via the DYNES network and Internet2 to
external research partners such as XSEDE and iPlant. The upgrades include the
campus core aggregation switch, two key data centers and six major data
generating laboratories and facilities. Monitoring and optimization of overall
network services within the upgraded DMZ includes implementation of perfSONAR
for on- and off-campus performance monitoring. The DMZ creates a platform
capable of integrating into Internet2 and utilizing DYNES and Software Defined
Networking for the dynamic establishment of dedicated research network
resources.

The upgrades transform research in a wide diversity of disciplines at Oregon
State University (OSU) that generate and analyze massive data sets that are
produced, analyzed and disseminated on- and off-campus. The disciplines affected
include genomics and computational biology, image processing and recognition,
earthquake and ocean wave physics, landscape remote sensing, pharmacy, clinical
veterinary medicine, and earth, atmospheric and ocean sciences. OSU is a land
grant, sea grant and sun grant institution. The network upgrades enhance its
capability for providing solutions to society's problems in agriculture,
aquaculture, forestry, fisheries and wildlife management, marine resource
management, water quality management, environmental preservation and
restoration, and animal and human health. Furthermore, the improved training and
education environment that will be created by the upgrades positively impacts
the professional development of graduate students, postdoctoral scholars and
undergraduate researchers.