* 1341562
* Collaborative Research:  Element Composition of High Energy Solar Particles
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2020
* John Bieber, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Vladimir Papitashvili
* 06/30/2020
* USD 741,053.00

The neutron monitor at the U.S. Amundsen-Scott Station, located at the
geographic South Pole, has operated since 1964. Neutrons detected by such
monitors are byproducts of nuclear interactions of cosmic rays (predominantly
protons and helium nuclei) with Earth's atmosphere. South Pole is a unique
location at high altitude and low geomagnetic cutoff rigidity. This installation
is the lynchpin of the worldwide neutron monitor network at low energies and the
primary link to spacecraft measurements at much lower energies. Central to the
research is the need to understand the detector response to the radiation
environment of the South Pole, particularly to determine the cause of a peculiar
secular decline in cosmic rays intensity at South Pole throughout the ~50-year
operating period of the neutron monitor. Understanding this decline is important
because cosmic rays produce radionuclides such as Beryllium-10 that become
trapped in the ice and are used to determine ice-core sample ages and
precipitation levels over the Earth's Polar Regions. A full understanding of the
production rate is vital to interpreting these data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent
opening of the IceCube Neutrino Observatory at South Pole, specifically the
IceTop air shower array, has increased the value of neutron observation. In
addition to its primary function as an extensive air shower detector, IceTop is
highly sensitive to the intensity and spectrum of cosmic rays of energy formerly
accessible only to the neutron monitors. IceTop and the neutron monitor are
highly complementary to each other as the former is more sensitive in an
absolute sense but responds to somewhat higher energy particles than does the
monitor. IceTop responds primarily to the electronic component of the secondary
particles whereas the neutron monitor responds primarily to the hadronic
component. Together the detectors can determine not only the spectra but also
the element composition of the primary particles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Solid
science, collaborative effort, international partners, and travel to Antarctica
provide an ideal opportunity to achieve education and outreach goals. Operation
of the neutron monitor at South Pole will become an undergraduate activity at
University of Wisconsin-River Falls. Providing undergraduate and two-year
college students with research experiences will allow students to make
meaningful contributions to cutting-edge science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Neutron
monitor data are broadly employed by other research groups, with applications in
cosmic ray research, solar-terrestrial relations, space weather, climatology,
atmospheric physics, geophysics, and magnetospheric physics. Neutron monitors
play a direct role in forecasting and specifying solar wind disturbances and in
providing Ground Level Enhancement alerts relevant to the transpolar aviation.
Improving the capability to forecast and characterize major space weather events
has direct societal benefit.