* 1341862
* Collaborative Project:  EaGER - CSEDI: Towards an integrated view of deep mantle structure, temperature, and composition
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2015
* Renata Wentzcovitch, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 06/30/2015
* USD 131,225.00

This Early Grant for Exploratory Research (EaGER) will support a collaborative
study between mineral physicists and seismologists to try a new approach of
combining mineral physics and seismology to provide new perspectives of the deep
Earth. Advances in seismic imaging of the Earth's deep interior, from global to
local scales, are providing structural information about convective and thermal
patterns in the lower mantle. Development of first principles methodologies to
tackle key mineral physics problems, e.g., thermoelastic properties, spin
crossover in iron in lower mantle minerals, and anharmonic thermal properties,
are greatly expanding characterization of mineral properties at deep mantle
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal and primary intellectual merit of the
proposed work is to advance understanding of deep mantle structure, temperature,
and composition with a transformative multidisciplinary effort to directly link
seismological imaging with modeling approaches based on realistic mineral
properties. The team will address an unresolved central issue in investigations
of deep mantle temperature and composition: the subtle effects of spin state
changes in iron in lower mantle minerals and potential seismological detection
of this fundamental transition and corresponding implications for bulk chemistry
of the lower mantle. Clarification of the seismic signature of spin state
crossovers is a major hurdle to be overcome in mineralogical interpretations of
seismological data of the deep Earth. The proposed search for spin transition
signatures in the deep mantle is not without risks, but this unprecedented joint
seismology/mineral-physics enterprise will pave the way for future studies of
numerous fascinating structures holding keys to the nature of the deep mantle.
It will open a needed first-hand dialogue between these communities and enable
elasticity data to be accessible online for use by the seismology community for
modeling purposes. The PIs of this study have diverse expertise that will help
the team to foster a multi-disciplinary education experience at the interface
between seismology and mineral physics.