* 1341017
* CC-NIE Networking Infrastructure: Extensible Cyberinfrastructure for Enhancing Extreme-Data Science (EXCEEDS)
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2015
* Scott Shenker, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 09/30/2015
* USD 498,412.00

The data requirements of many current research projects -- ranging from cancer
genomics to radio astronomy to brain imaging -- have far outstripped what most
campuses can handle. Progress in these and other important fields is
significantly hampered by the inability of researchers to rapidly transfer their
extremely large datasets. The problem lies not only in the bandwidth in the
underlying links, but also in the overall network architecture which limits the
ability of network administrators to deploy new
functionality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Extensible Cyberinfrastructure for
Enhancing Extreme-Data Science (EXCEEDS) project is accelerating scientific
discovery at the University of California, Berkeley by improving the
university's ability to support extreme-data science. The infrastructure
improvements being implemented include: increasing border bandwidth to 100Gb/s,
arranging for an end-to-end 100Gb/s data path from Berkeley to the University of
California at San Diego, establishing a modern Science Demilitarized Zone (DMZ)
architecture, and deploying a 100Gb/s capable Bro Intrusion Detection System
(IDS) -- currently a critical piece in Berkeley's security architecture -- on
this new high-speed network.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In the short run, the
improved infrastructure will speed progress at Berkeley in several scientific
areas, most notably cancer genomics but also in radio astronomy and other
fields. Longer term, the research on more extensible campus architectures will
lead to more flexible network designs that can enhance scientific progress on
campuses throughout the nation.