* 1341545
* High-resolution Mapping of Thermospheric Wind and Temperature Fields near the Equatorward Edge of the Antarctic Polar Cap to understand Coupling to Layers both above and below
* GEO,OPP
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2021
* Donald Hampton, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Moore
* 06/30/2021
* USD 984,222.00

Earth's upper atmosphere at altitudes above 100-km is subjected to highly
variable weather. Observations of this region, known as the thermosphere,
commonly show long periods (days to weeks) of relatively placid conditions,
punctuated by large disturbances that can only be described as "storms".
However, even quiet times exhibit a substantial and often seemingly random
background of day-to-day variability. In the troposphere, large storms develop
internally, without a requirement for sudden impulsive changes by externally
imposed forcing or regional boundary conditions. While internal instability does
also play a role in Earth's ionosphere and thermosphere (especially at low
latitudes); much of the thermospheric weather is instead directly driven from
outside by forcing from regions above and below. Upward propagating waves and
tides make a ubiquitous contribution to the low-level day-to-day variability,
whereas fluctuations in the solar radiation, solar wind, and Earth's
magnetosphere dynamics drive a broad spectrum of thermospheric perturbations -
and are entirely responsible for driving storms and other large events.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of this project is to understand the
origins of day-to-day fluctuations in thermospheric weather, both large and
small. Two state-of-the-art remote sensing instruments measuring thermospheric
wind and temperature will be deployed in Antarctica, at latitudes that have been
shown by previous studies to host the most extreme and complex thermospheric
weather behavior. While previous work has measured thermospheric winds and
temperatures across the globe for many years, there have never been instruments
at these geomagnetic latitudes with anything even close to the proven
sensitivity, resolution, and field of regard that are achieved by the proposed
all-sky imaging design. Demonstrated performance of these new Fabry-Perot
Spectrometers exceeds that of the previous generation of instruments at the
Antarctic McMurdo and South Pole stations by more than two orders of magnitude,
which will open revolutionary new insights in the fluid dynamics of Earth's
polar-cap thermosphere. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will address a number
of specific outstanding questions of aeronomical research: What is the main
source of complex day-to-day variability that has been observed in the generally
anti-sunward neutral flow across the polar cap? What are the mechanisms
responsible for discrepancies between observed and modeled temperatures and
tidal amplitudes within the polar cap? Do thermospheric gravity waves,
propagating poleward from the auroral oval, deposit a significant flux of heat
and/or momentum into the polar cap thermosphere? Are there any signatures of
anthropogenic climate change and/or declining solar activity in the long-term
record of thermospheric temperatures at South
Pole?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cutting-edge science, international partnership, and
travel to Antarctica provide an ideal opportunity to achieve the project's
education and outreach goals. Anticipated broader impacts from this project
include training of a Ph.D. graduate student, furthering international
scientific collaboration and cooperation in Antarctica, and providing real-time
and archive data that will be of operational value to satellite operators,
communicators, and navigators.