* 1341391
* EAGER: Towards Atomic-Scale Imaging of Hybrid Nanomaterials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Derk Joester, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* eugene zubarev
* 08/31/2016
* USD 249,878.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;Heterostructures with at least one single digit
nanometer dimension, and participation of organic molecules, are emerging as
exciting alternatives to inorganic semiconductors and insulators for low cost,
printable, and flexible electronics. Interfaces in such materials are integral
to function, but are becoming increasingly complex in structure and chemistry.
Quantitative imaging of all-organic or hybrid organic/inorganic nanomaterials is
a formidable challenge to established electron optical methods. Laser-pulsed
atom probe tomography (APT) is emerging as a potentially transformative
analytical tool. In this project, supported by the NSF Solid State and Materials
Chemistry Program, the experience of PI Joester will be leveraged in sample
preparation, APT operation, and spectral interpretation to establish the scope
of APT for the atomic-scale characterization of emergent organic and
organic/inorganic hybrid materials from single nanoparticles to devices.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, it is proposed to investigate model systems
for three important classes of materials: I) DNA-wrapped single wall carbon
nanotubes (SWNT) as representatives of self-assembled building blocks for
molecular electronic/optical devices. II) Self-assembled nano-dielectrics
(SANDs) as examples for organic thin films in electronic applications. III)
Ferritin nanocages with metallic and metal oxide nanoparticle payloads as
examples for hybrid nanomaterials. In each case, APT has the potential to
greatly facilitate future structure-function analyses. For example, APT imaging
of DNA-wrapped SWNT will enable systematic investigation of impact of DNA
sequence and nanotube chirality on the complex geometry and electronic
properties. Outcomes will provide input for rational design of single chirality
SWNT purification schemes and programmed assembly of CNTFET devices. Visualizing
SAND atomic scale structure will dramatically enhance the ability to correlate
processing, defect formation, and device performance. Model systems were
selected to generate maximum synergy with existing research efforts at the NU
MRSEC and the International Institute for Nanotechnology at NU. Proposed
activities include research training for young investigators from undergraduates
to postdocs and a summer school in atom probe tomography to disseminate hands-on
skills beyond the project team.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;Rapid materials innovation is integral to enhancing US
competitiveness in flexible/printable electronics, ultra-low power, or ultra-
high speed circuits for emergent applications. Northwestern University is
leading the development of all-organic and low dimensional organic/inorganic
heterostructures such as carbon nanotube field effect transistors (CNTFETs) or
self-assembled nanodielectric (SAND) thin films. However, shortcomings of
current analytical tools hinder realization of the potential of these
unconventional electronic materials. Laser-pulsed atom probe tomography (APT),
an atomic scale quantitative chemical imaging tool with unrivaled spatial
resolution and unbiased chemical selectivity, may rise to the challenge. In this
project, funded by the NSF Solid State and Materials Chemistry Program, it is
proposed to leverage the experience of PI Joester in APT to investigate model
systems for 0D, 1D, and 2D hybrid electronic nanomaterials in close
collaboration with leading experts and centers at NU. Outcomes of the proposed
work will have immediate impact by facilitating structure-function studies and
greatly accelerating innovation at NU and its partner institutions. Research
areas impacted at NU include energy materials, nano-electronics, sensors,
optical, and spintronic devices. In addition to training the next generation of
scientists and engineers, the impact of the proposed activities will be
significantly broadened by providing hands-on training in sample preparation
techniques and APT to users outside the project team in a summer school on APT.