* 1341311
* Collaborative Research:   Bipolar Coupling of late Quaternary Ice Sheet Variability
* GEO,OPP
* 03/01/2014,02/28/2018
* Axel Timmermann, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 02/28/2018
* USD 380,684.00

Timmerman/1341311&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a project to study
the physical processes that synchronize glacial-scale variability between the
Northern Hemisphere ice sheets and the Antarctic ice-sheet. Using a coupled
numerical ice-sheet earth-system model, the research team will explore the
cryospheric responses to past changes in greenhouse gas concentrations and
variations in earth's orbit and tilt. First capturing the sensitivity of each
individual ice-sheet to these forcings and then determining their joint
variability induced by changes in sea level, ocean temperatures and atmospheric
circulation, the researchers will quantify the relative roles of local versus
remote effects on long-term ice volume variability. The numerical experiments
will provide deeper physical insights into the underlying dynamics of past
Antarctic ice-volume changes and their contribution to global sea level. Output
from the transient earth system model simulations will be directly compared with
ice-core data from previous and ongoing drilling efforts, such as West Antarctic
Ice Sheet (WAIS) Divide. Specific questions that will be addressed include: 1)
Did the high-latitude Southern Hemispheric atmospheric and oceanic climate,
relevant to Antarctic ice sheet forcing, respond to local insolation variations,
CO2, Northern Hemispheric changes, or a combination thereof?; 2) How did WAIS
and East Antarctic Ice Sheet (EAIS) vary through the Last Glacial Termination
and into the Holocene (21 ka- present)?; 3) Did the WAIS (or EAIS) contribute to
rapid sea-level fluctuations during this period, such as Meltwater Pulse 1A? 4)
Did WAIS collapse fully at Stage 5e (~ 125 ka), and what was its timing relative
to the maximum Greenland retreat?; and 5) How did the synchronized behavior of
Northern Hemisphere and Southern Hemisphere ice-sheet variations affect the
strength of North Atlantic Deep Water and Antarctic Bottom Water formation and
the respective overturning cells? The transient earth-system model simulations
conducted as part of this project will be closely compared with paleo-climate
reconstructions from ice cores, sediment cores and terrestrial data. This will
generate an integrated understanding of the hemispheric contributions of
deglacial climate change, the origin of meltwater pulses, and potential
thresholds in the coupled ice-sheet climate system in response to different
types of forcings. A well-informed long-term societal response to sea level rise
requires a detailed understanding of ice-sheet sensitivities to external
forcing. The proposed research will strongly contribute to this task through
numerical modeling and paleo-data analysis. The research team will make the
resulting model simulations available on the web-based data server at the Asia
Pacific Data Research Center (APDRC) to enable further analysis by the
scientific community. As part of this project a female graduate student and a
postdoctoral researcher will receive training in earth-system and ice-sheet
modeling and paleo-climate dynamics. This award has no field work in Antarctica.