* 1341630
* Noble Gases and Helium Isotopes During Ocean2ice:   Processes and Variability of Ocean Heat Transport Toward Ice Shelves in the Amundsen Sea
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2019
* William Jenkins, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Peter Milne
* 08/31/2019
* USD 449,305.00

Ice shelf mass balance is controlled by net surface accretion (precipitation
minus ablation and surface melt terms), calving and basal melt along the
underside of the ice shelf cavity, which is in contact with a warming ocean.
Estimating the rate of basal melt is the most challenging term in this balance
because it is difficult to directly observe, but is also sensitive to changes in
ocean temperature and other ocean-atmospheric processes such as the sea ice
cycle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will join the Ocean2ice program, a UK
led effort to integrate state of the art instrumentation, chemical analysis and
modeling with the goal of improving the dynamical representation of ice shelf
mas balance processes in Antarctic circulation models. In the Amundsen Sea, the
shoaling warm Circumpolar Deep Water (CDW) and surficial glacial meltwater are
two important diagnostic and prognostic terms in the ice shelf mass balance. By
measuring the distribution of these water masses, using a suite of their
distinct inert gas tracers ? 3He, 4He, Ne, Ar, Kr and Xe - together with their
change over time, estimates of basal melt rates of some of the large West
Antarctic ice shelves (e.g. Pine Island Glacier) are to be made.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Greenland and the West Antarctic Ice Sheets together
represent potentially more than a 10 m of increase in mean (global) sea surface
height. How fast glacial mobilization rates may increase is of considerable
societal importance.