* 1341935
* Advanced Cyberinfrastructre - Research and Educational Facilitation: Campus-Based Computational Research Support
* CSE,OAC
* 03/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Gwen Jacobs, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 08/31/2018
* USD 5,901,465.00

The Advanced CyberInfrastructure - Research and Educational Facilitation:
Campus-based Computational Research Support project develops and implements
strategies that serve to advance our nation's research and scholarly
achievements through the transformation of campus computational capabilities and
enhanced coupling to the national cyberinfrastructure environment. Among the
project's collaborating institutions are the University of Hawaii, the
University of Southern California, the University of Utah, the University of
Wisconsin, and Clemson and Harvard Universities. The project brings together
education and research institutions that are committed to the vision of
advancing scientific discovery through a national network of Advanced
Cyberinfrastructure (ACI) Research and Education Facilitators (ACI-REFs).
Working together in a coordinated effort, the project is dedicated to the
adoption of models and strategies to leverage the expertise and experiences of
its members to maximize the impact of investment in research computing. Located
on the campuses and fully embedded in their local environment, the mission of
the ACI-REFs is to extend the reach and impact of campus and national research
computing infrastructure on the science conducted by students and faculty.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By building a cloud-like environment for advanced
computing infrastructure and support, the project seeks to create a community
that fosters seamless integration of cyberinfrastructure and domain researchers
and expand the reach of researchers involved in the use of advanced
cyberinfrastructure across campuses. The project also seeks to develop the
expertise base across partner campuses to support information sharing and to
facilitate the formation of extended local and national collaborations. The
project explores the potential for the creation of a nationwide alliance of
educators to empower local campus researchers to be more effective users of
advanced cyberinfrastructure. In particular, the project seeks to work with the
"long tail" of ACI users - those scholars and faculty members who traditionally
have not benefitted from the power of massively scaled cluster computing but who
recognize that their research requires access to more compute power than can be
provided by their desktop machines.