* 1341912
* WORKSHOP: Doctoral Colloquium at IEEE VIS 2013
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2014
* Remco Chang, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 06/30/2014
* USD 20,000.00

This is funding to support a Doctoral Colloquium (workshop) of about 18
dissertation stage doctoral students, in a variety of visualization subfields,
for a day of discussions and interactions with 6 distinguished research faculty,
to be held in conjunction with this year's IEEE VIS meeting (formerly known as
IEEE VisWeek), which will take place during the week of October 13-18, 2013, in
Atlanta, Georgia. Visualization, or the use of interactive graphics to support
data analysis and understanding, has become an integral part and critical
component of many application areas. IEEE VIS is the premier forum for
visualization advances in science and engineering for academia, government, and
industry, now bringing together about 900 researchers and practitioners from
around the world with a shared interest in techniques, tools, and technology.
VIS consists this year of the 24th annual IEEE Scientific Visualization
Conference (SciVis), the 19th annual IEEE Information Visualization Conference
(InfoVis), and the 8th annual IEEE Visual Analytics Science and Technology
Symposium (VAST). Co-located symposia this year include the IEEE Symposium on
Large-Scale Data Analysis and Visualization (LDAV), the IEEE Symposium on
Biological Data Visualization (BioVis), and the International Symposium on
Visualization for Cyber Security (VisSec). The papers published in the special
conference issue of IEEE Transactions of Visualization and Computer Graphics are
rigorously refereed and widely cited. More information is available online at
http://www.ieeevis.org.

The Doctoral Colloquium at IEEE VIS is a research-focused meeting which has
taken place annually at the visualization conferences since 2006, and has helped
launch the careers of a number of outstanding young researchers. In 2013 the
workshop will convene on Saturday, October 12, with follow-up events during the
VIS technical program. A primary goal of the Doctoral Colloquium is to allow
students to discuss their research directions in a supportive atmosphere with a
panel of distinguished leaders and with their peers, who will provide helpful
feedback and fresh perspectives. To this end each student will be assigned a
specific mentor among the expert panelists and will be allotted approximately
30-40 minutes of time during the group sessions, to include a formal
presentation about the student's doctoral research followed by in-depth
discussions and feedback. The workshop will support community building by
connecting beginning and advanced researchers (during events such as a common
lunch for all DC participants, students and panelists alike, and a roundtable
discussion at the end of the day where the focus will be on high-level topics
beyond technical research), one of the objectives being to build a cohort group
of new researchers who will then have a network of colleagues across the world.
Student research will be disseminated via posters during the VIS technical
program, and via publication in the VIS Extended Abstracts. Feedback about the
Doctoral Colloquium will be provided to future conference committees.

Broader Impacts: The VIS Doctoral Colloquium brings together the best of the
next generation of visualization researchers and allows them to create a social
network both among themselves and with senior researchers, which plays a major
role in their enculturation into the profession. Since the students and faculty
are a diverse group on several dimensions (nationality, scientific discipline,
research specialization), the students' horizons are broadened at a critical
stage in their professional development. The PI has affirmed that in managing
this event the organizers, while striving to identify and include the broadest
possible group of highly qualified participants, will also make an effort to
encourage participation by women, racial/ethnic minorities, and persons with
disabilities. They will furthermore ensure that NSF funds are used chiefly to
support participation by students enrolled in graduate programs in the United
States.