* 1341088
* US-Australia Collaboration: Preparing to study heavy-ion fusion induced with radioactive ion beams
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2016
* Zachary Kohley, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 09/30/2016
* USD 41,624.00

This CNIC award will facilitate the development of a new collaboration between
the National Superconducting Cyclotron Laboratory (NSCL) and the Australian
National University (ANU). The NSCL is near completion of the ReA3 facility
which will provide world-unique radioactive ion beams (RIBs) at energies around
the Coulomb barrier. A new research program focused on the study of heavy-ion
fusion induced with RIBs will be established. Planning for the construction of a
new detector to measure fission fragments is currently underway at the NSCL.
Prof. David Hinde (Dept. Head of Nuclear Physics) and Prof. Nanda Dasgupta of
ANU have developed a similar fission detector at the ANU accelerator facility
which has been used in numerous stable beam experiments. The CNIC award will
permit the NSCL research group to travel to ANU, perform a heavy-ion fusion
experiment, and begin developing a plan for completing similar measurements at
ReA3.

Along with the PI, two graduate students from the NSCL will travel to ANU to
participate in the experiment and planning process. The students will have a
wide range of educational opportunities including participating in an
international collaboration, scientific discussions with researchers at ANU, and
technical skills development using the ANU detector. The results from the
experiment completed during the visit will be published in a peer-reviewed
journal and presented at conferences. The collaboration will also work to
produce a new detector at the NSCL to be used for fusion measurements with RIBs.