* 1341178
* Direct Identification and Characterization of Marine Heterotrophic Nitrogen Fixers by Stable Isotope Probing
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2016
* Douglas Capone, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 05/31/2016
* USD 299,831.00

The nitrogen cycle in the ocean is extremely complex and it continues to yield
surprises. Knowledge gained in this project will directly contribute to
resolving an unsettled and important question regarding the sources of nitrogen
in the oceans because imbalances in nitrogen budgets have raised questions on
how well we have quantified all nitrogen inputs and removal. While nitrogen-
fixing cyanobacteria have long been recognized as important contributors to
nitrogen fixation in the oceans heterotrophic nitrogen-fixing bacteria (HNFB)
are a poorly characterized, but potentially important, component of the marine
nitrogen-fixing community. Using advanced methodologies, this project will
develop the means to obtain a new understanding of novel, active, HNFB in the
ocean. The identification of these organisms and the assessment of their
phylogenetic diversity and biogeochemical significance will provide important
insights about their role in the marine nitrogen cycle. The project will develop
a novel stable isotope probing (SIP) methodology coupled with high-throughput
sequencing. SIP exploits the uptake of isotopically enriched substrates into
nucleic acids (e.g., DNA) while high-throughput sequencing should allow the
identification of nitrogen-fixing bacteria generally, and HNFB specifically, so
that the principal investigator can directly link the biogeochemistry of
nitrogen with the phylogeny of those nitrogen-fixers. The objective of this
project is to provide a proof of concept effort and identify important HNFB
lineages using this novel approach and begin to develop quantitative estimates
for the contribution of HNFB populations to marine nitrogen-fixation and the
nitrogen cycle. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will foster the development
of a graduate student who will work on all aspects of the project for his PhD
and the work will be presented at science conferences and in public outreach
venues. Undergraduates will also work on the project under the guidance of the
graduate student and principal investigator. The participants will also engage
with the USC Young Researchers Program (YRP), which recruits high school
students from diverse and underprivileged local schools for summer research
experiences. Students will be guided in the laboratory-based aspects of this
project, and present their work at an YRP symposium. The principal investigator
will also continue to participate in science curriculum development workshops of
the Center for Ocean Sciences Education Excellence-West program.