* 1341013
* CC-NIE Networking Infrastructure: High Performance Science Network (HPSNet) at Northwestern University
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2013,03/31/2016
* Joseph Walsh, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 03/31/2016
* USD 499,656.00

The Northwestern University High Performance Data Network (HPDNet) supports data
intensive scientific research by providing high performance interconnects among
select research laboratories, teaching environments, and instrumentation
facilities on and between the two primary campuses of Northwestern University,
thereby enhancing research capabilities and significantly expanding
opportunities for interdisciplinary research. The research projects directly
impacted by this network include:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;* Computational
Chemistry: enabled visualization of terabyte-sized datasets aimed at
understanding how DNA structures and mechanical properties influence binding to
proteins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;* Chemical Engineering: transfer of large
datasets to analytical facilities used to explore reduction of automotive
emissions, development of fuel cells, and green chemistry processes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;* Theoretical Chemistry: movement of large datasets
between the campus and national facilities used in the exploration of charge
transfer in molecular systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;* High-Energy Physics:
Accelerated the movement and analysis of multi-terabyte datasets being generated
as part of the Higgs Boson discovery project&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;* Nanoscale
Science: transfer of large-scale 3-dimensional optical imaging of nanoparticles
in cells, which allows the ability to monitor intracellular movement, to
computer clusters for analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This network has direct
impact on the undergraduate and graduate research and training capabilities in
the departments and labs represented by these projects, broadening access to
internal and external research resources through interconnects among multiple
regional, national and international facilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
network is implemented as a long term resource within a wider science networking
strategic plan targeted towards enhancing scientific research, teaching and
collaboration with an emphasis on enhancing venues for hands-on participation in
scientific researcher by undergraduate students.