* 1341602
* Collaborative Research: The Physiological and Biochemical Underpinnings of Thermal Tolerance in Antarctic Notothenioid Fishes
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Elizabeth Crockett, Ohio University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Burns
* 08/31/2019
* USD 492,672.00

The ocean surrounding Antarctica is home to an extraordinary assemblage of
fishes, dominated by a single group that are extremely well-suited to life in
icy waters and which are of significant ecological importance there. Of great
concern is the capacity of these fishes to withstand increases in temperature as
the region of the Western Antarctic Peninsula warms at a rate faster than any
other area in the Southern hemisphere. One particular group of Antarctic fishes,
known as the icefishes, are particularly vulnerable to increases in temperature
because unlike all other vertebrates on earth, icefishes are white-blooded due
to their lack of the oxygen-binding protein hemoglobin. This greatly reduces
their capacity to transport and deliver oxygen to tissues compared to red-
blooded Antarctic fishes. Previous studies have shown that icefishes are indeed
less tolerant to elevations in temperature but the underlying factors are
completely unknown. Additionally, it is not understood if red- or white-blooded
Antarctic fishes can adjust, or acclimate, to modest increases in temperature,
similar to those changes in temperature the animals might experience as the
earth warms. The investigators will determine if heart function and/or nervous
system function limits thermal tolerance of Antarctic fishes, and will determine
their capacity to acclimate to warmer temperatures. The project will further the
NSF goal of training new generations of scientists by training graduate and
undergraduate students. In addition, the project will collaborate with a high
school biology teacher from a school which serves a largely minority student
body. The students will learn about the marine environment, and will construct a
camera to be used in the field to learn more about Antarctic fishes. Two
students and the teacher will also attend a summer marine biology internship
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Antarctic fishes within the suborder
Notothenioidei (called "notothenioids") are among the organisms on earth least
able to deal with changes in temperature. The hemoglobinless icefish are even
less able to withstand temperature changes than are red-blooded notothenioids.
While this is well documented, the underlying physiological and biochemical
mechanisms responsible are unknown. The investigators will test the hypotheses
that cardiac work is significantly greater in icefishes compared to red-blooded
species, and that as temperature increases, the greater cardiac work of
icefishes, coupled with reduced blood oxygen-carrying capacity, results in
cardiac failure at a lower temperature compared to red-blooded species. They
also hypothesize that neuronal function limits thermal tolerance of red-blooded
notothenioids. These hypotheses will be tested using a wide variety of
experiments. For example, the investigators will measure heart rate concurrently
with critical thermal maximum. They will also characterize metabolic and gene-
expression responses to elevated temperature and determine if mitochondrial
function contributes to thermal tolerance using a variety of techniques. To
determine if neuronal function limits thermal tolerance they will quantify
behavioral responses to warming of whole animals and to warming of only the
brain area. They will also determine if acclimation to warmer temperatures
impacts heart function and they will measure activities of a variety of enzymes
from central metabolic pathways.