* 1341150
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Endocrine and Behavioral Correlates of Female Social Dominance in Eulemur
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2015
* Christine Drea, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2015
* USD 23,553.00

Female social dominance (FSD) over males characterizes most Malagasy lemurs,
which represent almost 30% of all primates; yet, little is known about the
evolution or mechanism of this unusual phenomenon. Associated with FSD is a
suite of behavioral, physiological, and morphological traits in females that
implicates (as a possible mechanism) 'masculinization' via androgen exposure. In
light of this association, this project by doctoral student Joseph Petty (Duke
University), under the guidance of Dr. Christine Drea, takes a comparative and
integrative approach to investigating the role of the neuroendocrine system,
particularly androgens, in regulating FSD in lemurs. Studying mixed-sex pairs of
six closely related Eulemur species that express a gradient of behavioral
variation, from aggressive FSD to co-dominance between the sexes, this project
will characterize the expression of intersexual dominance, affiliation, and
aggression for each species. It will further provide novel information about the
neuroendocrine correlates of behavior through the analysis of blood samples for
the steroid hormones androstenedione (A4), testosterone (T), and estradiol (E2),
as well as the neurotransmitter serotonin (5-HT). Lastly, to provide evidence of
a direct causal linkage across species between behavior associated with FSD and
neuroendocrine networks, the endocrine system will be experimentally
manipulated, using a gonadotrophin-releasing hormone antagonist (antide), to
assess the behavioral and social effects on masculinized behavior in female
lemurs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project's unique comparative and experimental
perspective will provide an increased understanding of the evolution of female
dominance in primate social systems, as well as insight into the direct
activational role of naturally circulating hormones in the regulation of female
behavior. Its nontraditional focus has the potential to help update current
definitions of sexual selection to better reflect the importance of intrasexual
competition in females and to transform current understanding of the proximate
mechanisms that underlie the physiology and expression of social
dominance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will be conducted at the Duke Lemur
Center in Durham, NC, where it provides opportunities for collaborations with
research, technical, and educational staff. Through these collaborations, this
project facilitates mentorship of undergraduate researchers, dissemination of
information relevant to lemur biology and conservation, public outreach, and
hands-on science experience for children.