* 1341165
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Social change, parasite exposure and immune dysregulation: An evolutionary medicine approach
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2015
* James Snodgrass, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2015
* USD 20,393.00

Two recent hypotheses--the Hygiene Hypothesis and the Disappearing Microbiota
Hypothesis--argue that the dramatic rise in allergies and autoimmune disorders
in industrialized nations stems from decreased exposure to pathogens. These
hypotheses posit a mismatch between contemporary lifestyles and the evolved
biology of the human species. People living in developed nations such as the
United States are experiencing reduced exposure to parasitic worms and bacteria,
as well as overall changes to the microbial composition of the gut, compared to
individuals living in less developed nations. These changes appear to be
resulting in decreased immune stimulation and an increased vulnerability to
allergy and autoimmune diseases, which are nearly absent in non-Western
populations. The present dissertation study by doctoral student Tara Cepon
(University of Oregon), under the supervision of Dr. James Snodgrass, tests both
the Hygiene and Disappearing Microbiota Hypotheses among the Shuar, a forager-
horticulturalist population from Amazonian Ecuador who are currently
experiencing rapid yet uneven cultural change related to integration into the
market-based economy.

The project examines relationships among social/lifestyle factors, intestinal
parasite composition, and immune function and dysregulation among three
geographically separated Shuar communities experiencing different degrees of
market involvement and related social change. Through household interviews,
microscopic and molecular analyses of fecal samples, and biomarkers of immune
function, the present project will shed light on patterns of parasite exposure
and the role of humans as ecosystems for our parasitic residents, as well as the
contribution that these residents make to immune development and function. This
study also will advance knowledge of the health effects of cultural change by
focusing needed attention on how environmental shifts affect infectious and
autoimmune disease prevalence.

Beyond these contributions, this study has important implications for public
health policy, community outreach, international science partnerships, and
education. The research increases our understanding of the effects of market-
related changes on health variation among Shuar and, by extension, other
populations undergoing cultural change. Further, it has the potential to provide
insights that can be used for improving local and global health by identifying
lifestyle factors to target when implementing policies to reduce infectious and
chronic disease burden. Finally, this project will train a female scientist and
will provide research opportunities for undergraduates.