* 1341496
* Collaborative Research: Pathways of Circumpolar Deep Water to West Antarctica from Profiling Float and Satellite Measurements
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2020
* James Girton, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Peter Milne
* 08/31/2020
* USD 866,889.00

Current oceanographic interest in the interaction of relatively warm water of
the Southern Ocean Circumpolar Deep Water ( CDW) as it moves southward to the
frigid waters of the Antarctic continental shelves is based on the potential
importance of heat transport from the global ocean to the base of continental
ice shelves. This is needed to understand the longer term mass balance of the
continent, the stability of the vast Antarctic ice sheets and the rate at which
sea-level will rise in a warming world. Improved observational knowledge of the
mechanisms of how warming CDW moves across the Antarctic Circumpolar Current
(ACC) is needed.

Understanding this dynamical transport, believed to take place by the eddy flux
of time-varying mesoscale circulation features, will improve coupled ocean-
atmospheric climate models. The development of the next generation of coupled
ocean-ice- climate models help us understand future changes in atmospheric heat
fluxes, glacial and sea-ice balance, and changes in the Antarctic ecosystems. A
recurring obstacle to our understanding is the lack of data in this distant
region. In this project, a number of subsurface profiling EM-APEX floats adapted
to operate under sea ice will be launched on up to 4 cruises of opportunity to
the Pacific sector during Austral summer. The floats will be launched south of
the Polar Front and measure shear, turbulence, temperature, and salinity to
2000m depth for up to 2 year missions while following the CDW layer.