* 1341156
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Dual Burden Life History Tradeoffs in the Exploration of Childhood Gut Immune Function and Overnutrition
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2013,02/28/2015
* Kelly Houck, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 02/28/2015
* USD 22,250.00

Frequent intestinal infections due to poor water quality and inadequate
sanitation during childhood often result in chronic malnutrition and linear
growth restrictions. Many developing countries, however, are now undergoing diet
and disease transitions, with a shift from frequent malnutrition and infectious
disease to increasing overnutrition, with calorically-dense, high-fat, low-fiber
diets, and higher rates of overweight and obesity. The impact of this dual
burden of infection and overnutrition on childhood intestinal health and immune
function remains unknown. Doctoral student Kelly Houck (University of North
Carolina), with the guidance of Dr. Amanda Thompson, draws on the emerging field
of study focusing on gut microbiota, the beneficial bacterial colonies
responsible for intestinal barrier function, digestion of dietary fiber and
immune health (inflammatory regulation), to examine the impact of pathogenic and
dietary factors on the relationship between childhood gut immune health, growth
and obesity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Gal√°pagos Islands of Ecuador are an
important setting for this research as children experience both high infection
rates due to the lack of clean water and overnutrition, likely due to the
reliance on processed foods shipped from the mainland. Researchers will collect
detailed data on the children's diet, illness history, and household
characteristics, and will measure growth and adiposity, household water quality,
and gut immune function using blood spot and fecal analyses. This project tests
the hypothesis that in dual burden environments, concurrent pathogenic exposures
and overnutrition contribute to gut immune dysregulation, creating a new
synergism between overnutrition and infection that may be driving the
paradoxical pattern of childhood stunting and obesity seen in such
populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In developing countries where economic
development and urbanization are rapidly transforming human health, the need to
understand how these changes are affecting childhood immune function and growth
is urgent to prevent the high rates of infection, stunting and obesity. The
proposed project offers training to university students and a community health
worker in Ecuador. The results will provide original insights into the impacts
of gut immune activation on childhood growth and obesity and identify important
targets for public health education and interventions relevant to the Galapagos,
Ecuador, and other non-industrialized populations undergoing transition.