* 1341360
* Development of a Laser Spectroscopy System for Analysis of 17Oexcess on Ice Cores
* GEO,OPP
* 10/01/2013,01/31/2017
* Eric Steig, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 01/31/2017
* USD 357,627.00

Steig/1341360

This award supports a two-year project to develop a method for rapid and precise
measurements of the difference in 18O/16O and 17O/16O isotope ratios in water,
referred to as the 17O-excess. Measurement of 17O-excess is a recent innovation
in geochemistry, complementing traditional measurements of the ratios of
hydrogen (D/H) and oxygen (18O/16O). Conventional measurements of 17O/16O are
limited in number because of the time-consuming and laborious nature of the
analyses, which involves the conversion of water to oxygen via fluorination,
followed by high-precision mass spectrometry. This project will use a novel
cavity ring-down spectroscopy (CRDS) system developed by a joint effort of the
University of Washington and Picarro, Inc. (Santa Clara, CA), along with the
Centre for Ice and Climate (Neils Bohr Institute, Copenhagen). The primary
intellectual merit of the research is the improvement of the CRDS method for
measurements of 17Oexcess of discrete samples of water, to obtain precision and
accuracy competitive with conventional methods using mass spectrometry. This
will be achieved by quantification of the effects of water vapor concentration
variability and instrument memory, precise calibration of the instrument against
standard waters, and improvements to the spectroscopic analyses. The CRDS system
will also be coupled to continuous-flow systems for ice core analysis, in
collaboration with the University of Colorado, Boulder. The goal is to have an
operational system available for ice core processing associated with the next
major U.S.-led ice core project at South Pole, in 2015-2017. The broader impacts
of the research include the ability to measure 17O-excess in ambient atmospheric
water vapor, which can be used to improve understanding of convection, moisture
transport, and condensation. The instrument development work proposed here is
relevant to research supported by several NSF-GEO programs, including Hydrology,
Climate and Large Scale Dynamics, Paleoclimate, Atmosphere Chemistry, and both
the Arctic and Antarctic Programs. This proposal will support a postdoctoral
researcher.