* 1341612
* Assembling and Mining the Genomes of Giant Antarctic Foraminifera
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Samuel Bowser, Health Research Incorporated/New York State Department of Health
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Burns
* 08/31/2019
* USD 549,991.00

Agglutinated foraminifera (forams for short) are early-evolving, single-celled
organisms. These "living fossils" construct protective shells using sediment
grains held together by adhesive substances that they secrete. During shell
construction, agglutinated forams display amazing properties of selection - for
example, some species build their shells of clear quartz grains, while other
species use only grains of a specific size. Understanding how these single cells
assemble complex structures may contribute to nanotechnology by enabling people
to use forams as "cellular machines" to aid in the construction of nano-devices.
This project will analyze the genomes of at least six key foram species, and
then "mine" these genomes for technologically useful products and processes. The
project will focus initially on the adhesive materials forams secrete, which may
have wide application in biomedicine and biotechnology. Furthermore, the work
will further develop a molecular toolkit which could open up new avenues of
research on the physiology, ecology, and population dynamics of this important
group of Antarctic organisms. The project will also further the NSF goals of
making scientific discoveries available to the general public and of training
new generations of scientists. Educational experiences related to the "thrill of
scientific exploration and discovery" for students and the general public will
be provided through freely-available short films and a traveling art/science
exhibition. The project will also provide hands-on research opportunities for
undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Explorers Cove, situated on the
western shore of McMurdo Sound, harbors a unique population of foraminiferan
taxa at depths accessible by scuba diving that otherwise are primarily found in
the deep sea. The project will use next-generation DNA sequencing and
microdissection methods to obtain and analyze nuclear and mitochondrial genomes
from crown members of two species each from three distinct, early-evolving
foraminiferal groups. It will also use next generation sequencing methods to
characterize the in-situ prokaryotic assemblages (microbiomes) of one of these
groups and compare them to reference sediment microbiomes. The phyogenomic
studies of the targeted Antarctic genera will help fill significant gaps in our
current understanding of early foram evolution. Furthermore, comparative genomic
analyses of these six species are expected to yield a better understanding of
the physiology of single-chambered agglutinated forams, especially the
bioadhesive proteins and regulatory factors involved in shell composition and
morphogenesis. Additionally, the molecular basis of cold adaptation in forams
will be examined, particularly with respect to key proteins.