* 1341034
* CC-NIE Integration: Science Slices Converting Network Research Innovation into Enhanced Capability for Computational Science and Engineering at the University of Utah
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2016
* Thomas Cheatham, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 09/30/2016
* USD 984,978.00

As demands on campus networks - many driven by science and engineering
disciplines - intensify, traditional network management approaches are
increasingly obsolete. Researchers often require network paths with higher
throughput, increased security, and/or perimeter firewall bypass. Network
operators traditionally have accommodated a few research users by provisioning
dedicated resources. Previous approaches for addressing requests for special
connectivity to regional and national facilities have not scaled
well.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;At the University of Utah, a research team is
upgrading part of the campus network with technology originally developed for a
national network research testbed (NSF GENI). This "sliceable network" model
allows multiple virtual networks to be established in parallel over the same
equipment. Each resulting science slice may have different characteristics and
may connect to distinct resources either on or off campus. This allocation
scheme may incorporate computational and storage resources in addition to
network paths. With hardware supporting emerging Software Defined Networking
standards, these slices can be controlled to very fine granularity. This
technology inherently supports dynamic slice creation to enable on-demand
network resource allocation for researchers.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This work
provides an abstraction to insulate multiple high-intensity users cleanly in a
campus network. The ensuing intellectual merit follows from applying a research
focused network management approach more broadly to part of a large production
environment. For broader impact, a connection to the University?s undergraduate
honors residence allows this innovative cohort to interact directly with the
sliced network and also pursue guided experimentation. The core software base
and project-specific enhancements are available under open-source licensing.