* 1341728
* EXPROBE-WAIS: Exposed Rock Beneath the West Antarctic Ice Sheet, A Test for Interglacial Ice Sheet Collapse
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* John Stone, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 06/30/2019
* USD 376,812.00

Stone/1341728

This award supports a project to determine if the West Antarctic Ice Sheet
(WAIS) has thinned and collapsed in the past and if so, when did this occur.
This topic is of interest to geologists who have long been studying the history
and behavior of ice sheets (including the WAIS) in order to determine what
climatic conditions allow an ice sheet to survive and what conditions have
caused them to collapse in the past. The bulk of this research has focused on
the last ice age, when climate conditions were far colder than the present; this
project will focus on the response of ice sheets to warmer climates in the past.
A new and potentially transformative approach that uses the analysis of atoms
transformed by cosmic-rays in bedrock beneath the WAIS will allow a definitive
test for ice free conditions in the past. This is because the cosmic rays
capable of producing the necessary reactions can penetrate only a few meters
through glacier ice. Therefore, if they are detected in samples from hundreds of
meters below the current ice sheet surface this would provide definitive proof
of mostly ice-free conditions in the past. The concentrations of different
cosmic ray products in cores from different depths will help answer the question
of how frequently bedrock has been exposed, how much the ice sheet has thinned,
and which time periods in the past produced climatic conditions capable of
making the ice sheet unstable.

Short bedrock cores beneath the ice sheet near the Pirrit Hills in West
Antarctica will be collected using a new agile sub-ice geological drill (capable
of drilling up to 200 meters beneath the ice surface) that is being developed by
the Ice Drilling Program Office (IDPO) to support this and other projects.
Favorable drilling sites have already been identified based on prior
reconnaissance mapping, sample analysis and radar surveys of the ice-sheet bed.
The cores collected in this study will be analyzed for cosmic-ray-produced
isotopes of different elements with a range of half-lives from 5700 yr (C-14) to
1.4 Myr (Be-10), as well as stable Ne-21. The presence or absence of these
isotopes will provide a definitive test of whether bedrock surfaces were ice-
free in the past and due to their different half-lives, ratios of the isotopes
will place constraints on the age, frequency and duration of past exposure
episodes. Results from bedrock surfaces at different depths will indicate the
degree of past ice-sheet thinning. The aim is to tie evidence of deglaciation in
the past to specific periods of warmer climate and thus to gauge the ice sheet's
response to known climate conditions. This project addresses the broad question
of ice-sheet sensitivity to climate warming, which previously has been largely
determined indirectly from sea-level records. In contrast, this project will
provide direct measurements that provide evidence of ice-sheet thinning in West
Antarctica. Results from this work will help to identify the climatic factors
and thresholds capable of endangering the WAIS in future. The project will make
a significant contribution to the ongoing study of climate change, ice-sheet
melting and associated sea-level rise. This project has field work in
Antarctica.