* 1341003
* CC-NIE Network Infrastructure: Enabling Data-Intensive Research at the University of Connecticut Through Science DMZ
* CSE,OAC
* 11/01/2013,10/31/2016
* Sanguthevar Rajasekaran, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 10/31/2016
* USD 388,057.00

The goal of this project is to improve the network infrastructure at the
University of Connecticut (UConn), in both the main campus at Storrs and the
Health Center at Farmington, to enable data-intensive research. Specifically,
the project (1) constructs a Science DMZ at the Storrs campus that provides an
aggregate access bandwidth of 100Gbps to its regional network provider, (2) re-
architects the current Science DMZ at the Farmington campus and increases its
access bandwidth from 2Gbps to 100Gbps, and (3) establishes a 40Gbps layer-2
connection between the Storrs and Farmington campuses dedicated to scientific
traffic between these two campuses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
The project is expected to significantly increase data transfer rate to specific
projects in physics, geography, statistics, biology, bioinformatics,
quantitative cell biology and simulations, and computational genomics, directly
benefiting research in a wide range of disciplines. The enhanced network
connectivity will also make an impact on closely interlinking the two campuses,
fostering multidisciplinary research that can lead to scientific breakthroughs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The project will enhance the capabilities
of researchers to host data and share data with researchers in other
institutions, which can benefit a larger community of researchers. The proposed
infrastructure will also facilitate our current GENI educational activities by
providing a platform for computer networking courses and training programs. The
researchers participating in the project will continue their current practice of
involving minority and underrepresented students in research, and will
disseminate their research outcomes to the scientific communities through
journal and conference publications.