* 1341904
* 2013 Chemical Sciences and Society Summit (CS3) in Japan
* MPS,CHE
* 05/15/2013,04/30/2015
* Bradley Miller, American Chemical Society (ACS)
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 04/30/2015
* USD 30,000.00

This award from the Division of Chemistry supports an international meeting as
part of the Chemical Sciences and Society Symposia (CS3). The CS3 convenes
eminent high-level researchers from the US, UK, Japan, China and Germany to
explore frontier chemistry research on diverse topics. The CS3 meeting in Tokyo,
Japan, September 16-19, 2013 will work to chart a vision for "Efficient
Utilization of Elements," i.e. finding new ways to reduce/replace the use of
rare/precious metals. Specifically, it will focus on research areas with
applications for catalysis, energy storage/conversion, construction materials,
and environmental safeguard more sustainably. Representatives from each
country's science and technology funding agencies also participate in the
symposia. These meetings have been developed multilaterally through discussions
of the chemical societies in each participating country (American Chemical
Society in the US). This series is intended to be of great value to the global
chemistry enterprise and to the world at large as it attempts to foster work in
trans-national teams, across scientific disciplines, and beyond institutional
boundaries. The workshop proceedings are promoted and distributed to the global
science and technology community and the general public through journal articles
and reports on the web, respectively. These results and recommendations
illustrate chemistry's role in solving challenges in green energy and in
pursuing economically-feasible and environmentally-benign commodity chemical
production.