* 1341207
* Noyce Northeast Regional Conferences in 2013 and 2014
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Lisa Gonsalves, SUNY College at Cortland
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 08/31/2016
* USD 715,398.00

Drexel University, the State University of New York College at Cortland, and the
University of Massachusetts Boston are organizing two annual conferences for
Noyce Scholars, Fellows and faculty from Noyce programs located in the Northeast
United States. The conferences are designed to advance the content knowledge and
pedagogical practices of STEM teachers with a focus on teaching in high-need
schools. Successful teaching in high need schools is dependent upon STEM
teachers who have a wide repertoire of pedagogical practices for teaching
conceptually difficult content. The conferences are enabling participants to
learn about, discuss and practice the latest methods for teaching STEM content
to students who face the challenges common in high-need schools. To this end,
the conference aims to integrate the intellectual and conceptual aspects of STEM
teaching with the practical application of STEM concepts in the classroom. Noyce
programs from the Northeast region are coming together to learn about and share
the latest content from STEM fields and the best teaching practices. The
conferences provide a platform for them to inspire one another, to address the
national needs of supporting high quality, innovative and transformative
mathematics and science teaching and to advance education in high need schools.
Noyce scholars and teachers receive professional development that directly
impacts their teaching. The conferences are providing opportunities for Noyce
scholars and teachers to collaborate, share experiences, expertise, and skills
with peers and colleagues and to continue to maintain the connections beyond the
conference through on-going networking. The goal is to advocate for strong
content knowledge and teaching practices in mathematics and science and include
researchers, teacher educators, K-12 educators, school administrators, and
policy makers who can support teachers and work to positively transform
practices and policies to better support science and mathematics learning for
students in high need schools.