* 1341329
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Metal Procurement and Regional Community Organization in the Bronze Age of Southwest Transylvania
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2015
* John O'Shea, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2015
* USD 25,192.00

Under the guidance of Dr. John O'Shea, Colin Quinn will investigate how metal
procurement affected community organization in southwest Transylvania during the
Bronze Age (2700-1200BC). Metals, especially copper, tin, and gold, were key
resources during the Bronze Age, a period of major social transformation across
Europe. Southwest Transylvania is an ideal case in which to study the
articulation of metal procurement and community organization because metal
resources are locally abundant, spatially discrete, and exchanged widely across
the continent during the Bronze Age. The goals of this research are to
understand how metal procurement was organized, what roles metal procurement
played in the political economy, and the changing roles of metal procurement in
the development of social complexity throughout the Bronze
Age.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The organization and development of metal procurement
and communities will be examined through the study of change over time in the
patterning of metallurgy, settlement systems, and local and non-local exchange.
To generate these data, Colin Quinn will conduct systematic survey and test
excavations at sites within the Geoagiu Valley. The project will examine the
organization of metal procurement to evaluate three models; if it was integrated
by (1) autonomous communities, (2) local elites, or (3) regional polities. These
models will inform understanding of how Bronze Age communities positioned
themselves on the landscape in relation to resources and neighboring settlements
and how these relationships and priorities changed through
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research is the first systematic
archaeological survey in southwest Transylvania and the first anthropologically-
oriented study of communities in metal procurement zones in the Carpathians. As
such, this research develops models of politics and the economy that are
specific to metal procurement zones. This is a much-needed counterbalance to
traditional models of the role of metal in society that assume that metal
sources are not locally available. The revised chronology generated through
radiocarbon dating will challenge and nuance our understanding of development of
social complexities in southwest Transylvania and inform future models into the
relationship among social, economic, and political lifeways in middle-range
societies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More broadly, this research expands
anthropological understanding of resource procurement and its social context.
The long-term perspective provided by archaeological approaches complements
approaches from other disciplines that are interested in the impact of mining,
trade, and globalization on local economies, political systems, and the
environment. The proposed project will critically evaluate the likely shifting
role of metal procurement in the organization and evolution of societies in
procurement zones. This research will serve as a template for studying the role
of local resources in procurement zones and can be applied to the study of a
wide range of resources in many different temporal and geographic contexts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project contributes to and enhances larger research
efforts to study the development of social complexity across the Carpathian
Basin by virtue of extending these approaches into metal procurement zones. The
project has broader impacts by fostering international collaborations and
providing training opportunities for Romanian and U.S. students. The local
community will be engaged through public outreach events and web resources. The
GIS database generated as part of this project will serve as a lasting
infrastructure of research and will be made available to local archaeologists
and policy makers to be used in cultural heritage management.