* 1341858
* Roundtable on Ethnographic Film Archiving as a Tool for Research in Contemporary Visual Anthropology
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2014
* Alice Apley, Documentary Educational Resources
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 07/31/2014
* USD 10,500.00

This award to Documentary Educational Resources (DER) will support a one-day
Roundtable on Archiving Ethnographic Films. The meeting will bring together
anthropologists, archivists and ethnographic media producers from leading Visual
Anthropology programs, and institutions such as the Smithsonian Institution and
Library of Congress, to strategize about how ethnographic film archives can best
support contemporary research in visual anthropology. Roundtable outcomes
include 1) recommendations for the design of Ethnographic Film databases (using
the DER collection as a case study) and 2) discussion of frameworks, priorities,
and next steps for the preservation and accessibility of ethnographic films.
Beginning from a notion of ethnographic film as a cultural product, the
Roundtable will assess existing standards for describing anthropological subject
matter content, filmmaking practices and genres, and technologies used in the
production of film and video recordings. Further discussion, leading to
development of a white paper, will address key concerns and priorities for the
field related to the preservation and access of both existing collections and
new ethnographic media. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The extensive body of films and
footage that have been created as part of ethnographic research and teaching
constitute a significant record of human cultures and societies. The project
will improve access to these materials for individuals ranging from individuals
interested in identifying films for teaching, museum exhibitions, film festivals
and community screenings. An improved infrastructure for the preservation and
accessibility of ethnographic films will help to extend understanding of the
anthropological project, of film as a medium of documentation, and of our
diverse human heritage. Further, the consideration of archiving practices for
film materials understood as texts rather than as recorded data has significance
for the broader field of archiving.