* 1341255
* Conference: Gordon Conference on Synthetic Biology: (Re-constructing and Re-programming Life  at Mount Snow Resort, Vermont
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2013,06/30/2014
* Christopher Voigt, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Susanne von Bodman
* 06/30/2014
* USD 15,680.00

Overview: &lt;br/&gt;The pursuit of synthetic biology is both the design and
fabrication of biological components and systems that do not exist in the
natural world, as well as the re-design and fabrication of already existing
biological systems. The core of this concept draws on cross-disciplinary and
biological engineering design principles to enable the creation of "synthetic"
or hybrid biological systems with unprecedented power and efficiency.
Eventually, it is envisioned to build up from scratch - bottom-up approaches -
cellular components, compartments and even cells to create living devices for
use as molecular-scale factories, sensors to detect chemical weapons, devices to
clean up pollutants, diagnose diseases, deliver vaccines, and produce hydrogen
from water and sunlight, or to create novel, hybrid materials. Other on-going
efforts - top-down approaches - with ultimately the very same goals, focus on
simplifying and genetically reprogramming existing cells with simple genomes.
Thus, this emerging field has tremendous scientific, technological and
economical potential and downstream impacts. However, regardless of a number of
recent advances in this regard, Synthetic Biology is as yet in its infancy, with
knowledge highly scattered and scarce, and facing many serious scientific,
technological and societal challenges ahead. This first GRC on Synthetic Biology
will provide an in-depth discussion forum among practitioners of the various
fields, with particular focus on top-down vs. bottom-up approaches aimed at re-
constructing and re-programming life. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
&lt;br/&gt;This conference seeks to foster in-depth discussions to pinpoint the
challenges, potential and pitfalls, and to lay the foundation for future
developments and consolidation of the field towards fulfilling the envisaged,
ambitious goals. Because of the lack of a common language among the scientists
from the many different fields involved, longer meetings with large blocks of
time dedicated to discussions, rather than series of presentations held at
"traditional" conferences, are favored for establishing such a foundation. The
conference program was thus designed to promote these ambitious goals.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts : &lt;br/&gt;While ensuring the highest
scientific quality and standing, the conference program was developed to promote
the interaction between established researchers and the up-and-coming
investigators at the earlier stages of their careers. Furthermore, both the
invited speakers and attendees balance well in terms of gender,
geography/continents, ethnicities and expertise. In addition, this conference
will provide opportunities for junior scientists and graduate students to
present their work in poster format and exchange ideas with leaders in the
field. The collegial atmosphere of this conference, with programmed discussion
sessions as well as opportunities for informal gatherings in the afternoons and
evenings, provides a forum for scientists from different disciplines to
brainstorm and to promote cross-disciplinary collaborations in the various
research areas represented. Thus, this conference will consolidate a critical
mass of practitioners and research topics in an emerging field that promises
tremendous scientific, economic and societal impacts.