* 1341027
* CC-NIE Networking Infrastructure: Establishing a Science DMZ for Research in Coastal, Marine, Atmospheric, Environmental, and Geospatial Computing Sciences
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2016
* Dulal Kar, Texas A&M University Corpus Christi
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 09/30/2016
* USD 495,466.00

This project facilitates national and international collaborations among
scientists for environmental research by establishing a high-speed Science DMZ
at Texas A&amp;M University-Corpus Christi, an emerging research institution,
whose research focus is on the Gulf of Mexico and its resources. The Science DMZ
is designed to securely and reliably share data among scientists for research in
various fields such as coastal, marine, atmospheric, and environmental sciences.
This new cyberinfrastructure is aimed to promote connectivity among all
scientific researchers in the Texas A&amp;M University system institutions - 11
universities and 1 Health Science Center. The high-speed Science DMZ network, to
some extent, is designed to be physically separate from the existing campus-wide
network infrastructure to ensure high data rate, reliability, and security.
Fiber optic links, high-performance switches, and high-performance routers, all
in duplicate, are used to connect four major science and engineering buildings
to the Science DMZ thus achieving high reliability and double data rate. Traffic
to and from the Science DMZ are not firewalled, thus allowing free flow of
science data. Instead, security of the Science DMZ and its data servers are
provided by passive monitoring of incoming as well as outgoing traffic by an
intrusion detection system. The InCommon authentication system allows external
collaborators to access resources at the data centers. The project will
transform the university into a major source of environmental research data,
create research opportunities for its minority student body, expand research in
all key environmental research areas around the globe through collaboration, and
improve data flow for greater dissemination of ongoing research findings.