* 1341881
* Bering Strait Socio-economic Organization, ca.2000-200 BP: A View from Port Clarence
* GEO,OPP
* 06/15/2013,05/31/2017
* Shelby Anderson, Portland State University
* Continuing Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 05/31/2017
* USD 144,249.00

This is an EAGER proposal to support archaeological excavation and analysis of
an ancient site at Point Spencer, Alaska, near the former US Coast Guard (USCG)
station. This research is appropriate for EAGER funding because of its
application of new techniques and the potential for discovery of new
information. In addition, the project has an element of urgency to it because of
subsistence/illegal digging that has increased at the site location following
the departure of the USCG. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More than 50 years ago Helge
Larsen recognized the importance of the stratified Ipiutak and Neoeskimo
deposits at the Point Spencer site, located on the Bering Sea coast of northern
Alaska. In the late 1940s, Larsen and Charles Lucier investigated this extensive
village site as part of a larger effort to explain western Alaskan prehistory.
With intact stratified deposits dated across the Ipiutak-Neoeskimo transition
and good organic preservation, Larsen and Lucier recognized the potential of
Point Spencer to address key questions about socio-economic change over the last
2000 years. Despite this potential, no research has taken place at the site in
the intervening years. The research proposed here involves excavation at Point
Spencer to address questions about socio-economic organization during this
period of significant cultural change. Changing diet, subsistence practices,
environmental change, and engagement with regional social and economic systems
are factors archaeologists point to in explaining the development and spread of
the Neoeskimo tradition across the North American Arctic. Yet these ideas remain
largely untested with new archaeological data. This research will address these
questions through data recovery and survey in the Port Clarence region of
northern Alaska. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Illegal digging at Point Spencer brings
both urgency and risk to the proposed project. In 2010, it was estimated that
approximately 40 acres of the site were disturbed, with more than 70 pits or
disturbed areas created by illegal digging. Much of this digging took place in
2010 when the USCG withdrew from their station near the site. Aerial surveys
indicate that similar illegal digging activities are taking place at other
archaeological sites around the Port Clarence region. Research goals include: 1)
establishing the local chronology, 2) investigating mobility and settlement
patterns both locally and regionally, 3) studying subsistence activities and
diet, 4) reconstructing local landscape history, and 5) evaluating the scope of
illegal digging activities at the site and develop a framework for
collaboratively addressing this problem with the Bureau of Land Management (BLM)
and local communities. Methods include excavation, radiocarbon dating, spatial
data analysis, ceramic sourcing, artifact analysis, residue analysis of soils
and ceramics, faunal analysis, study of cooking/processing features, and
geoarchaeology.