* 1341019
* CC-NIE Integration: Houston, We have Troubleshooting for the 100 Gbps Network!
* CSE,OAC
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Deniz Gurkan, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 08/31/2016
* USD 900,000.00

The project, Houston-Cyberinfrastructure (HoustonCI), establishes a flow
separation and analysis system for the University of Houston campus network
while enabling high bandwidth data transfers from domain science laboratories on
the University of Houston and Rice University campuses. These laboratories all
connect to the regional networks LEARN (Lonestar Education and Research Network,
Texas-wide network with over 30 institution members), SETG (SouthEast Texas
Gigapop, Houston-based fiber loop with University of Houston, Rice University,
Texas Medical Center, and other institutional members in Houston area), GENI
(Global Environment for Network Innovation), and Internet2 100 Gbps software-
defined network (SDN). In this respect, the project has two objectives: (i)
leverage software-defined networking (SDN) to separate flows for better
monitoring of where high data transfer needs and network issues are; and (ii)
pave the way towards connecting with 100 Gbps cyber-infrastructure of Internet2.
The research and development effort is in the creation of a troubleshooting
framework that utilizes OpenFlow protocol flow
definitions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The impact of the project will be on campus
network engineers having a deeper exposure to network utilization by science
data transfers. On one hand, such a troubleshooting capability will better the
network design and planning processes on campuses. On the other hand, the domain
scientists will be able to communicate science data transfer needs with network
engineers. SDN will enable effective allocation of bandwidth with savings in
campus networking investments by institutions. The research methods and results
will be tested and demonstrated by utilizing the GENI infrastructure as an
experimentation testbed.