* 1341126
* US Bahrain Cooperative Research-CNIC: Intelligent Video Surveillance Systems for Hajjrites
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2014
* Ahmed Abdelgawad, Central Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Lyons
* 09/30/2014
* USD 36,649.00

1341126&lt;br/&gt;Ahmed Abdelgawad&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
support research by Dr. Ahmed Abdelgawad, Department of Engineering and
Technology at Central Michigan University and Dr. Yasser Ismail, University of
Bahrain. They plan to use surveillance system data taken during the pilgrimage
in Mecca (the Hajj) as a unique occasion where some 2-3 million people gather
for 4 days, and with the traffic that results as they move on foot or by car in
prescribed paths. The research goal is to speed the encoding process of video
signals that are transmitted from cameras to the monitoring room. The work will
be in two phases: the simulation to study, investigate, and propose new
algorithms for video encoding; and the hardware implementation phase which will
focus on developing low power, high speed and efficient monitoring cameras that
can be used for monitoring activities in Hajj
traffic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The PIs plan to address some
cutting edge problems in high-speed video encoding. This project can advance the
science of signal processing by suggesting new motion estimation algorithms for
real-time applications. Due to the logistical and time-consuming challenges of
establishing a real time video streaming test bed, much of the current
algorithms design work has relied on analytical or simulation models. This has
significantly limited the development of the video surveillance systems. This
project will focus on the design and test of a fully integrated infrastructure.
It will enable novel and potentially transformative network research in signal
processing. In addition the project is designed to support on-going research and
experimentation in other areas such as environmental monitoring, autonomous
vehicle, and robot applications. The PIs have some very promising results
already in motion estimation. They will first formalize the improved motion
estimation algorithms and then proceed to a hardware prototype implementation.
The latter part will seek to validate the algorithms in realistic settings. The
PI plans to test his design using large crowd-based video datasets, i.e., as
obtained from video surveillance during the Hajj. This is a very realistic
environment to evaluate the work and will have applicability to other
surveillance settings as well. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: A major
goal is to produce engineers that have the education and research expertise,
this will help to infuse education with the excitement of discovery and enrich
research through the diversity of learning perspectives. This will be
accomplished, in part, through the design of an inter-disciplinary project based
course (i.e., signal processing, embedded systems, and image processing). With
international collaboration, the PI will orient emerging undergraduate and
graduate students toward research in signal processing, open up new scientific
directions, encourage new ideas, and facilitate knowledge transfer to society.
The PI who is a new faculty is planning to use research work to develop new
courses, and will partner with on-going and successful university student
recruitment programs. The hands-on experience combined with theoretical
principles will be a very attractive program to the innovative student and
under-represented groups. The project will help to have demonstrations at local
K-12 schools and youth groups. The PI will give presentations to Society of
Women Engineers (SWE) to encourage women to participate in his research field.
The outcome of this project will be available through a website. The project
will identify new real time applications, which will benefit the society
especially for security.