* 1341075
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Comparative and functional morphology of primate ungulae and distal phalanges
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2015
* William Jungers, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2015
* USD 9,277.00

Flattened nails are a defining feature of humans and other primates; they are
one of the few traits that unite this Order. Furthermore, the presence or
absence of specialized nails distinguishes the three major extant primate
groups: strepsirrhines (lemurs, lorises, and galagos) possess a grooming claw on
the second toe of each foot, tarsiers have one on both the second and third
toes, and most anthropoids have none. This project, conducted by doctoral
student Stephanie A. Maiolino under the guidance of Dr. William L. Jungers
(Stony Brook University), intends to assess the origin, evolution, and diversity
of primate nails and grooming claws within a broadly comparative mammalian
context. A large database of high resolution digital photographs and ìCT scans
of nails and distal phalanges will be collected. ìCT scanning is employed as a
non-destructive method of sampling bones embedded within preserved mammalian
skins and cadavers. Quantitative data will be analyzed to interpret the
functional and phylogenetic significance of extant distal phalanx and nail
shape, and to interpret the form of the distal phalanges of the earliest fossil
primates. Ancestral state reconstructions will be used to assess the homologies
and polarities of grooming claw form in different primate
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will supply information that is
integral to the understanding of broad questions of primate origins and
diversification. It will provide data on the evolutionary transition from a
claw-bearing ancestor into a nail-bearing primate, a primary component of
theories of primate origins. Additionally, an understanding of the polarity of
grooming claws among primate clades will be gained; this is critical to
systematic analyses of controversial fossils. Finally, this study will help
elucidate the functional and phylogenetic implications of an often cited, but
poorly understood primate trait.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project promotes the
education of a female graduate student and provides opportunities for
collaborations with fellow students. It also includes the training and education
of high school and undergraduate students in 3D and 2D imaging. MicroCT scans
collected for this project will be shared using a free online repository, thus
allowing data that were previously unavailable to be broadly accessed. Finally,
results will be disseminated in peer reviewed journals, professional meetings,
and public talks.