* 1342487
* EAGER: Architectures for Biodegradable Processors
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* David Wentzlaff, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2016
* USD 160,561.00

Computing devices and electronics have become increasingly numerous on a per-
capita basis with people owning multiple personal computing devices such as cell
phones, tablets, and laptops along with embedded electronic devices such as
remote controls and calculators. Also, electronics advance and become obsolete
at a very rapid pace. While this advancement has caused great strides in human
productivity, it has come at a cost in terms of pollution to our environment,
the creation of electronic waste (e-waste), and harm to electronics recycling
workers. This project addresses this challenge by studying how to create
computer architectures for biodegradable electronics built out of organic
semiconductors. By embracing biodegradable and compostable electronics, the
computing and electronics industry can switch from an industry that harms the
environment to one that is sustainable and does not harm the
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project tackles the challenging problem
of designing computer architectures in organic semiconductors. This is a brand
new field as most computer architecture research has targeted (non-
biodegradable) silicon-based substrates. Many challenges exist in designing for
organic semiconductors including, low mobility (low-speed), large transistor-to-
transistor variability, and a different interconnect to transistor speed ratio
than is found in silicon. This project takes a bottom up approach by first
laying the groundwork including the creation of a model logic cell library for
organic semiconductors, then it uses that library as a synthesis target for
different computer architectures, and finally an architectural design tradeoff
study to understand pipeline length and machine
architectures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research can broadly impact humanity by
laying the groundwork for electronics and computers that can be manufactured and
disposed of without adversely impacting the environment. This can ultimately
lead to electronics such as a fully biodegradable cell phone, thereby removing
the need to properly recycle electronics, removing e-waste from our landfills,
and reducing dangers to electronics.