* 1342609
* NSF Support for the 2014 USENIX Security Symposium, Financial Aid; August 2014; San Diego, CA
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2015
* Fabian Monrose, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Shands
* 06/30/2015
* USD 20,000.00

This grant funds approximately 20 US-based graduate students to attend the 2014
USENIX Security Symposium, a leading forum for advanced professionals from
academic and industrial backgrounds to meet and discuss the newest advances in
the security of computer systems and networks. Participation in Security 14 and
similar conferences is a valuable and important part of the graduate school
experience. It provides students with the opportunity to interact with more
senior researchers in the field, and exposes students to leading work in the
field. The support enables the participation of students who would otherwise be
unable to attend the conference. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;USENIX Security 14 will
be held in San Diego from August 20-22, 2014. The conference consists of a
three-day technical program, with numerous workshops co-located. The goal of the
conference is to bring together researchers, practitioners, system
administrators, system programmers, and others interested in the latest advances
in the security of computer systems and networks. This cross-disciplinary
emphasis makes it well suited as a target for student participation, and this
event has always drawn a large proportion of student attendees. This venue
provides an excellent vehicle for students to learn about the latest advances in
computer security research, and participate in engaging discussions on a wide
variety of sub-topics including network and system security, techniques for
developing secure systems, technologies for trustworthy computing, hardware
security, applied cryptography, etc.