* 1342377
* BRIGE: Characterizing the Rheological and Microstructural Evolution of Oil Well Cement Slurries under Elevated Temperature and Pressure Conditions
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Shiho Kawashima, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 08/31/2016
* USD 181,796.00

Background:

Insufficient zonal isolation, or sealing, is a prevalent issue in oil wells,
from which many safety, economic, and environmental concerns can arise. And the
origin of failure can be traced back to the placement of the fresh oil well
cement slurry. During a critical period called transition time, the slurry is
static and evolving from a near-Newtonian fluid to a viscoelastic solid due to
the progression of cement hydration. If it does not either rapidly develop
sufficient static gel strength or set, gas from adjacent geological formations
will penetrate the material. This makes the slurry extremely susceptible to gas
migration, which can result in permanent fluid channels in the well and
compromise the sealing performance of the eventual cement sheath structure.

Technical Description:

The objective of the proposed work is to characterize the rheological properties
of oil well cement slurries considered to be critical in achieving proper zonal
isolation, namely gelation. This will entail measuring the dynamic flow
properties under large and rapid deformation and the linear viscoelastic
properties at rest. All rheological tests will be performed with rigorous
attention to the effects of elevated temperatures and pressures to simulate
down-hole conditions, and shear history to simulate different pumping
conditions. The approach will be to implement complementary shear and
extensional rheological techniques that place the sample under dynamic and
quasi-static loading to monitor the evolution of rate of gelation and magnitude
of static gel strength over the simulated cementing period. And an important
complement to the rheology will be to monitor changes in the crystalline phases
and pore network of the material, which will help provide insight into flow
behavior and sealing performance. This will be done through synchrotron x-ray
diffraction and x-ray tomographic microscopy for real-time, in-situ
microstructural characterization.

Broader Signficance and Importance:

As a complex fluid that is continuously evolving, the thermomechanics and time-
and shear-dependent flow behavior of fresh cement-based materials presents a
challenging characterization problem. And the specific area of oil well
cementing is a particularly good example of an application where understanding
the fresh-state and early-age properties under severe conditions is critical.
The proposed activities will improve understanding of the performance of oil
well cement slurries during placement, which can help in the development of
effective mix design methodologies and models. Ultimately, this can improve
zonal isolation to increase production and safety, and reduce the negative
environmental impact of oil well operations. Further, the experimental
methodology proposed and developed in the study can potentially be extended to
all types of cement-based systems for a wide array of applications.

Broadening Participation of Underrepresented Groups in Engineering:

An important component of the proposed work is the broadening participation
plan, which will focus on supporting women in engineering through direct
involvement in research activities at the pre-college, undergraduate, and
graduate level. By engaging female students in the proposed research, the PI
will present them with the opportunity to impact the field and subsequently give
them the confidence and desire to pursue academia or advanced industry careers
in engineering and science. And through various outreach programs coordinated by
the Office of Outreach Programs and local chapter of Society of Women Engineers
at Columbia University, the PI will participate as a guest speaker to present
the proposed work and run hands-on lab demonstrations on rheology. This will
serve as a means to convey the interdisciplinary nature of her field, invoke
interest and recruit students. Further, the PI will encourage her own students
to participate in outreach programs so that they, themselves, can go on to serve
as role models. As a product of such programs herself, the PI firmly believes
that such trickle down approaches are effective.

This research has been funded through the Broadening Participation Research
Initiation Grants in Engineering solicitation, which is part of the Broadening
Participation in Engineering Program of the Engineering Education and Centers
Division.