* 1342933
* Belmont Forum-G8 Initiative Collaborative Research: Multi-scale adaptations to global change and their impacts on vulnerability in coastal areas
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* John Anderies, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Uhle
* 08/31/2017
* USD 211,508.00

This award provides support to U.S. researchers participating in a project
competitively selected by a 13-country initiative on global change research
through the Belmont Forum and the G8 countries Heads of Research Councils. The
Belmont Forum is a high level group of the world's major and emerging funders of
global environmental change research and international science councils. It aims
to accelerate delivery of the international environmental research most urgently
needed to remove critical barriers to sustainability by aligning and mobilizing
international resources. The G8 Heads of Research Councils developed a funding
framework to support multilateral research projects that address global
challenges in ways that are beyond the capacity of national or bilateral
activities. Each partner country provides funding for their researchers within a
consortium to alleviate the need for funds to cross international borders. This
approach facilitates effective leveraging of national resources to support
excellent research on topics of global relevance best tackled through a
multinational approach, recognizing that global challenges need global
solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Working together in an inaugural call of the
International Opportunities Fund, the Belmont Forum and G8HORCs have provided
support for research projects that seek to deliver knowledge needed for action
to mitigate and adapt to detrimental environmental change and extreme hazardous
events that relate to either Freshwater Security or Coastal Vulnerability. This
award provides support for the U.S. researchers to cooperate in consortia that
consist of partners from at least three of the participating countries and that
bring together natural scientists, social scientists and research users (e.g.,
policy makers, regulators, NGOs, communities and industry).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports research activities that will create a
better understanding of the underlying socio-ecological adaptation processes in
coastal regions that facilitate effective adaptation to coastal vulnerabilities.
Adaptation practices can have long term and unintended consequences for the
vulnerability of society, specific stakeholders, and/or ecosystems.
Understanding how feedbacks occur between risk from biophysical changes,
cognitive processes and adaptation practices can facilitate more effective
adaptation strategies. This project will adopt a socio-ecological systems
approach to model practices and feedbacks in response to climate change in three
coastal regions in France, South Africa, and the United Kingdom. This will be
done by assessing interactions among (1) actual risks posed by climate change;
(2) cognitive factors such as perceived risk and adaptive capacity; (3)
adaptations; and (4) situational learning where decision makers and stakeholders
participate in modeling processes. Multi-scale models, ranging in scale from
individuals to regional planning bodies, will be developed to study cognitive
shifts that contribute to adaptation practices. This project will contribute
toward improving vulnerability and adaptation assessment and decisions by
focusing on the way decisions are made and the long term implications
consequences of decisions and practices.