* 1342343
* BRIGE: Engineering Antifouling Ultrafiltration Membranes Using Polycationic Nanofibers
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2015
* Jessica Schiffman, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 08/31/2015
* USD 174,321.00

Background:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Globally, diarrhea remains the second leading
cause of childhood mortality. While membrane-based technologies can effectively
diminish this mortality rate, the costs associated with retaining membrane
performance prohibits developing countries from maintaining access to safe
drinking water. This NSF-BRIGE proposal embarks on a new generation of
antimicrobial ultrafiltration membranes that will last longer in operational
systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polysulfone ultrafiltration membranes will be
surface functionalized with polycationic/poly(ethylene oxide) nanofiber mats.
The nanofiber layer will inactivate a broad-spectrum of microbes via contact
with the exposed cationic surface charges. The poly(ethylene oxide) content will
render the membrane surface more hydrophilic, and thus, more resistant to
microbial attachment. For the polycation, we will investigate the biopolymer
chitosan, as well as a synthetic analogue, poly(dimethyldiallylammonium
chloride). Ultrafiltration membranes enhanced with nanofibers will be
characterized for functionality, biofouling, and their materials
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will provide critical structure-
property relationships between high porosity nanofiber mats applied as a thin-
layer on ultrafiltration membranes and their ability to retain high flux and
inactivate microbes under operational conditions. These nanostructure-enhanced
ultrafiltration membranes hold the potential to impact water quality on a local,
national, and global scale by providing safe, high-quality water to local
municipals and underdeveloped communities. In addition to improving the
functionality and lifetime of membranes for water purification, understanding
the materials-biology interface has great implications on the proper functioning
of membranes for a broad range of separations, including, beverage
clarification, blood filtration/treatment, protein purification, and metal ion
recovery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Signficance and
Importance:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From this work, new insights into the
manufacturing of low cost, water purification membranes that feature "green"
antimicrobials will be acquired. This technology holds the potential to impact
water quality on a local, national, and global scale by providing safe, high-
quality water to local municipals and underdeveloped communities. The continuous
decline in water quantity and quality is a tangible societal impact that makes
this project a powerful vehicle for communicating the vital role of STEM
disciplines over a broad demographic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broadening
Participation of Underrepresented Groups in Engineering:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
key component of this project is its aim to educate and mentor a diverse
workforce at the emerging interface of chemical engineering, materials science,
and environmental engineering. In addition to her on-going efforts, this
proposal will result in numerous new research experiences for deaf or hard-of
hearing undergraduate students, as well as women and minority undergraduate and
graduate students. Additionally, the PI will act as the moderator to two new
web-based international discussion groups. One will increase access to
scientific knowledge globally and the second will provide a safe women-
mentorship network to an underserved population of women, those living in remote
places where there may not be other women role models. Additionally, the PI will
act as the moderator to two new web-based international discussion groups
maintained by the Global Materials Network. The first will be a topical forum to
increase access to scientific knowledge on "Polymers" globally. The second, will
be a "Women in Engineering Discussion Group" that will provide a mentorship
network to women in remote locations where there may not be other women role
models, an underserved population of women.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
has been funded through the Broadening Participation Research Initiation Grants
in Engineering solicitation, which is part of the Broadening Participation in
Engineering Program of the Engineering Education and Centers Division.