* 1342693
* 2013 mHealth Training institute @UCLA
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2014
* Vivek Shetty, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 06/30/2014
* USD 18,000.00

Recent advances in mobile technologies (e.g., smart phones, sensors) have
created opportunities for applications that were not previously possible in data
gathering (activity monitoring, physiological, and psychological states
assessment) and intervention (just in time and context aware alerts and
reminders). As such mobile technologies are poised to transform various facets
of our lives especially social and health-related aspects. Taking a full
advantage of the mobile and mobile health (mHealth) technologies will require
considerable multidisciplinary research at the intersection of behavioral,
social sciences and clinical research fields with computer science, networking
and engineering. The mHealth Summer Institute addresses the multidisciplinary
challenges by bringing together scientists from diverse fields to enhance the
quality of mHealth research. Intellectual Merit: The mHealth Summer Training
Institute is the premier venue for cross-fertilization of research in the
mHealth area. By providing a structured environment for researchers from
multiple disciplines to collaboratively work on a mobile health issues of common
interest, the training institute provides a platform for idea generation and
development that can directly lead to transformative innovations, it provides
invaluable experience of working in multidisciplinary teams towards a common
goal. It facilitates research, development and specially innovation in mobile
health and career development of young scientists in a transdisciplinary
environment with rapidly changing landscape. Broader Impacts: The institute has
several long-term impacts on the society. First, the ideas generated during the
institute, are frequently developed fully into promising grant proposals,
several of which (from prior year institutes) have been funded. These ideas
generated at the institute can lead to scientific advancement and impact the
society by improving health. Second, the participants who are selected for the
institute directly benefit by developing skills and experience of working in
multidisciplinary teams and acquire the basic knowledge and skills of the mobile
health domain via lectures from thought leaders in mobile health across all the
relevant disciplines. Third, the teams formed at the institute frequently lead
to long-term collaborative relationships, which continue and flourish in the
long-term. It helps seed new connections among young scientists who would not
otherwise work together. Fourth, the participants often become champions of
mobile health at their respective home institutions and in their respective
scientific communities, and educate/train others, including the students.