* 1342592
* CBMS Conference: Regularity Problem for Partial Differential Equations Modeling Fluids and Geophysical Fluids
* MPS,DMS
* 02/01/2014,09/30/2015
* Jiahong Wu, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 09/30/2015
* USD 38,059.00

This award will support an NSF-CBMS regional conference to be held at Oklahoma
State University in the summer of 2014 on the regularity problem for partial
differential equations modeling fluids and geophysical fluids. The principal
speaker of this conference is Professor Peter Constantin, William R. Kenan Jr.
Professor and Director of the Program in Applied and Computational Mathematics
at Princeton University. He will deliver ten lectures during this five-day
conference. His lectures will cover some of the most recent advances on the
regularity problem and associated issues concerning the surface quasi-
geostrophic equation, the Euler and Navier-Stokes equations, the Boussinesq
system, and other related equations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSF-CBMS
conference will reflect the distinguishing features of the NSF-CBMS conference
series: focus on a single important and timely area of research by a leading
practitioner, published monograph for a wider audience, and continued effect and
local stimulation through regional emphasis. The lectures of this conference
will present the major ideas and most recent progress in a field with some very
exciting new developments, and will help advance knowledge and chart future
directions. Besides, this conference will have broad impacts. Around 30
participants will be invited and special efforts will be made to involve,
support, and encourage the participation of junior mathematicians and
researchers from under-represented groups. A monograph based on the lectures
will be published and is expected to reach a much wider audience.