* 1342903
* GLOBE Program and Next Generation Science Standards Alignment Workshop
* GEO,ICER
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2014
* Marcene Seavey, Iowa Academy of Science
* Standard Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 07/31/2014
* USD 42,608.00

This award is being used to convene a 2.5-day workshop and associated activities
in order to align science education resources developed and used by the Global
Learning and Observations to Benefit the Environment (GLOBE) Program with the
newly-released Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS). GLOBE is a world-wide
partnership between students, teachers, and scientists to learn more about
Earth's systems through local scientific investigations of globally relevant
measurements. As such, GLOBE provides rich opportunities to both discuss Earth-
related scientific concepts and implement inquiry-based pedagogies that are
prominent throughout the NGSS. The Iowa Academy of Science, a US GLOBE Partner
since 1999, is hosting a national workshop and related pre- and post-activities
to develop the GLOBE Program alignment to the NGSS. The workshop is bringing
together educators, professional development providers and scientists
experienced with GLOBE and the NGSS to develop an alignment document between
GLOBE and NGSS. The participants will work in small groups, utilizing the
Achieve Open Education Rubrics (OER) and a consensus process to evaluate the
GLOBE Program protocols, classroom activities, Elementary GLOBE, and other GLOBE
resources for their alignment to NGSS. Webinars are being conducted prior to the
workshop to recruit participants and prepare potential participants for the
activities of the workshop. After the workshop, a draft alignment document will
be circulated to the U.S. GLOBE Partners, and others, for review and comment.
The final document will provide alignments between GLOBE resources and NGSS that
are organized sequentially by grade, NGSS topic, and GLOBE investigation area.
In addition to the alignment, recommendations for integrating the alignment into
GLOBE Professional development will be included. A series of webinars for GLOBE
Partners and educators will be conducted to practice use of the new resource in
their own NGSS implementation plans; archived recordings will be made available
to the GLOBE Program for use in ongoing professional development. It is expected
that alignment of GLOBE materials to the NGSS will facilitate their inclusion in
the classroom as the NGSS begin to be implemented in early adoption states,
beginning in Fall 2013.