* 1342590
* Request for travel supplement: DAC Workshop on Modeling of Biological Systems (MoBS)
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2016
* Natasa Miskov-Zivanov, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 05/31/2016
* USD 10,000.00

The First Workshop on Modeling of Biological Systems (MoBS) focuses on
computational methods and software tools for modeling and analysis of biological
systems. It will bring together researchers from computational systems biology
and design automation communities. The goal of MoBS is to create an environment
where different types of researchers interact and start fruitful collaborations.
Co-locating MoBS with Design Automation Conference (DAC) provides means to
fulfill this goal. For biologists, this workshop is an opportunity to showcase
their work to an entirely new audience and gain exposure to a new talent pool of
potential postdocs and graduate students. For electronic design automation (EDA)
experts, this workshop provides an excellent opportunity to explore challenges
in biology and medical research, and recognize potential for new collaborations
and novel applications of methods and techniques they are familiar with.
Existing systems biology conferences and meetings do not actively include the
EDA community, which can bring a wide range of experiences, expertise, and
perspectives to the modeling and analysis of novel biological systems. MoBS
allow the EDA community to interact with and learn from leaders in systems
biology. A number of academic leaders in systems biology are featured speakers
of MoBS. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop will provide a venue for fifteen
technical talks, among them four keynote talks, five invited lectures, and six
contributed talks, as well as ten to fifteen posters. Topics of the workshop are
diverse and include areas such as: biological network inference, CAD and
visualization of biological systems, data-mining for bio and health-care
systems, hybrid methods for bio-system simulation, bio-model validation and
verification, sensitivity analysis for biological systems and much more. A wide
variety of researchers from EDA and computational systems biology are brought
together in a unique context, which is not provided at other conferences. The
slides, posters, and abstracts from the workshop will be made public on the
workshop website. Finally, MoBS will have numerous undergraduate, graduate and
post graduate student researchers in attendance. The organizing committee
encourages and supports woman and underrepresented minority student
participation, and has planned a diverse technical program.