* 1342968
* CEDAR: Dynamics of SAPS (SubAuroral Polarization Streams) during Geomagnetic Disturbances and Their Effects on the Coupled Ionosphere-Thermosphere System
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2018
* Michael Hartinger, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Ilia Roussev
* 04/30/2018
* USD 346,941.00

This project aims to comprehensively investigate the dynamics of SubAuroral
Polarization Streams (SAPS) during geomagnetic disturbances and their effects on
the ionosphere and thermosphere (IT). The dynamics of SAPS is an outstanding
magnetosphere-ionosphere coupling problem associated with the electrodynamics at
the interface between the hot and cold particle populations in the inner
magnetosphere. The generation mechanisms of SAPS during geomagnetic active
times, in particular substorms, are still not well understood, nor are the wave-
like oscillations embedded within SAPS, or the effects of SAPS on the global IT
system.&lt;br/&gt; Ground-based observations (Super Dual Auroral Radar Network
(SuperDARN), Poker Flat Incoherent Scatter Radar (PFISR) and all-sky imager
arrays) and space-based measurements (Time History of Events and Macroscale
Interactions during Substorms (THEMIS) and the Van Allen probes), as well as the
Global Ionosphere Thermosphere Model (GITM), will be used to carry out an
integrated study of the dynamics of SAPS and their effects on the coupled IT
system. Specific objectives are (1) to statistically construct the distribution
of response times of SAPS intensifications relative to substorm onset and the
distribution of intensification durations, and investigate the underlying
mechanisms responsible for the SAPS intensification and for variable time
delays, (2) to characterize the wave activity within the SAPS and their
magnetospheric counterparts and identify the nature of the wave activity, and
(3) to quantitatively evaluate the role of ion precipitation in affecting the
SAPS evolution and the effect of the SAPS intensification after substorm onset
and the wavy-structures of SAPS on the IT system using GITM.&lt;br/&gt; This
project will support the professional development of two young researchers,
including one female. It will also involve participation of a graduate student
and summer REU students. Project results will be disseminated broadly. The
project is interdisciplinary and will be valuable to the GEM (Geospace
Environment Modeling) community, and contribute to an improved understanding of
space-weather events.