* 1342001
* Deep Convection in the Tropics
* GEO,AGS
* 11/01/2013,10/31/2016
* David Raymond, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Edward L. Bensman
* 10/31/2016
* USD 597,188.00

This award aims to increase the understanding of the interaction of deep
convection over tropical oceans with weather disturbances such as tropical
depressions, easterly waves, various convectively coupled equatorial wave modes,
and the Madden-Julian oscillation. This is a particularly good time to undertake
such a project for two reasons:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) Recent field programs,
including two on tropical cyclogenesis (TPARC/TCS08 and PREDICT and one studying
the Madden-Julian oscillation (DYNAMO), have provided a wealth of new,
quantitative data on tropical deep convection. These observations (especially
those on tropical cyclone formation) provide detailed measurements of convective
mass fluxes as well as the thermodynamic and wind environments in which the
convection is embedded.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2) The use of the weak temperature
gradient (WTG) approximation to provide lateral boundary conditions for cloud-
resolving models of convection has developed to the point where the resulting
calculations provide useful comparisons with observation. Preliminary results
show that the model exhibits significant skill in replicating vertical mass flux
profiles of observed convection, given the thermodynamic environment surrounding
the convection. Work remains to be done on the comparison of mass fluxes
observed in various pre-cyclone cases with WTG computations. Momentum fluxes in
shear will also be explored. In addition, the PIs are just beginning our
comparisons with results from large-scale tropical experiments such as DYNAMO.
In addition to DYNAMO, there exists a large set of earlier observations begging
to be explored.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the proposal outlines two ways that the
WTG technique can be improved. One involves adding more realistic thermodynamics
to the cloud-resolving model while the other consists of improving WTG?s
transient behavior. These improvements are designed to result in greater
fidelity in the representation of tropical convection in the
model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award has the potential to improve
parameterization of convection in global models. Inadequate representation of
convection in global atmospheric models is one of the main obstacles preventing
progress in the forecast of tropical weather. Better weather forecasts in the
tropics feed back on weather predictions over the continental United States.
Climate models also suffer from this problem. Continuation of a collaboration
with the University of Split, Croatia serves the goal of increased the
scientific interchange between the two countries. New Mexico Tech is an
hispanic-serving institution.