* 1342793
* Dimensions: Collaborative Research: Symbiont and Transcriptomic Niche Dimensions of Long-term Coexistence in Trifolium Communities
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2014,02/28/2018
* Maren Friesen, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 02/28/2018
* USD 987,629.00

Understanding how species coexist, and the role of genetic diversity within and
between species, remains a fundamental challenge in biodiversity research. This
project focuses on highly diverse communities of clover plants and their
bacterial nitrogen-fixing symbionts, rhizobia. Integrating observational
approaches, manipulative field, greenhouse, and growth chamber experiments,
genomic techniques and phylogenetic analyses, this project will test the
importance of rhizobial symbionts and soil feedbacks in coexistence. Gene
expression and functional traits will serve as proxies for the ecological niche;
this project will determine how these evolve using phylogenetic trees that
capture the evolutionary history of species. This project will yield an
integrated insight into the molecular, functional, and ecological mechanisms of
diversity maintenance and will greatly increase our understanding of biological
nitrogen fixation, a critical function of legumes and rhizobia in natural and
agricultural ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Symbiotic nitrogen fixation has
global importance on par with photosynthesis, and this project will assess its
functionality in light of genetic variation in symbionts and clover species.
This project will train two post-docs and two graduate students and will provide
research experiences to undergraduate students through the Plant Genomics at MSU
program, and through an exchange program with Howard University at UC Davis. The
project will train students in the High School Honors Science Program at MSU and
in the Ecological Society of America?s SEEDS program (Strategies for Ecology
Education, Diversity and Sustainability: Diverse People for a Diverse Science).