* 1342000
* Collaborative Research: Deglacial Ice Dynamics in the Weddell Sea Embayment using Sediment Provenance
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2022
* Stefanie Brachfeld, Montclair State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Jackson
* 08/31/2022
* USD 157,056.00

Abstract for the general public:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The margins of the
Antarctic ice sheet have advanced and retreated repeatedly over the past few
million years. Melting ice from the last retreat, from 19,000 to 9,000 years
ago, raised sea levels by 8 meters or more, but the extents of previous retreats
are less well known. The main goal of this project is to understand how
Antarctic ice retreats: fast or slow, stepped or steady, and which parts of the
ice sheet are most prone to retreat. Antarctica loses ice by two main processes:
melting of the underside of floating ice shelves and calving of icebergs.
Icebergs themselves are ephemeral, but they carry mineral grains and rock
fragments that have been scoured from Antarctic bedrock. As the icebergs drift
and melt, this ?iceberg-rafted debris? falls to the sea-bed and is steadily
buried in marine sediments to form a record of iceberg activity and ice sheet
retreat. The investigators will read this record of iceberg-rafted debris to
find when and where Antarctic ice destabilized in the past. This information can
help to predict how Antarctic ice will behave in a warming climate.
&lt;br/&gt;The study area is the Weddell Sea embayment, in the Atlantic sector
of Antarctica. Principal sources of icebergs are the nearby Antarctic Peninsula
and Weddell Sea embayment, where ice streams drain about a quarter of Antarctic
ice. The provenance of the iceberg-rafted debris (IRD), and the icebergs that
carried it, will be found by matching the geochemical fingerprint (such as
characteristic argon isotope ages) of individual mineral grains in the IRD to
that of the corresponding source area. In more detail, the project will:
&lt;br/&gt;1. Define the geochemical fingerprints of the source areas of the
glacially-eroded material using samples from each major ice stream entering the
Weddell Sea. Existing data indicates that the hinterland of the Weddell
embayment is made up of geochemically distinguishable source areas, making it
possible to apply geochemical provenance techniques to determine the origin of
Antarctica icebergs. Few samples of onshore tills are available from this area,
so this project includes fieldwork to collect till to characterize detritus
supplied by the Recovery and Foundation ice streams. &lt;br/&gt;2. Document the
stratigraphic changes in provenance of iceberg-rafted debris (IRD) and
glacially-eroded material in two deep water sediment cores in the NW Weddell
Sea. Icebergs calved from ice streams in the embayment are carried by the
Weddell Gyre and deposit IRD as they pass over the core sites. The provenance
information identifies which groups of ice streams were actively eroding and
exporting detritus to the ocean (via iceberg rafting and bottom currents), and
the stratigraphy of the cores shows the relative sequence of ice stream activity
through time. A further dimension is added by determining the time lag between
fine sediment erosion and deposition, using a new method of uranium-series
isotope measurements in fine grained material. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The behavior of the Antarctic ice sheets and ice
streams is a critical topic for climate change and future sea level rise. The
goal of this proposal is to constrain ice sheet response to changing climate in
the Weddell Sea during the three most recent glacial terminations, as analogues
for potential future warming. The project will also examine possible
contributions to Meltwater Pulse 1A, and test the relative stability of the ice
streams draining East and West Antarctica. Much of the West Antarctic ice may
have melted during the Eemian (130 to 114 Ka), so it may be an analogue for
predicting future ice drawdown over the coming centuries. &lt;br/&gt;Geochemical
provenance fingerprinting of glacially eroded detritus provides a novel way to
reconstruct the location and relative timing of glacial retreat during these
terminations in the Weddell Sea embayment. The two major objectives of the
project are to: &lt;br/&gt;1. Define the provenance source areas by
characterizing Ar, U-Pb, and Nd isotopic signatures, and heavy mineral and Fe-Ti
oxide compositions of detrital minerals from each major ice stream entering the
Weddell Sea, using onshore tills and existing sediment cores from the Ronne and
Filchner Ice Shelves. Pilot data demonstrate that detritus originating from the
east and west sides of the Weddell Sea embayment can be clearly distinguished,
and published data indicates that the hinterland of the embayment is made up of
geochemically distinguishable source areas. Few samples of onshore tills are
available from this area, so this project includes fieldwork to collect till to
characterize detritus supplied by the Recovery and Foundation ice streams.
&lt;br/&gt;2. Document the stratigraphic changes in provenance of iceberg-rafted
debris (IRD) and glacially-eroded material in two deep water sediment cores in
the NW Weddell Sea. Icebergs calved from ice streams in the embayment are
carried by the Weddell Gyre and deposit IRD as they pass over the core sites.
The provenance information will identify which ice streams were actively eroding
and exporting detritus to the ocean (via iceberg rafting and bottom currents).
The stratigraphy of the cores will show the relative sequence of ice stream
activity through time. A further time dimension is added by determining the time
lag between fine sediment erosion and deposition, using U-series comminution
ages.