* 1342029
* Support for Student and Invited Speakers to participate in the 87th ACS Colloid and Surface Science Symposium at UCR, June 23-26, 2013
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2014
* Francisco Zaera, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 06/30/2014
* USD 10,000.00

1342029&lt;br/&gt;PI: Walker&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop being supported
is the 87th ACS Colloid and Surface Science Symposium at the University of
California, Riverside (UCR), June 24-26, 2013. Funding partially cover costs
associated with invited speakers and students attending the Symposium. This
Symposium is perhaps the most important and extensive annual conference in the
areas of colloid and interfacial sciences. The final program has 364 abstract
submissions, accounting for 280 oral presentations and 84 poster presentations.
The summer symposium at UCR will provide a forum for communicating fundamentally
new insights into colloidal and surface science with particular emphasis on
advances in environmental, biological, medical, and material applications. Due
to its broad scope, this meeting attracts participants from diverse disciplines
(e.g. Chemistry, Chemical Engineering, Materials Science, and Physics, among
many others) and nearly all major US academic institutions and many leading
international institutions. The diversity of the participants and the talks is
further represented by contributions from theoretical, computational, and
experimental groups and the participation of scientists and engineers from all
sectors including industry, government, and academia.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funds from the NSF are being used to partially support the
participation of not only premier researchers and leaders, but also a diverse
pool of U.S. undergraduate and graduate students who are the future leaders in
these disciplines. This Symposium is the most important annual event for the
colloid science and engineering community in the US ? innovators who use
fundamental principles to drive innovative solutions in medicine, defense, and
environmental preservation and restoration, among many other fields. The event
brings together acknowledged leaders in the field with up-and-coming scientists
and engineers in an environment where new ideas can be shared and explored.