* 1342218
* BRIGE: Active micro-rheology with spherical micro-confinement: A model for intracellular transport
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2015
* Roseanna Zia, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 09/30/2015
* USD 175,000.00

Technical Description:

The goal of this BRIGE proposal is to build a research and education program to
discover and develop predictive theory for the active and passive transport of
particles inside 3D-microscopically confined and concentrated complex fluids,
with a view toward a model of intracellular transport inside eukaryotic cells.
The interior of a eukaryotic cell is an active, crowded aqueous compartment that
is populated by a multitude of nano-scale particles. Emerging studies suggest
that much cellular function--e.g. metabolism, pattern formation, and cargo
transport--is affected by simple physical transport, including diffusion and
active towing by motor proteins. Several important open questions must be
answered to understand how such motion affects cell function: What is the origin
of anomalous diffusive behavior of particles in the cytoplasm? Does gradient
diffusion or cytoplasmic streaming (or both) enable particle migration during
pattern formation, division, and growth? What are the effects of micro-
confinement? Recent models attempting to answer these questions assume a
quiescent and unbound fluid, but the cytoplasmic fluid undergoes bulk advection
due to its entrainment by self-propelled motor proteins, and even 1D confinement
dramatically alters transport behavior.

To approach this problem, the PI will construct a 3D simulation model utilizing
the framework of Stokesian Dynamics, the premier technique for accurate modeling
of particle-laden fluids. Prior to utilizing the simulation, however,
theoretical work is required to develop the so-called mobility
tensors?hydrodynamical "rules" for the way particles interact with each other
and with an enclosure?and similar functions for representing the motion of self-
propelled motor proteins. Equilibrium, gradient diffusion, and imposed flows
that mirror motion inside a cell will be studied. The statistical distribution
of particles, diffusion coefficients, effective viscosity, and stress will be
computed. The simulation results will be compared to our theory that connects
stress gradients to particle migration, and to experimental results.

The intellectual merit of such understanding is high: the rheological behavior
of fully 3D-confined suspensions is a largely unexplored area and thus
constitutes a substantive and novel contribution to the rheology field. This
knowledge will advance our understanding of the effects of finite domains on the
rate at which energy is dissipated in Brownian systems.

Broader Significance and Importance:

The knowledge developed will create greater understanding of the dynamical fluid
environment and transport inside the cell, will advance our understanding of how
such processes are related to disease, and will facilitate the development of
therapeutic tools. It will uniquely broaden connections between cell biology,
engineering, and statistical physics by creating a novel first-principles model
that can be built upon by any of these fields.

Broadening Participation of Underrepresented Groups in Engineering:

To broaden participation in STEM fields by under-represented minority students
and to reach out to the general public, we will work to improve the interest,
participation, and skills of such students in science by teaching critical
skills: using the scientific method; identifying physical processes to predict
behavior; and connecting mathematics to physical problems. To achieve this goal,
the PI will develop interactive demonstrations and disseminate them via (1)
Cornell classes; (2) Cornell outreach programs; and (3)quarterly "Science
Scrimmage Days" at a National Academy Foundation high school for
underrepresented minority students.

This research has been funded through the Broadening Participation Research
Initiation Grants in Engineering solicitation, which is part of the Broadening
Participation in Engineering Program of the Engineering Education and Centers
Division.