* 1342763
* Dimensions: Collaborative Research: Functional diversity of chemosymbiosis in  lucinid bivalves from coastal biomes
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2019
* Barbara Campbell, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 12/31/2019
* USD 436,391.00

All known clams of the Lucinidae family harbor chemosymbiotic bacteria that fix
carbon and supply it to their hosts in the absence of sunlight. Because lucinids
are very abundant in shallow marine sediments, their effects on porewater
composition, nutrient suspension, sediment biogeochemistry and vegetation
productivity are considerable. However, their roles in sediment N and methane
cycling are unknown, especially compared to other chemosymbiotic systems in
deep-marine settings. Moreover, it is unclear how a decline in lucinid
populations and/or functional diversity may impact coastal biome and ecosystem
services, or even what could lead to lucinid population declines overall. This
project will investigate the underexplored genetic, taxonomic, and functional
diversity of lucinid chemosymbioses in shallow marine environments ranging from
pristine to highly altered. Sampling will take place in Florida, California, and
The Bahamas. The investigators will also test for ways to characterize lucinid-
bacteria biodiversity in the geologic past. This research is expected to fill
gaps in our understanding of lucinid chemosymbiotic systems, including how gene
expression is altered for lucinids and their endosymbionts in changing ecosystem
conditions, particularly due to anthropogenic impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will fill a major gap in understanding lucinid biodiversity loss that
may occur in habitats sensitive to natural and anthropogenic disturbances and
will be important for coastal resource management decisions. The researchers
will provide interdisciplinary training in geochemistry, microbiology, and
paleobiology to graduate and undergraduate students, including field studies in
The Bahamas, training in museum collection standards, laboratory research, and
computational bioinformatics. Students from underrepresented STEM groups will be
involved on the project, and involvement with university outreach and mentoring
programs will target symbiosis and biodiversity topics through formal and
informal classroom, public speaking opportunities, and museum activities.