* 1342632
* Acquisition of an Ion Chromatograph for Hydrological, Geochemical and Biogeochemical Research
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2015
* Bryan Mark, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 06/30/2015
* USD 53,352.00

All living things depend upon the availability of clean water. This award funds
the purchase of new instrumentation which will serve as an important aspect of
the teaching and research mission of the researchers by enhancing their ability
to quantify the chemical constituents in water, and help determine what ?clean?
water is. Ion chromatography, a technique used for the measurement of major
dissolved ions in water, has been used by the researchers? investigations of
such topics as the impacts of agricultural practices on fate and transport of
dissolved constituents; chemical weathering of rocks and soils and the fate of
carbon in small watersheds; human perturbation of natural waters in urban
watersheds; the impact of low temperature geochemical reactions in acidic
environments; carbon dioxide interactions between fluids and rocks; the use of
major chemical constituents as tracers of glaciological, hydrological, and
biogeochemical processes, and impacts of climate change on water supplies. The
new instrumentation funded by this award will expand the researchers? analytical
capabilities in these areas and provide more sensitive detection limits of
chemical constituents in waters. This new instrumental acquisition will support
not only the funded research by the five researchers and their students, but
also the unfunded research conducted by the many undergraduate students mentored
and advised by the researchers. The new instrumentation will also support
teaching goals introductory geochemistry courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A multi-
disciplinary group of Earth scientists will acquire a new ion chromatograph to
support their research in hydrology, hydrogeology, glaciology, experimental
aqueous geochemistry, biogeochemistry, climate change dynamics, and
environmental geochemistry. Their collective research projects demand high-
quality analyses of major ions from natural surface and ground waters, glacial
meltwaters, subsurface brines, soil extracts, and experimental solutions. The
new state-of-the-art instrument will bring expanded analytical capabilities,
more sensitive detection limits, and greater variety of possible analytes than
the 12+ year old instrument that has served these researchers well, but is now
obsolete.