* 1342090
* Collaborative Research: EAGER: Enhancing the Cyber Security Workforce - The Human Angle
* EHR,DGE
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2016
* Masooda Bashir, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 07/31/2016
* USD 161,708.00

The proposed study provides extensive new data in two scarcely examined research
areas. The first is the overall impact that cyber competitions have on enhancing
the cybersecurity workforce. There is widespread anecdotal evidence of the
benefits of individual competitions, but a large-scale, carefully constructed
study is needed to determine outcomes and causal relationships. Additionally, it
is the first thorough examination of the psychological characteristics of people
interested in cybersecurity. Related research has examined the personality
traits of IT professionals, the cognitive styles of computer "hackers," and the
academic abilities associated with success in STEM programs. However, no studies
have focused exclusively on the cybersecurity field. The findings hold promise
to transform existing ideas about the types of people who are qualified and
willing to pursue careers in cybersecurity. Increasing the number of trained
cybersecurity professionals is crucial to the continued success of both public
and private enterprises. Competitions, such as NYU-Poly's digital "Capture the
Flag" challenge, represent a promising approach towards accomplishing that goal
using hands-on competition as a stimulus for learning. However, in order to
improve the efficacy of future challenges, it is first necessary to examine the
impact of past endeavors. Competitions present a unique opportunity to explore
the psyche of individuals who have already displayed an interest in
cybersecurity. Examining that population provides insight into the reasons why
certain qualified individuals pursue careers in cybersecurity, while others do
not. Such insight can also serve as an invaluable guide for the organizers of
future efforts aimed at attracting a larger number of talented individuals to
the cybersecurity workforce.