* 1342895
* CEDAR:  Auroral Electrojet Waves and Wave Heating
* GEO,AGS
* 05/15/2014,04/30/2019
* David Hysell, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Carrie E. Black
* 04/30/2019
* USD 361,565.00

One of the important effects of auroral precipitation at high latitudes is the
production of waves and turbulence in the ionosphere. These dynamic variations
can cause disruption and degradation of communication and navigation signals
that pass through the ionosphere. Although ionospheric irregularities were
discovered in the auroral zone more than 75 years ago, fundamental questions
about the way that the waves propagate and saturate in a turbulent state
persist. The purpose of this award is to investigate a particular kind of
turbulence referred to as Farley-Buneman waves. The objective is to study the
internal mechanics of these waves, their effects on the background ionospheric
state, and the interpretation of coherent radar backscatter that can be received
from them. The investigation has experimental, theoretical, and modeling aspects
as well as strong educational underpinnings. The broad goal of the research is
to elucidate the processes involved in generating ionospheric structure by
magnetospheric forcing (from above), one of the two main themes highlighted by
the 2013 Decadal Survey for Solar and Space Physics. Its emphasis on the
multiscale connections between the background forcing available during disturbed
conditions, the auroral instability and turbulence it creates, and the feedback
on the mean ionospheric state constitutes a systems approach to this complex and
highly coupled process. The proposed study will be carried out by faculty and
students at Cornell University and the University of Alaska, Anchorage, and will
involve experimental field work in Alaska. Experimental data will be interpreted
in the context of results from the theoretical investigation. One component of
that investigation involves the construction of a 3D hybrid fluid-kinetic model
of Farley- Buneman waves capable of simulating the wave mechanics at small and
intermediate scales. The second component involves the development of a
mathematical model of Farley-Buneman waves and turbulence, including saturation
effects, based on the formalism of stochastic differential equations (SDEs). The
broader impact of this investigation is associated with the novelty of the tools
that will be developed, which have applications outside research in the radar
aurora. Radar imaging has tremendous potential as a means of performing
discovery research in geospace but is computationally demanding and will see
little application outside the current effort until it can be simplified and
accelerated. Additional broader impact will come from undergraduate and graduate
education in geospace and CEDAR science at Cornell and the University of Alaska.