* 1342185
* BRIGE: Bimetallic Plasmonic Nanostructures for Enhanced Light Harvesting in Dye Sensitized Solar Cells
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Rizia Bardhan, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* James Moore
* 08/31/2016
* USD 175,000.00

Technical Description of the Project&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dye sensitized solar
cells (DSSCs) are third generation solar devices that have rapidly emerged in
the past decade as an inexpensive alternative to silicon solar cells. While the
low cost of fabrication processes make DSSCs highly promising, the poor light
absorption and inherent low efficiencies (&lt; 10%) of current devices have
hindered successful market entry. Plasmon resonances, which are the collective
oscillations of the conduction electrons, in noble metal nanostructures can be
engineered by modulating their geometry, dimensions, and composition to generate
intense light scattering and electromagnetic near-fields surrounding their
surface. Plasmons in metal nanostructures when coupled with light harvesting
organic dyes can significantly amplify the dye optical absorption and carrier
generation capabilities. This proposal aims to develop a new paradigm of
bimetallic plasmonic nanostructures to understand, control, and optimize light
harvesting in DSSCs. By combining wet-chemical synthesis, controlled surface
engineering, electrodynamics simulations, device physics, and ultrafast optics,
plasmon-enhanced DSSCs will be constructed and their photocurrent efficiencies
will be significantly enhanced.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical Explanation
of the Project's Signficance&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanoscale metal-molecule
hybrid interfaces are ubiquitous in energy conversion and energy storage, as
well as in optoelectronic devices. The information learned from this project
will provide fundamental scientific insights of the optical properties at the
organic/inorganic interface and how that influences optically-induced electron
transport processes. The proposed research efforts will also broadly impact the
future infrastructure of both portable and stationary energy conversion systems.
High efficiency plasmonic DSSCs will ultimately enable inexpensive sustainable
energy systems that can be developed and implemented in third-world countries.
For example, cheap and reliable solar electricity, solar-thermal convertors for
use as space heaters, solar driven motors for niche applications in remote
villages, and solar driven small vehicles which will ultimately reduce
greenhouse gas emissions. These devices will form a new platform for a range of
light harvesting devices including photoelectrochemical cells, optical sensors,
and solar-energy-conversion systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Activities to Broaden
Participation of Underrepresented Groups in Engineering&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research is expected to broaden the participation of underrepresented
minorities (URMs) in STEM education through active participation of graduate,
undergraduate and K-12 students in the research. The PI will continue to involve
URM undergraduates in her research efforts. The project will lead to development
of a lab module in an existing class, and students will visit local colleges
with high URM population and demonstrate DSSC fabrication with berry juices. The
PI will also participate in mature outreach activities to promote K-12 education
particularly among URMs. The PI currently co-leads the Boy Scouts of America
Engineering Explorers program at Vanderbilt and ~67% of the high school student
participants are URMs. The PI also currently participates and will continue to
contribute to the Vanderbilt Summer Academy (VSA) where middle school students
(50% URM) perform hands on nanoscience experiments. VSA students performed
synthesis and characterization of gold nanostructures of variable shapes and
sizes in the PI's lab. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has been funded
through the Broadening Participation Research Initiation Grants in Engineering
solicitation, which is part of the Broadening Participation in Engineering
Program of the Engineering Education and Centers
Division.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is also funded through the
Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR), which is part
of the Office of International and Integrative Activities.