* 1342189
* BRIGE: Novel Strategies To Regulate Extracellular Matrix Composition of Tissue Engineered Heart Valves
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2016
* Zannatul Ferdous, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Carol Lucas
* 12/31/2016
* USD 175,000.00

Heart valve disease is a major global health problem that affects about 25% of
the population over age 65 in developed countries. Approximately 300,000 valve
replacement/repair surgeries are performed every year to replace the diseased
valve with a bioprosthetic or mechanical valve. While these valves are an
effective option, they lack long-term functionality. A dire need thus exists for
better treatment options for heart valve disease.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-
term goal of this BRIGE (Broadening Participation Research Initiation Grants in
Engineering) proposal is to design functional tissue-engineered heart valves
(TEHVs) with similar composition to the native tissue. Current tissue
engineering strategies for heart valves utilize cell source, substrate,
chemical, and mechanical cues to modify their physical properties. In spite of
recent progress, existing functional TEHVs are limited by their low mechanical
strength and resilience. This lack of desirable mechanical properties hinders
their successful operation in the complex mechanical environment of the heart.
The extracellular matrix (ECM) composition and alignment significantly
contributes to the mechanical properties of native and TEHVs. For example,
aortic valves contain a bi-directional network of ECM, which assists in their
differential stretching during the opening and closing cycles. A critical need
exists for ways to modulate cell-mediated ECM synthesis and organization to
improve mechanical properties of TEHVs. Functional TEHV design also requires an
improved understanding of valvular cells, since they are primarily responsible
for developing and maintaining ECM; unfortunately, they also differentiate to
produce abnormal amounts of ECM in diseases. Therefore, the proposed two-year
project will: 1) design a culture device to mimic the stretch environment of
heart valves in vitro to measure the contribution of cellular and environmental
factors in creating TEHVs; and 2) determine the ideal culture conditions for
valvular cells to generate favorable ECM in TEHVs and avoid excessive ECM
remodeling observed in diseases. This will be accomplished by modulating ECM
signaling, directional stretch magnitudes, and cell phenotypes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will develop a state-of-the-art
stretch device for mechanobiology studies of heart valve. The research outcomes
will be incorporated into a newly developed graduate course in the area of
Biomechanics in Tissue Engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broadening
Participation of Underrepresented Groups in Engineering:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will engage in university-wide activities to
attract bright and talented undergraduate students who are from populations that
are underrepresented in engineering. Yearly laboratory tours will be organized
to foster higher education in pre-collegiate students and expose them to the
interdisciplinary research happening at the University of Tennessee, Knoxville.
Finally, opportunities will be created for female students to share and learn
from the experience of successful women in academia. Completing this BRIGE
proposal will thus advance tissue engineering, engage students of all
backgrounds in pioneering research, and lead to a deeper understanding of the
biology, pathology, and tissue engineering of heart
valves.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has been funded through the
Broadening Participation Research Initiation Grants in Engineering solicitation,
which is part of the Broadening Participation in Engineering Program of the
Engineering Education and Centers Division.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is
also funded through the Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR), which is part of the Office of International and Integrative
Activities.