* 1342702
* Collaborative Research:EAGER:Exploiting Heterogeneity in Emerging Interconnect Technologies for Building Highly Scalable and Power-Efficient Network-on-Chips for Many-core Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2013,11/30/2015
* Ahmed Louri, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* chengshan xiao
* 11/30/2015
* USD 179,999.00

Objective:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to lay the
groundwork for completely re-thinking Network-on-Chips (NoCs) design and propose
to exploit the unique advantages of the emerging interconnect technologies such
as photonics and wireless for designing performance scalable, and power-
efficient NoCs for future multicores.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merits:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Power consumed by digital devices and systems such
as smartphones, laptops, servers and datacenters is increasing at an alarming
rate as more computing cores can be integrated on a single chip. The computing
capabilities of multicore architectures can be unleashed only if the underlying
network that transports data between the cores and the caches can provide
scalable bandwidth at low power consumption. Research has shown that disruptive
technology solutions such as photonics and wireless technologies have the
potential to alleviate the critical bandwidth, power, and latency challenges of
future multicore architectures. The proposed research combines multiple
interconnect technologies to achieve three objectives, namely: (1) scalability
to 1000 cores, (2) power efficiency (at least a 50% reduction as compared to
state-of-the art metallic interconnects), and (3) high bandwidth and low latency
across a wide variety of applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research has the potential to
transform the design of next-generation NoCs and multicore architectures, which
are essential for the continued growth of computing performance. This proposal
describes a transformative and viable approach that integrates research in
technology, architecture, algorithm and applications for designing energy-
efficient NoCs thus enabling scalable multicore architectures. The research will
also play a major role in education by integrating discovery with teaching and
training. Finally, the results and findings of the proposed research will be
disseminated to researchers, engineers and educators through technical
publications and presentations.