* 1342908
* Establishing a Long-Term Geodetic Network at the East Pacific Rise Ridge 2000 Integrated Studies Site
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2013,09/30/2014
* Scott Nooner, University of North Carolina at Wilmington
* Continuing Grant
* Bilal U. Haq
* 09/30/2014
* USD 23,897.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt; Most of the world's plate boundaries are submerged beneath
the oceans, and little is known about how these boundaries accommodate plate
motion on monthly to yearly time scales. At mid-ocean ridges, new oceanic crust
is formed as two oceanic plates move apart and magma is tapped from mantle
upwelling beneath the ridge. Magma movement beneath active volcanoes on land has
been tracked using a variety of geodetic techniques such as GPS and InSAR,
however, to date there are few constraints on magma extraction beneath mid-ocean
ridges. Lenses of melt (magma) have been identified both within the crust and at
the crust mantle boundary, as well as a low seismic velocity mush (partial melt)
zone beneath the crustal magma lens. Eruptions at the ridge crests presumably
tap into these melt lenses but the fundamental scales associated with magma
movement beneath ridge crests remain obscure. &lt;br/&gt;The questions to be
addressed in this study include 1) What volume of the crustal melt lens is
tapped by an eruption? How quickly does the melt lens get replenished from
upwelling mantle? Does an eruption depend on horizontal transport of magma in a
shallow dike? 2.) What is the rheologic structure of the ridge, including the
width of the low viscosity mush zone? What is the mechanical behavior of the
crust during and after an eruption? 3.) Do vents change temperature, chemistry
flow rates, and location as the underlying magma lens evolves?&lt;br/&gt;We plan
to address these questions by monitoring the vertical displacements of the
seafloor at 9degrees50'N on the EPR in the vicinity of an eruption that occurred
in early 2006. We will use a Mobile Pressure Recorder (MPR) in three campaign
style surveys to measure the relative water pressure between different seafloor
locations to determine changes in the relative elevation of benchmarks placed on
the seafloor. Due to the buoyancy of the magma, surface deformation directly
reflects the movement of magma below the surface. We expect to track the gradual
movement of magma between eruption and diking events. We plan to compare
processes under this fast-spreading ridge segment, which is underlain by a
continuous, linear body of melt, to that of volcanoes elsewhere, which typically
have a focused magma source. The temporal and spatial scales of recharging of
the magma chamber post eruption will depend on the physical characteristics of
the underlying mush zone and provide insight into the rheology of the
surrounding crust. When paired with the co-located array Bottom Pressure
Recorders (BPR) to be deployed in February 2007, both episodic and long-term
deformation information will be available, tracking magma movements with hourly
to yearly time scales. This will allow us, in collaboration with other
researchers, to examine system relationships, such as the interplay between
movements of magma, changes in hydrothermal vent systems, and
microseismicity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts&lt;br/&gt; This work will
establish the infrastructure for long-term geodetic monitoring and begin
accumulating a geodetic time series. All aspects of the ridge system are
influenced or driven by the heat from magma that moves within the Earth's crust,
which makes this work important in understanding all ridge systems and
processes.&lt;br/&gt; Borrowing an instrument from Dr. Zumberge will promote
collaboration between our two institutions. Public dissemination of the work
will take place through peer reviewed publications and presentations at
scientific conferences, interdisciplinary meetings, and seminars at other
universities. We will work with the Ridge 2000 Education and Outreach office to
educate the public about the significance of this project in understanding ridge
systems, and how this work fits into the larger picture.&lt;br/&gt;