* 1342196
* BRIGE Exploiting crystalline framework flexibility to enable energy efficient entropically selective separations
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2013,10/31/2016
* Ryan Lively, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 10/31/2016
* USD 175,000.00

Technical Description:

This project seeks to design and develop a microporous material that can
successfully fractionate multi-component gas streams using a temperature-
dependent molecular sieving phenomenon. Zeolitic imidazolate frameworks (ZIFs)
are a class of microporous material that are chemically tunable due to the
availability of a wide spectrum of organic imidazolate linkers. The pores of ZIF
crystals are flexible as a result of imidazolate linker rotation around
coordination bonds within the framework. A central hypothesis to be explored in
this project is that the ZIF pore flexibility is temperature-dependent, which
results in a tunable sieving aperture that can enable an entropic separation of
diffusing gas species. The ZIFs created in this work will be integrated into
state-of-the-art porous fiber composites that uniquely enable the entropic
separation process. A primary challenge facing entropic separations is
simultaneously maintaining low gas pressure drop and intracrystalline diffusion
controlling the overall mass transfer in the system. The highly porous fiber
composites will allow gas diffusion in the crystal to control the process at low
gas pressure drops, which is not feasible in traditional adsorption systems.

Broader Signficance and Importance:

The work proposed in this project aims to create a new platform for materials
that enable energy efficient recovery of valuable natural gas liquids (NGLs)
from non-conventional natural gas sources. The current NGL recovery systems are
major energy consumers?a ?standard? NGL recovery plant that produces
approximately 750 tons of NGLs per day will consume energy equivalent to the
heating of 10,000 homes. This project aims to reduce this energy loss by a
factor of 3-5. This goal will be achieved by creating novel crystalline
materials that physically "sieve" the NGL molecules from raw natural gas
molecules. The physical sieving process relies on the creation of microscopic
pathways through the novel crystalline materials--creation and understanding of
NGL molecular movement in these microscopic pathways is a major thrust of this
project. To enable wide-spread adoption of the proposed energy-efficient NGL
recovery system, the novel crystalline materials will be integrated into
synthetic fiber-based devices, which are ideally suited for mass manufacturing.
Creation of these fiber-based NGL-recovery devices--a second major focus of this
project--is inspired by industrial synthetic textile fiber production processes.
Large-scale production of these fiber-based NGL-recovery devices could
potentially lead to domestic "advanced" manufacturing jobs and provide the USA
with a head start in the field of energy-efficient recovery of NGLs. The
fundamental scientific and technological insights established here will guide
the design of future energy efficient gas separation and purification processes,
including natural gas recovery from dilute sources, chemical production, and
hydrogen production.

Broadening Participation of Underrepresented Groups in Engineering A primary
goal of this project is to introduce young women and under-represented
minorities to STEM fields in an effort to increase inclination to join these
fields. The PI will achieve this goal through a combination of outreach at local
inner city middle and high schools in Atlanta, and by leveraging existing
programs at Georgia Tech. The BRIGE award will allow the PI to implement his
educational outreach plans which aim to achieve these goals. The PI?s
comprehensive plan for outreach and retention of women and under-represented
minorities has three primary facets: i) Outreach through in-class demonstrations
and lectures at inner city Atlanta middle and high schools and active
participation in Georgia Tech?s Summer Engineering Institute, ii) use BRIGE
support for female and under-represented minority research assistants, and iii)
leveraging existing programs at Georgia Tech to engage in mentoring, guidance
and professional development of female and under-represented minorities both in
and out of the laboratory. The PI will periodically assess the success of his
outreach efforts and adjust his program according to feedback from teachers,
students, and research assistants.

This research has been funded through the Broadening Participation Research
Initiation Grants in Engineering solicitation, which is part of the Broadening
Participation in Engineering Program of the Engineering Education and Centers
Division.