* 1342051
* EAGER: Analysis of cardiac repolarization as a tool for the noninvasive assessment of cardiovascular system exposure to carbon and metallic nanotubes
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,11/30/2015
* Shyam Aravamudhan, University of North Carolina Greensboro
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 11/30/2015
* USD 99,970.00

CBET - 1342051&lt;br/&gt;The research goal of this proposal is to investigate a
feasibility of measurements of cardiac repolarization as a tool for the
noninvasive assessment of cardiovascular system exposure to carbon and metallic
nanotubes. In pursuit of this goal, the specific objectives are
to:&lt;br/&gt;(a) employ an intensity-controlled dobutamine exercise stress test
for the conscious rats after pulmonary exposure to single-wall carbon and TiO2
nanotubes, and determine values of QT/RR hysteresis and the rates of adaptation
of QT and RR intervals, (b) use common bio- and immunochemical markers and
determine the degree of toxic levels of oxidative stress, myocyte injury and
vascular inflammation, and (c) compare the association of toxic outcomes of
pulmonary exposure to different nanotubes using electrophysiological and
immunochemical markers. The unique aspect of this proposal is the integration of
theoretical nonlinear dynamics and experimental electrophysiological
measurements to assess toxicological effects of nanostructures on cardiac
function. Successful accomplishment of the above objectives will have far-
reaching implications in the development of robust noninvasive monitoring of
cardio toxicity of nano-systems. The educational goals of this proposal are to
integrate new science and technology into formal and informal teaching and
outreach programs in an effective manner. We extend a cohesive educational plan
with three major themes: Course development, Mentoring, and Outreach activities.
(A) Improve two graduate-level courses: NANO785 - Fundamentals of
Nanobioelectronics (S. Aravamudhan), NAN740 - Nonlinear Waves in Biological
Excitable Media (J. Starobin), through incorporation of research results. (B)
Involvement of graduate and undergraduate students (including minority graduate
students, currently working with the PI) in the interdisciplinary fields with
significant exposure to materials, bioelectronics, biology and computational
physics, (C) Current and future outreach programs at NCA&amp;T, UNCG and JSNN
will be strengthened (including NanoDay and K-12 Nanotechnology Lego
modules).&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit :&lt;br/&gt;Previous research
demonstrated the importance of biochemical and immunological markers for
identifying nanotube induced oxidative stress and vascular damage. However, the
association of such exposure with noninvasive electrophysiological factors is
not understood. Even if monitoring of cardiovascular system using
electrophysiological measurements is one of the most robust biomedical tools it
is still not adapted for applications in the environmental studies which is of a
critical importance for public health. This project will pave the road for the
development of novel non-invasive electrographic predictors of toxic effects on
human cardiovascular system.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts :&lt;br/&gt;This research
seeks to enhance diversity in the emerging cross-disciplinary areas of
nanobioscience by training graduate and undergraduate students, especially
minorities and women in both NCA&amp;T and UNCG. In addition to formal
education, it will enrich established partnerships with Guilford County schools
and technical community colleges. Also, the results of this research will be
widely disseminated to the public through both formal modes and on a dedicated
YouTube channel (to be launched soon by JSNN).