* 1342703
* Dimensions NASA: Collaborative Research: The biogeography and evolution of drought tolerance in grasse
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2018
* Christopher Still, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 12/31/2018
* USD 370,190.00

Drought is a pervasive factor that structures grasslands worldwide. Yet little
is known about the genetic basis of drought tolerance, how drought-tolerance has
evolved, how it is distributed geographically, and what its potential role is in
determining future grassland productivity. In this research, the investigators
will determine physiological drought tolerance and associated anatomical and
physiological traits for 400 species of grass distributed across eight major
evolutionary groups and broad geographic and environmental ranges. To better
understand the genetics of grasses, gene expression will be examined as well as
root and leaf anatomy, morphology, and physiology. With new sequence data
complementing current efforts, the phylogenetic relationships among the 400
species and their environmental niche spaces will be determined. The research
will also parameterize models of global productivity in the context of drought,
coupling data on drought tolerance with gas exchange and environmental data,
which will be critical in modeling responses of vegetation to future climate
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the different dimensions of drought
tolerance and photosynthesis will contribute broadly to our understanding of
grasslands in a way that could impact everything from crop selection to
predictions of future global function. Additionally, this project will recruit
underrepresented individuals at the graduate and post-doctoral level, will
contribute to multiple public datasets, and will develop educational materials
such as a temporary exhibit on the phylogeny of grasses and grass roots to the
new Flint Hills Discovery Center in Manhattan, KS.