* 1342566
* CSR: Small: Collaborative Research: Cross-Layer Design Techniques for Robustness of the Next-Generation Nonvolatile Memories
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2013,08/31/2015
* Hai Li, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2015
* USD 191,964.00

The objective of the research is to develop design technologies that can
alleviate the general robustness issues of the next-generation nonvolatile
memories while maintaining and even improving the generic memory specifications
such as density, power and performance. Comprehensive solutions are integrated
from architecture, circuit and device layers for the improvement on the density,
cost and reliability of emerging nonvolatile memories. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
design techniques include 1) a new write endurance improvement technique for
multi-level cell devices to prolong the lifetime of the new nonvolatile memories
by applying the coding and wear-leveling techniques that are monitored and
controlled by self-contained circuits; 2) self-reference and other adaptive
sensing techniques to overcome the impacts of process variations and device
wear-out mechanisms for yield improvement.; and 3) a new interleaved 3D-stacking
memory integration scheme and peripheral circuit design to increase the number
of stacks integrated within a certain height. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact of the research lies in revealing the importance of applying cross-layer
design techniques to resolve the robustness issues of the next-generation NVMs
and the attentions to the robust design context. The system architects, the
circuit designers and the device integration engineers can be well bridged and
educated by the research innovations. The developed techniques can be directly
transferred to industry applications under the close collaborations with several
industry partners, and directly impact the future computing systems. The
activities in the collaboration also include the tutorials in the major
conferences on the technical aspects of the projects and new course development.