* 1342104
* Symposium on Cognitive Systems and Discovery Informatics
* CSE,IIS
* 06/15/2013,05/31/2014
* Pat Langley, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 05/31/2014
* USD 13,000.00

The project provides support for Symposium on Discovery Informatics and
Cognitive Systems. Discovery informatics aims to develop computational systems
that support the scientific enterprise. Cognitive systems aims to develop
computational artifacts that exhibit the broad range of intelligent behavior
found in humans. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The symposium brings together researchers
who approach discovery informatics from a variety of perspectives but who share
an interest in system-level approaches and the role of high level cognition in
science. It focuses on a specific set of challenges at the intersection of
cognitive systems and discovery informatics. The participants' interactions
should lead to new insights and new collaborations in this emerging
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new field of discovery informatics has the
potential to not only accelerate but also advance the frontiers of the
scientific enterprise by automating processes that researchers currently carry
out manually. This symposim aims to clarify these processes and share insights
with the broader community. The symposium fills a critical need in terms of
building a vibrant community of interdisciplinary researchers in discovery
informatics. It contributes to education and training of graduate students, and
broadening participation of underrepresented groups in STEM areas that are
critical to multiple NSF initiatives e.g., Big Data Science and Engineering,
Computation and Data Enabled Science and Engineering, among others.