* 1342739
* Participant Support for attendants to the program Mathematics of Machine Learning (Barcelona)
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2014
* Alexander Rakhlin, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 08/31/2014
* USD 32,000.00

The research program ``Mathematics of Machine Learning'', hosted by the Centre
de Recerca Matematica (Barcelona, Spain), will take place from April 7th to July
14th, 2014. The aim of the program is to bring together leading researchers from
the fields of Statistics, Optimization, and Computer Science. The dialogue
between these fields has been crucial to the understanding of modern machine
learning problems. The research program will focus on several aspects of
theoretical machine learning, including the interplay of computation and
statistics, connections between learning and optimization, as well as the theory
of sequential prediction methods. Over the course of fourteen weeks, the
investigators will organize three thematic 3-day workshops, one large 5-day
workshop on learning theory, as well as many short and long-term visits. The
program will also be co-located with the conference Journees de Statistique and
the Conference on Learning Theory.

Machine learning approaches to dealing with large scale data ultimately rely on
our understanding of computational and statistical demands. By attracting the
leading experts in the respective fields, the program organizers are aiming to
focus on the theoretical issues of modern machine learning problems. As machine
learning methods form an essential part of many computerized systems, the
research is likely to have a positive impact on technology and society through
the development of faster algorithms with better performance. The program
naturally integrates research and education. The short and long-term visitors
will be given a unique opportunity to conduct cutting-edge research, while the
thematic workshops during this period will provide a forum for learning and the
exchange of ideas with the broader audience. In particular, student
participation will be crucial to fostering the next generation of researchers
that study both computational and statistical aspects of learning. Conference
web page is located at http://stat.wharton.upenn.edu/~rakhlin/crm/