* 1342640
* I-Corps:  Probiotics to Prevent Metabolic Changes Associated with Starch Induced Laminitis
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2013,02/28/2015
* Jeffrey Blanchard, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 02/28/2015
* USD 50,000.00

Through the use of genetic tools, researchers have identified naturally
occurring bacteria that appear to consume lactic acid thus maintaining gastro-
intestinal balance in animals under high starch conditions. These bacteria may
provide the "right" microbial participants to prevent or minimize the extent of
laminitis in horses and ruminant livestock. Preliminary data verifies that the
in vitro system models fluctuations in bacterial metabolites seen in the horse
gut during starch-induced laminitis and enables the tracking of bacterial
populations over time. One group of bacteria, the Veillonellaceae, show promise
as a probiotic for the ability to utilize lactic acid, which is known to
increase during starch induction, and thought to be implicated in the metabolic
cascade leading to laminitis. The research team has isolated strains of
Veillonellaceae with potential to utilize lactate and withstand low pH and
storage conditions. This proposal supports further work to: a) use the in vitro
system to demonstrate that isolated strains, individually and in mixtures, can
prevent or ameliorate microbial changes characteristic of starch induced
acidosis (laminitis) in horse and cattle GI samples; b) conduct dose titration
studies to determine effective concentrations of strains or mixtures and; c)
determine the robustness of effective strains, namely growth rate on selective
media, oxygen tolerance, and lyophilization stability (desiccation tolerance).
The anticipated outcome for this project is a prototype formulation ready for
testing on either an animal model of induced lactic acidosis or a cohort of
volunteer clinical cases with chronic pasture laminitis.

A new understanding of the microbial dynamics underlying lactic acidosis and
laminitis may lead to better informed models of health, improved feed
formulations and management practices, and the development of a probiotic
treatment for affected horses that can be used to prevent and/or treat a
condition affecting millions of horses annually. These bacteria can be
incorporated into animal feed to protect from the fermentative events that
trigger laminitis and this could potentially help improve beef and dairy
production by decreasing the number of cases of laminitis among cattle, as well
as reducing medical costs for horse owners.