* 1342604
* Collaborative Research: Dimensions: Experimental adaptive radiation - genomics of diversification in bird lice
* BIO,DEB
* 11/01/2013,10/31/2019
* Kevin Johnson, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 10/31/2019
* USD 630,866.00

Adaptive radiation occurs when one species of organism diversifies into several
species that occupy distinct ecological niches. The process is a common
generator of biodiversity, yet the genetic changes underlying it have not been
documented. Parasites, one of the most diverse groups of organisms on earth, are
thought to adaptively radiate as they switch to new species of hosts. This
process will be studied using birds and feather lice, which are host specific
parasites that spend all of their time on the host's body. Lice will be
transferred in controlled experiments between normal and novel species of
captive hosts. Evolutionary changes in genomes of the lice will be documented as
they undergo adaptive radiation. The results of this work may have implications
for basic research, as well as human and animal health. Genomic data will be
deposited in public databases. One postdoctoral associate, two Ph.D. students,
and several undergraduate students will be trained. Two educational modules
demonstrating adaptation by natural selection will be developed for K-12
students: "cryptic critters" (K-6) and "hunker down" (7-12). These modules are
cost effective and easy to implement. Their effectiveness will be assessed with
assistance from the University of Utah Center for Science and Math Education.