* 1342876
* Dimensions:  Costs and benefits of chronic viral infections in natural ecosystems
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2018
* Mark Young, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 09/30/2018
* USD 1,997,415.00

This research project will investigate a new hypothesis about how viruses may
control the structure and function of microbial communities. The traditional
view of viruses is that they negatively impact the fitness of infected hosts. In
other words, they are viewed strictly as pathogens, in which the host tries to
eliminate the virus. This project will explore an alternative hypothesis: that
chronic viral infections contribute positively to host fitness, increasing the
success of the virus-host pair by protecting their hosts from infection by even
more pathogenic viruses. Under this model, the competitive advantage provided by
many viruses plays a direct role in maintaining microbial biodiversity.
Microbial communities in hot springs in Yellowstone National Park will be used
to test this hypothesis by: i) linking temporal changes in virus abundance and
diversity to host genetic and taxonomic diversity, ii) identifying chronic
viruses, and quantifying the fitness consequences of chronic viral infections in
the laboratory, iii) assessing the effects of removing viruses in laboratory and
field experiments, and iv) developing a theoretical and computational model of
host-viral interactions that includes the costs and benefits of chronic
infections. It is anticipated that this research will provide new insights into
how viruses influence not only microbial biodiversity, but also the biodiversity
of plants and animals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will be of broad
scientific importance. It is known that microbes play a significant role in life
on earth, including as the foundation for earth's food webs, influencing carbon
and nitrogen cycles, and in human health. Viruses infect all forms of life,
including microbes. This study will reveal more about how viruses impact the
composition and function of ecosystems. The research project also will engage
K-12 teachers, students, and the public on the science of biodiversity using
Yellowstone National Park as a highly attractive and visible venue for public
interest in science. The investigators will create field courses for K-12
science teachers, virtual classrooms from Yellowstone to K-12 schools, online
courses and workshops, and nationally aired films focused on microbial research
in Yellowstone. Results from this project are expected to reveal fundamental new
knowledge about the biodiversity of life on earth.