* 1342805
* Dimensions: Collaborative Research: Scent-mediated diversification of flowers and moths across western North America
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Rachel Levin, Amherst College
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 08/31/2019
* USD 91,025.00

Relationships among flowering plants and insects represent one of the great
engines of terrestrial diversity. Plant scents are important drivers of these
relationships (herbivory, plant defense, pollination), but remain poorly
integrated into our understanding of floral evolution and pollination ecology.
This study examines the role of floral scent in the diversification of the
western North American evening primroses (Onagraceae) and their pollinators
(hawkmoths, bees) and floral and seed predators (Mompha moths). Hypotheses that
integrate across the genetic, phylogenetic, and functional dimensions of
biodiversity are developed from the Geographic Mosaic Theory of Coevolution,
which posits that variation in plant-animal interactions across the distribution
of a species creates shifting evolutionary trajectories that drive local
diversification. The research examines functional trait variation and selective
forces in the field and experimental arrays, the genetic basis of the variation
from the population to phylogenetic level using comparative genomics, and
patterns of phylogenetic diversity in Onagraceae and Mompha. Mompha is a poorly
understood genus that is the only known lepidopteran group to specialize on
Onagraceae.

Few studies have tested the full spectrum of plant fitness outcomes when
volatiles attract both mutualists and enemies, and no current studies have
investigated scent-driven, geographic diversification in groups of interacting
organisms. The hidden diversity of floral and seed predators and their potential
as selective agents constitutes a considerable gap in pollinator-centric
understanding of floral evolution. The integration of chemical ecology and
comparative genomics provides a first attempt to explore the impact of past
selective pressures on current patterns of diversity in non-model organisms.
Additionally, the investigators will engage over 200 students (high school -
graduate school, interns, and postdocs) in field work, experiments, and
genomics/informatics activities. Private and public land owners and volunteers
will participate in and/or be informed of conservation-focused components of
this study.