* 1342995
* Support of Campus Cyberinfrastructure at Non-Research Intensive and EPSCoR Institutions
* CSE,OAC
* 11/15/2013,09/30/2016
* John Hicks, INTERNET2
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 09/30/2016
* USD 1,318,058.00

This two-year project enhances campus network infrastructure and external
connectivity of colleges and universities having notable research projects, even
though the institution may not be primarily research-focused. It offers
workshops focused on campus infrastructures and external connectivity to support
research and teaching, and "Tiger Team" campus visits to assist with technical
implementation. It builds upon Internet2's track record in campus infrastructure
enhancement, campus-focused network performance workshops, and tools to foster
intra- and inter-campus collaboration; it also supports NSF efforts on behalf of
under-represented institutions and those in states identified in the
Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR) program, to
upgrade infrastructures and enhance research and non-research activities. The
workshops cover technical, organizational, and administrative aspects of
upgraded campus infrastructure and high-bandwidth (1, 10, 40, 100 Gb/s) external
connectivity. The Tiger Team visits will include expert advice on technical
implementation, and Network Administrator and CIO-level administrative issues.
It will result in a Best Practices manual informed by the project's findings.
The project broadens the volume of campuses capable of participating in campus
cyberinfrastructure-based projects, such as the Extreme Science and Engineering
Discovery Environment (XSEDE) and Campus Cyberinfrastructure-Network
Infrastructure and Engineering (CC-NIE) award collaboration, and uses standard
communications mechanisms (including Internet2's website) to broadly disseminate
project findings. This will have a broad impact from analysis of solutions to
barriers and needs in campus cyberinfrastructure, and the benefit non-research-
intensive campuses that would not participate otherwise, including remote
instruction.