* 1342388
* BRIGE: Effects of Varying Fluid Shear Stress on Stem Cell Sphere Aggregates
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Yonghyun Kim, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* David Fyhrie
* 08/31/2016
* USD 174,999.00

BACKGROUND:&lt;br/&gt;In this project, ?stem cells? refer exclusively to adult
stem cells (also known as somatic stem cells) of non-embryonic origins. As
common in all types of stem cells, these adult stem cells are capable of self-
renewal and are able to differentiate into specified progenies. They will be
acquired from existing cell lines commonly available at national nonprofit
biological resource centers (e.g. ATCC). Additional source of adult stem cells
will be from ?waste? tissues that are discarded after surgical resection,
provided by translational research centers and medical
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION:&lt;br/&gt;This project
will provide fundamental engineering and biological understanding of how stem
cells tolerate shear stress from fluid flow. It will investigate stem cell
aggregates under varying regimes of shear stresses, ranging from physiological
conditions of vascular and interstitial flows to in vitro conditions of pipette
trituration and mixing impellers. The effects of shear stresses on stem cell
sphere aggregates will be evaluated using comparative and quantitative proteomic
analysis, which would allow the elucidation of underlying mechanotransduction
molecular signatures and signaling pathways. In addition, proteomic analysis of
natively shear-resistant hematological cells will be performed to identify key
shear-resistant genes, and these will be engineered in model stem cells to
confer them improved survivability in high shear conditions. The proposed work
addresses an important yet relatively understudied area of research and will
significantly advance the field by its creative combined use of engineering and
molecular biology tools. Furthermore, the project is poised to provide
transformative contributions to the field of regenerative medicine by providing
insights into proper handling and growth of stem cells in high shear
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER SIGNFICANCE AND
IMPORTANCE:&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project is inherently interdisciplinary and
will make fundamental proof-of-concept contributions to a broad number of
fields, including bioprocessing, bioengineering, and mechanobiology. In
particular, the project will investigate how to retain high viability of stem
cells in shear stress conditions. Generating an appreciable number of stem cells
for cell therapy applications would inevitably require the use of large vessels,
in which mixing with impellers creates high shear environment. To improve the
survivability of stem cells in such conditions, this project will investigate
stem cells in model shear stress environments and elucidate the underlying
biological mechanisms that correlate to their survival. Beyond stem cell
biotechnology, the findings of this work will also have important ramifications
in understanding how other cells, such as circulating tumor cells, survive in
shear stress conditions, and allow for novel targeted drug development.
Components of the proposed research will be integrated into core undergraduate
chemical engineering courses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADENING PARTICIPATION
ACTIVITIES:&lt;br/&gt;To broaden participation of African-American students in
engineering research, the PI will interact with regional HBCUs and the Alabama
?Black Belt? high schools that are in close proximity to the University of
Alabama. This interaction will involve regular seminars and hands-on experience
opportunities for these students in the region. To broaden the participation of
women in engineering research, the PI will continue to interact with the members
of the Society of Women Engineers. In addition, the PI will recruit student
researchers of both underrepresented groups through the Howard Hughes Medical
Institute Undergraduate Summer Research Program and through the University of
Alabama?s Student Introduction to Engineering Summer Camp.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has been funded through the Broadening
Participation Research Initiation Grants in Engineering solicitation, which is
part of the Broadening Participation in Engineering Program of the Engineering
Education and Centers Division.