* 1342595
* Collaborative Research: ABI: Innovation: The Global Names Architecture, an infrastructure for unifying taxonomic databases and services for managers of biological information.
* BIO,DBI
* 03/17/2013,06/30/2014
* Nico Franz, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 06/30/2014
* USD 285,090.00

The Marine Biological Laboratory (Woods Hole, MA), Bishop Museum (Honolulu),
California Academy of Sciences (San Francisco), and Missouri Botanical Gardens
(St Louis) have received an ABI innovation award to establish the Global Names
Architecture (GNA), a modular suite of databases, applications, and semantic web
services that will help integrate information across the Life Sciences. The
project will extend existing proof of concept components, explore alternative
solutions for technical challenges, and integrate the components into a pilot
GNA. The GNA capitalizes on Linnaeus' system of Latin scientific names for
organisms, a system that has endured as one of the oldest and most universal
standards in science. Virtually all information in biology is given context by
evolution and the hierarchical pattern of shared similarities it has produced.
Scientists name species and change them with growing knowledge about their
evolution and relationships. These changes create a tangled network of synonyms
that, along with homonyms and variant spellings, make it difficult to manage
information effectively The GNA will create a system that enables us to
translate names correctly across the literature and on-line datasets. While the
GNA has implications for the long-term management of information in the life
sciences, the initial beneficiaries will be the more than 10,000 taxonomists
worldwide, on whose expertise our understanding of the world's biodiversity
rests. A scientific name 'usage bank' coupled with the Biodiversity Heritage
Library's CiteBank will generate shared indexes and access keys to the taxonomic
literature, the source of most of our knowledge about nearly 2 million species.
New nomenclatural registries founded by the co-operation of the Index Fungorum
and the International Commission of Zoological Nomenclature's ZooBank will
broadcast new discoveries as they are registered. Other tools will help
taxonomists collaborate to build authoritative catalogs of the Earth?s
biodiversity, then merge and integrate them, a process that GNA will transform
into a semantic cyberinfrastructure that will organize the growing, internet-
accessible, knowledge of Earth's biosphere. Ultimately, other NSF grantees in
the life sciences should be able to augment their Data Management Plans by
exposing their web sites to services that will create taxonomic indices. More
information about this project can be obtained from http://globalnames.org or
dpatterson@mbl.edu.