* 1342448
* Improving Skills and Capabilities in the Conduct of Institutional Research in Postsecondary Educational Institutions
* SBE,NCSE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2017
* Randy Swing, Association for Institutional Research
* Standard Grant
* Mark Fiegener
* 05/31/2017
* USD 627,398.00

This project increases the capacity of individuals to use higher education data
at the institution, state, and federal levels; encourages innovative ways for
studying higher education; and facilitates the dissemination of research
findings to the higher education community, as well as the general public.
Through grant awards and face-to-face training, AIR promotes the contribution
that National Science Foundation (NSF) and National Center for Education
Statistics (NCES) datasets make in setting higher education policy, theory, and
practice; enhances understanding about methodological and technological issues
relevant to large-scale national data collections; and fosters collaboration
between the higher education community and government agencies. In addition, the
grantee's partnership with the National Postsecondary Education Cooperative
(NPEC) promotes research focused on increasing the understanding and knowledge
of specific issue areas, selected annually by NPEC. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
grant and training opportunities are targeted to institutional researchers,
faculty, and doctoral students, who conduct research about American
postsecondary education -- including trends in science, technology, engineering,
and math (STEM) -- and who use national data to inform campus and national
higher education practices. Faculty and practitioners are eligible for
competitive research grants of up to $40,000 for one year of independent
research, while doctoral students are eligible for dissertation grants of up to
$20,000 for one year to support dissertation research and writing under the
guidance of a faculty dissertation advisor. As part of the project award, an
annual summer institute (The National Data Institute: Using Federal Data to
Support Research on Science, Engineering, and Postsecondary Education) will
provide an intensive introduction to NSF and NCES datasets and research
methodologies using large-scale national data sources. The Institute is a hands-
on face-to-face workshop with speakers from NSF, NCES, and other national higher
education organizations. Both the grant program and Institute incorporate
competitive, national proposal processes with previous participants and higher
education experts serving as reviewers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
implications for these activities are in providing research based information to
assist colleges and universities in improving graduation and completion rates of
students, especially in STEM careers. Grant recipients are required to present
their research at AIR's annual conference and these materials, as well as final
reports, are made available to the general public on AIR's website. Studies
funded through AIR's grant program are regularly presented at national higher
education conferences and published in the most respected journals in higher
education. National dissemination through conferences, publications, and the
internet provides researchers, practitioners, and scholars outside higher
education opportunities to review these innovative contributions to the field of
education through lens of NSF and NCES data.