* 1342627
* I-Corps:  Ultrafast All-Optical Shutter Technology
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2013,01/31/2014
* Bernard Kippelen, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 01/31/2014
* USD 50,000.00

There are few known alternatives to the use of high-peak power sub-nanosecond
lasers for high quality laser manufacturing and surgery applications. This
project plans to explore the use of ultrafast all-optical shutters and their use
for non-thermal ablation by further developing an ultrafast all-optical shutter.
The shutter allows sampling of high-peak power nanosecond laser pulses to
produce high-peak power picosecond or femtosecond pulses that are well suited
for non-thermal ablation of materials. This technology can operate across a wide
spectral range. It can directly modulate high peak-power lasers and offers the
ability to continuously tune the shutter's time window width.

The ultrafast all-optical shutter technology offers a novel approach towards
producing sub-nanosecond optical pulses. Ultrafast laser pulses are finding an
ever increasing range of applications in medicine, manufacturing, and technology
as a whole. This technology has the potential to impact laser manufacturing and
laser surgery by allowing replacement of expensive high peak-power sub-
nanosecond lasers with less expensive nanosecond lasers combined with an
ultrafast all-optical shutter; thereby, significantly decreasing the capital
equipment and recurring cost for high-quality pulsed laser manufacturing and
laser surgery. The increasing use of ultrafast lasers for the non-thermal
ablation of materials in the areas of laser manufacturing and laser surgery
combined with widespread use of this technology has the potential to make non-
thermal laser ablation affordable for a wider range of customers.