* 1342049
* Environmental Causes Of Tropical Cyclone Size and Structure Change
* GEO,AGS
* 12/01/2013,11/30/2017
* Elizabeth Ritchie, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Edward L. Bensman
* 11/30/2017
* USD 353,657.00

This project aims to improve basic understanding of the physical mechanisms
associated with size and structure changes of a tropical cyclone (TC) due to
interaction with its environment. Through a two-tiered approach using reanalysis
datasets and numerical simulations, the fundamental physical mechanisms
associated with TC size and structure change (expansion/contraction) will be
investigated. Improved understanding of the physical processes associated with
TC size/structure change is essential to better predict their future
impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit :&lt;br/&gt;This project will
improve understanding of fundamental processes in the environment that produce
TC size and structure change. TC size and outer wind structure determine the
total area of landfall impact through radius of damaging winds, storm surge, and
extent of rainfall. A better understanding of how TC size and outer wind
strength is modified by the environment will result in better anticipation of
these downstream impacts and, ultimately, better evacuation planning. These
gains in knowledge will be achieved through a combined observational and
numerical simulation study. The relationships between size/structure change and
a number of environmental parameters will be explored using reanalysis data.
Then, through examination of a series of initial-value and time varying, full-
physics simulations utilizing a very fine mesh and explicit moist physics, the
basic physical mechanisms that govern size and structure change from
environmental forcing will be established.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts
:&lt;br/&gt;There are several areas of broader impact that will be addressed in
the course of the work. The University of Arizona (UA) is committed
institutionally to the research-based education of the next generation of
scientists. Towards that end, this project will support early career development
of a Postdoctoral Scholar and the education of a graduate student in a STEM
discipline. The PI has a strong record of graduate and undergraduate student
support and a demonstrated history of fostering graduate research, especially
for women and other underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We
also target elementary school education via a program called "Adopt-A-School"
(AAS). The vision of AAS is to partner a single elementary school with a group
of UA personnel to create a close, long-term relationship designed to strengthen
STEM education at the elementary level with disadvantaged communities. Hollinger
Elementary is a bilingual Title 1 school with a population that is over 90%
Hispanic. This school year we have over 15 mentors working in 16 classrooms at
all grade levels. Our goal is to provide role models and broaden the vision of
these children so that they too dream of going to College. Graduate students
working with the PI are mentors in these classrooms and the results gained
during the course of this research are communicated to these children as part of
enabling and enhancing the STEM education. Weather in general and TCs in
particular, provide a source of information for STEM learning that excites the
children.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Finally, this award has the potential to
significantly impact society as a whole. Forecasting of TC activity in general,
and structure change specifically, is a problem that affects everyday people
globally. Improvement of the understanding of large-scale patterns associated
with significant structure change that contribute to forecasting ability is of
great importance to our science. The ability to adequately forecast size and
structure change, which impacts evacuation planning, wave setup and storm surge,
has the potential to improve evacuation planning and disaster remediation. This
project truly has the potential to have an impact far beyond the scientific
community.