* 1342705
* Dimensions: Collaborative Research:  Connecting the proximate mechanisms responsible for organismal diversity to the ultimate causes of latitudinal gradients in species richness.
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2018
* Keith Willmott, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 12/31/2018
* USD 425,528.00

The latitudinal gradient in species diversity is one of the most striking
biogeographic patterns in nature, with species richness peaking in equatorial
regions for nearly all groups. Despite considerable effort to understand the
origin and maintenance of latitudinal gradients in species diversity, a
multitude of potentially interacting, non-mutually exclusive hypotheses exist,
and no single over-riding explanation has emerged. However, multiple hypotheses
link the latitudinal diversity gradient to a presumed gradient in the strength
of biotic interactions between temperate and tropical environments. While biotic
interactions are believed to play a major role in the origin and maintenance of
diversity and may drive increased rates of adaptation and speciation in tropical
regions, this hypothesis remains virtually untested. To bridge this gap, a
comprehensive analysis of the evolutionary mechanisms underlying adaptive
phenotypic variation in color, vision, and smell across a rapidly diversifying
lineage of butterflies will be performed together with field-studies.
Understanding the ecological and evolutionary processes that shape temporal and
spatial patterns of biodiversity is a central goal of biology, and an
increasingly important facet of the endangered species management, particularly
in a time of rapid global climate change. This proposal links biodiversity
researchers across the US and Latin America, and will lead to sustained
international collaboration; broadened access to STEM fields for women and
minorities through targeted recruitment; substantial employment opportunities
across institutions and countries; and an enhanced public understanding of
biodiversity science and threats to global biodiversity.