* 1342892
* I-Corps:  Decision Support Systems for Managers of Civil Infrastructure Systems
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2014
* Amlan Mukherjee, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 12/31/2014
* USD 50,000.00

The proposed technology is a methodology to assess alternative infrastructure
management strategies based on project cost, system performance and estimates of
greenhouse emissions. The supporting methods include stochastic analysis, life
cycle assessment and Monte Carlo simulation based approaches. The technology is
designed to address the problems of reducing life cycle emissions of civil
infrastructure systems, helping agencies provide a consistent level of service,
while optimally using available resources for construction, maintenance and
rehabilitation. This is particularly significant given the twin challenges of
climate change, and ongoing shortfalls in state and federal budget
appropriations for public works. Finally, the underlying theory and methods are
mathematically sophisticated and data intensive, and not easy for decision-
makers to implement without significant training. The proposed technology
promises efficient implementation by providing an innovative product/service
that is reliable and intuitive, and has a friendly and easy to use interface.

Civil infrastructure systems are critical to socioeconomic success. Services
such as access to clean drinking water, efficient sewer and waste management,
easy mobility and access to multiple modes of transportation provide the
backbone for multiple supply chains, besides supporting a healthy standard of
living. Challenges due to climate change, aging infrastructure, and the impact
of the economic crisis on local and state budgets are hurting the efficient
delivery of these services. By providing support to decision-makers the proposed
technology is likely to have a significant impact on maintaining and managing
infrastructure sustainably.