* 1342194
* BRIGE: Understanding the posttranslational regulation of cell adhesion in fluid flow
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2016
* Susan Thomas, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 09/30/2016
* USD 175,000.00

Technical Description:

The PI's long-term career goal is to understand how presentation of adhesive
glycan epitopes by cells impacts the biomechanics of adhesion in fluid flow in
order to develop approaches that can elicit precise patterns of cell homing to
target tissues for applications in enhancing wound healing or treating
inflammation and metastasis. In pursuit of this goal, the research objective of
this BRIGE award is to establish how the context of cell surface presentation of
binding epitopes, in particular density versus multivalency, controls cell
adhesion in physiological flow conditions. The research approach is to
systematically evaluate the effects of cell surface epitope and ligand density
on the biomechanics of cell adhesion, to determine how epitope density versus
receptor-ligand biophysics contribute to this process, and to elucidate the
glycan biosynthetic and gene expression pathways involved in eliciting a range
of cell adhesion behaviors.

Broader Significance and Importance:

The results of this proposal will provide design criteria for the development of
strategies to selectively attenuate or enhance cell adhesion for therapeutic
purposes ranging from regenerative medicine, management of inflammation and
prevention of cancer metastasis. Many people whom suffer from a variety of
disease conditions would therefore benefit from the novel insight into the
regulation of cell adhesion governing tissue-specific cell engraftment that will
be gained from this proposal.

Broadening Participation:

The educational objective of this BRIGE proposal is to develop online modules
for elementary, middle and high school science teachers to improve compliance
with science and mathematics learning standards as a part of the state of
Georgia's participation in the Race to the Top program. The PI' laboratory will
also host a science teacher from a metro Atlanta school, serving a largely low-
income underrepresented minority student population, through the Georgia Intern
Fellowships for Teachers program. The PI will also continue her efforts in
expanding the Georgia Tech Ambassador Program administered by Women in
Engineering to promote education and career opportunities in STEM with young
students in the metro Atlanta area. The educational objectives of this proposal
will impact large numbers of students at a variety of different education levels
throughout the state of Georgia. The goal of these interactions is to increase
the number of students, especially minority and women students, interested in
STEM higher education and careers.

This research has been funded through the Broadening Participation Research
Initiation Grants in Engineering solicitation, which is part of the Broadening
Participation in Engineering Program of the Engineering Education and Centers
Division.