* 1342046
* International Workshop on BioDesign Automation (IWBDA)
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Douglas Densmore, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 05/31/2014
* USD 12,000.00

The International Workshop on Bio-Design Automation (IWBDA) brings together
researchers from electronic design automation and synthetic biology. The goal of
IWBDA is to make biology more easily, robustly, reliably, and predictably
engineered and therefore, tackle challenges in biology and medicine, leading to
advances in disease diagnosis, treatment and prevention. Existing synthetic
biology conferences and meetings do not explicitly focus on bridging the gap
between the work of experimentalists and computational researchers. Bridging
this divide is essential for the field of synthetic biology to fulfill its
promise. Furthermore, other venues do not actively include the EDA community,
which can bring a wide range of experiences, expertise, and perspectives to the
design of novel biological systems. IWBDA has been held successfully in 2009,
2010, 2011, and 2012 when it was co-located with the largest conference for EDA
(the Design Automation Conference; DAC). DAC connected the IWBDA audience to the
EDA community of over 10,000 academic and industrial participants. This year,
IWBDA will be co-located with the BioBricks Foundation Synthetic Biology
Conference Series, SB6.0, and will bring together researchers from the synthetic
biology, systems biology, and design automation communities. IWBDA includes
keynote and invited talks, tutorials, poster sessions, panel discussions, as
well as dedicated time for informal discussions. The intellectual merit of this
workshop is a key strength. This workshop will provide a venue for between
twelve and fifteen technical talks, four invited lectures, ten to twenty
posters, and include an industry/academic panel session. Topics will be diverse
and include areas such as: Parts and Standardization, Biological Circuit
Simulators, Biological Circuit Design, CAD Tools for Synthetic Biology and Gene
Network Reconstruction. No other such workshop exists in Synthetic Biology/EDA.
The broader impacts of IWBDA are numerous. A wide variety of researchers (120+)
from EDA and synthetic biology will be brought together in a unique context
which does not exist elsewhere. IWBDA will capture and make public the slides,
posters, and abstracts from the session. In addition, IWBDA will create a user
survey which is used to learn more about how workshops like this can better
serve the community. Finally, this conference will also have numerous
undergraduate, graduate and post graduate student researchers in attendance.
IWBDA encourages and supports woman and underrepresented minority student
participation and has a diverse technical program and executive committees.