* 1342121
* BRIGE:  Simultaneous Modeling and Calibration for Environmental Sensor Data
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Laura Balzano, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2016
* USD 174,996.00

ECCS-1342121&lt;br/&gt;Balzano, Laura&lt;br/&gt;University of
Michigan&lt;br/&gt;BRIGE: Simultaneous Modeling and Calibration for
Environmental Sensor
Data&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This
BRIGE project is aimed at the investigation of signal processing theory and
methods for blindly calibrating sensors on a massive scale, after they are
deployed, and as their calibrations change over time. The massive deployment of
sensors is exciting for the prospect of what may be learned from the data; a
critical challenge in using those data is knowing their quality and reliability.
In deployments of even a hundred sensors, it becomes infeasible to hand-
calibrate each one in order to maintain confidence in the sensor output. Thus
blind calibration, i.e. calibration without the need for controlled stimulus or
high fidelity ground-truth data, is of critical importance. This proposal
focuses both on theory of blind calibration and the concrete practical
application to air quality sensing. Realistic sensing environments are
considered, where phenomena are non-stationary, and data are streaming, with
corruptions and missing values. A calibration dataset will be collected and
shared with the community. The two major theoretical contributions will be (1)
extending theory of blind calibration to models which capture the great variety
exhibited by environmental phenomena, and (2) online modeling for the practical
scenario where the phenomenon of interest is non-stationary.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Environmental sensing is an important
contemporary application of statistical signal processing that attracts a great
deal of interest from people with diverse backgrounds. This application gets
people involved in the technology, the climate, and their local community;
therefore it has potential to truly broaden participation in engineering. The
syllabus for Digital Signal Processing at the University of Michigan, a central
course in all signal processing curricula, will be expanded to include this
application and useful fundamentals like spatial models, auto-regressive models,
and matrix decomposition. Additionally, signal processing for environmental
sensing in particular has the potential to attract students who may typically go
into science or environmental policy, but who have a strong interest in
mathematics as well. Interaction with the Marian Sarah Parker Scholars program
at Michigan will expose outstanding young female scientists to the wide variety
of possibilities with signal processing. Beyond the classroom, exploring one's
environment using sensing has the potential to make a very positive social
impact. The projects developed for the Parker scholars and other Michigan
educational programs will build an infrastructure for future interactions with
all grade levels and the greater public.