* 1342900
* Conference: Reforming Power Semiconductor Education. To be Held October, 27 - November 1, 2013 in San Francisco, CA.
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2013,03/31/2014
* Ibrahim Abdel-Motaleb, Northern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Dimitris Pavlidis
* 03/31/2014
* USD 5,000.00

The proposed project seeks financial support for the participation of student,
underrepresented groups and young researchers in the Symposium on GaN and SiC
Power Technologies 3 at the 224th Electrochemical Society (ECS) Meeting to be
held Oct. 27 - Nov. 1, 2013 in San Francisco, CA.. The Symposium will address
research areas related to developing and delivering an Integrated Power
Electronics Curriculum from Components to Systems. The program includes invited
presentations by active experts in the field as well as regular papers, to
enable dissemination of the current ideas and to foster critical discussion on
the diverse applications. The speakers will explain how to implement the
proposed curricular changes in the current engineering curriculum. Discussions
on how to proceed to ensure the adoption of an integrated curriculum in power
electronics components, technologies, and systems will provide the opportunity
for a better understanding this critical for the nation area. The proposed
conference session create a strong awareness about the importance of including
the physics and technologies of various components that are needed to design and
build modern electrical energy conversion systems based on solid-state power
electronics. It will also emphasize the emerging wide bandgap semiconductor
power switching devices in university and community college educational
curricula.