* 1342028
* EAGER: Development of Novel Analytical Approaches for Measurements of CNTs Release from Polymer Nanocomposites
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Alexander Orlov, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 08/31/2016
* USD 100,000.00

CBET - 1342028&lt;br/&gt;There is growing interest in the development of
nanocomposites consisting of organic polymers&lt;br/&gt;and various
nanomaterials. These new materials can provide unique functionalities as
compared&lt;br/&gt;to unmodified polymers in terms of dielectric, magnetic,
thermal, mechanical, optical, transport,&lt;br/&gt;permeation and separation
properties. Although nanomaterials are considered potentially
hazardous,&lt;br/&gt;they are often considered safe when encapsulated into the
matrix. However, systematic research&lt;br/&gt;to confirm the abovementioned
paradigm is lacking, despite the potential risks of
nanomaterial&lt;br/&gt;release to human health and
environment.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit :&lt;br/&gt;Current research on the
stability of nanocomposites has focused primarily on short term
stability&lt;br/&gt;and performance, whereas the longer term issues have not
been properly addressed. This knowledge&lt;br/&gt;gap has the potential to
hinder both applications and acceptance of polymers in various
industries.&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, stability of both matrix and
nanocomposites are of critical importance.&lt;br/&gt;It is known that the
polymer matrix can undergo degradation when exposed to various
environmental&lt;br/&gt;conditions during production, use and disposal. This can
lead to nanofiller release, which&lt;br/&gt;can potentially cause various health
and environmental problems. Therefore, it is absolutely&lt;br/&gt;critical to
understand the behavior of nanocomposites under relevant environmental
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, evaluation of the amounts and rates of
Carbon Nanotubes (CNTs) release&lt;br/&gt;from composites has been a tremendous
challenge for the existing analytical techniques so&lt;br/&gt;far. This project
will utilize C-14 labeled CNTs which will allow us to quantify the
released&lt;br/&gt;CNTs using a relatively simple analytical technique. This
will be of tremendous value for&lt;br/&gt;advancing our knowledge of various
CNTs exposure scenarios by developing accurate metrology&lt;br/&gt;tools. This
tool can be also vital for development of accurate life cycle assessments of
CNTs&lt;br/&gt;encapsulated into the polymer composites.&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts :&lt;br/&gt;This project can significantly impact nanotoxicology,
environmental engineering, materials&lt;br/&gt;science and green
chemistry/engineering areas through evaluation of various strategies
for&lt;br/&gt;delivering functional nanocomposites with reduced health and
environmental impacts. These&lt;br/&gt;approaches are designed to make timely
contributions to a basic understanding of the environmental&lt;br/&gt;health and
safety of nanotechnology. During the course of this project, the students
will&lt;br/&gt;gain fundamental and applied knowledge in many areas of science
and engineering encompassing&lt;br/&gt;environmental health and safety of
nanotechnology. Our team has already utilized the resources&lt;br/&gt;of a new
NSF REU site in Nanotechnology for Health, Energy, and the Environment at Stony
Brook&lt;br/&gt;University. We will continue to recruit students through the REU
site, which focuses on students&lt;br/&gt;from non-research, 4-year institutions
with this research project. Through several recruitment&lt;br/&gt;mechanisms
already established at the Stony Brook University we will reach
underrepresented&lt;br/&gt;groups, including students from minority and
economically disadvantaged communities as well&lt;br/&gt;as females. All these
activities will establish a good foundation to achieve notable
broader&lt;br/&gt;impacts of this proposal