* 1342395
* Collaborative Research: P2C2--Reconstructing Tropical Pacific Climate Variability and Monsoon Systems, and Abrupt Changes from Ice Cores on Irian Jaya, Indonesia and Hualcan, Peru
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2013,07/31/2014
* Raden Susanto, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 07/31/2014
* USD 41,366.00

Funding is provided to recover and analyze ice cores from glaciers in the
tropical Pacific to examine tropical climate variability especially El Nino-
Southern Oscillation (ENSO) linked climate phenomena such as the Austral-Asian
monsoon system, the abrupt 4,000 year drought, and the modulation of Atlantic
and Pacific tropical storm intensities. Specifically, the researchers will
recover four cores to bedrock from the two of the three remaining ice fields on
Puncak Jaya (PJ) in Irian Jaya, Indonesia on the Island of New Guinea and two
cores from Nevado Hualcán in the Cordillera Blanca, Peru.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Climatologically, tropical ice masses are particularly
sensitive to small changes in ambient temperatures since they exist very close
to the melting point of water. Scientific evidence exists for recent and strong
warming in the tropics that is signaled by the disappearance and rapid retreat
of ice caps and glaciers at high elevations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;General
circulation models of possible future climate change indicate that warming will
increase most rapidly at higher altitudes and especially in the tropical
latitudes where these glaciers are located. Scientific interest in the study of
the Puncak Jaya and Hualcán ice fields, both in the analysis of the cores and in
the measurements of area and volume changes of the glaciers themselves, arises
in part from the need to place the recent and accelerating ice retreat into a
longer temporal perspective.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Furthermore, the analyses of
the Hualcán ice cores and accompanying mass balance studies will help provide
critical information about water resources in Peru. Runoff from glaciers feed
Peru's streams and rivers and is essential for irrigation, hydroelectric
production (80% of Peru?s electricity), and municipal water supplies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The planned project supports students in an effort to
expand our fundamental knowledge of climate across time and space. The research
also provides for true intellectual and financial collaborations between
academia, non-governmental organizations, and governments in several nations.