* 1342618
* Impedance-Based Bioelectronic Tongue that Incorporates Antibodies
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/17/2013,05/31/2015
* Ian Suni, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 05/31/2015
* USD 176,258.00

Intellectual Merits The Electronic Tongue, which combines an array of non-
selective electrodes with pattern recognition algorithms, is known to be limited
by inadequate sensitivity and selectivity of the individual electrodes. This has
emerged as a major research thrust. To address this shortcoming, the first
Bioelectronic Tongue was recently reported for small molecule detection using an
array of ion-selective electrodes, one or more of which has an enzyme coating.
The Principal Investigators propose to extend the concept of the Bioelectronic
Tongue to antibody-coated electrodes for detection of biomolecules (for example,
proteins) and cells. The proposed new type of Bioelectronic Tongue will be
demonstrated for peanut protein Ara h 1 from a protein mixture using an array of
antibody-coated electrodes interrogated by impedance methods. Measurements will
be processed with pattern recognition algorithms to separate the electronic
fingerprint of the protein analyte from that of interfering proteins that adsorb
non-specifically. Peanut protein Ara h 1 is an allergenic food protein that is
stable during most food processing operations, and accidental ingestion of
allergenic peanut proteins causes more than 100 deaths in the USA alone each
year. The Principal Investigators also propose to demonstrate simultaneous
detection of three allergenic proteins: peanut protein Ara h 1, peanut protein
Ara h 2, and shrimp tropomyosin, from a protein mixture. Impedance measurements
at antibody-coated electrodes are quite powerful, since different
physicochemical phenomena can be probed at different frequencies. Pattern
recognition algorithms are will be employed to identify the sensor electrodes
most sensitive to binding of the protein analyte and most sensitive to non-
specific adsorption, and to identify the protein species that adsorb non-
specifically. Non-specific adsorption of protein molecules to a surface-
immobilized antibody is a critical shortcoming of many solid state biosensors,
often afflicting electrochemical, optical, and acoustic biosensors, so the
broader technical impact of this research is significant. The Principal
Investigators expect that the proposed impedance-based Bioelectronic Tongue is
particularly important for problems that are inherently multi-dimensional, with
many analytes involved, and for problems where antibody cross-reactivity is
expected. Broader Impact Graduate students will be trained within existing
graduate programs (Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, Electrical and
Computer Engineering) at Clarkson University. Numerous education and outreach
activities are planned to increase the broader impact of this project. The
Principal Investigators plan to apply for supplemental research grants from the
National Science Foundation for both Research Experiences for Undergraduates and
Research Experience for Teachers. The Principal Investigator also plans to make
presentations on Biosensors and Bioelectronics to physics and chemistry classes
at Potsdam High School. These activities will be coordinated through Clarkson
University K-12 Project-Based Learning Partnership Program, and through the
Undergraduate Research Committee at Clarkson University Coulter School of
Engineering. The Principal Investigators also plan to recruit undergraduate
students from underrepresented groups for summer research in their laboratories
through Clarkson University Collegiate Science and Technology Entry Program and
McNair Scholars Research Program. In addition, the Principal Investigators will
create a design project for BR 450, Biomedical Engineering, Science, and
Technology Capstone Design.