* 1342420
* BRIGE: Bioengineering Approach for Understanding the Intracellular Signaling Response to Shear Loading
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2016
* Ronald June, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* kara peters
* 12/31/2016
* USD 192,410.00

Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cartilage is the smooth tissue which
articulates between bones to allow motion of joints such as the knee and hip.
During normal activity (e.g. walking) cartilage cells are compressed, which
provides a mechanical stimulus that affects chondrocyte (i.e. cartilage cell)
biology. The mechanisms by which the cells sense and respond to their mechanical
environment are not yet fully understood, and the objective of this project is
to define how central energy metabolism changes in response to applied
compression.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our hypothesis is that short-duration
compressive loading results in changes in energy metabolism resulting in
increased protein production. This project will utilize a dual approach
consisting of experimental measurements and computational predictions.
Experimental analysis will quantify the abundance of central energy metabolites
in response to 0-30 minutes of applied compression. Computational analysis will
predict patterns of central energy metabolite expression for testing of our
hypothesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Significance and
Importance&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will improve our understanding of
how cartilage cells respond to mechanical loading. This improved understanding
may enable novel treatments for debilitating diseases such as arthritis. This
knowledge will also enable bioengineering of specific cellular behavior (e.g.
production of metabolite X) in response to applied compression, which may have
applications for the bio-inspired design of new classes of sensors and
actuators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broadening Participation
Activities&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Broadening Participation activities will
focus on providing intensive academic and research support to a highly-selected
population of Native American students. These students will receive tutoring
assistance and a mentored laboratory experience where they conduct experiments
and analyze data. Successful completion of the Broadening Participation Plan
will increase the representation of Native American students which will
contribute toward a greater increase in cultural diversity in the STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has been funded through the
Broadening Participation Research Initiation Grants in Engineering solicitation,
which is part of the Broadening Participation in Engineering Program of the
Engineering Education and Centers Division.