* 1342754
* Dimensions US-China: Collaborative Research: Phylogenetic, Functional, and Genetic Diversity and Ecosystem Functions in a Fragmented Landscape
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Lin Jiang, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 08/31/2019
* USD 1,247,841.00

This project ? jointly funded with the Chinese National Science Foundation
(NSFC) ? will study the relationships among ecological/evolutionary measures of
biodiversity, and ecosystem functions. In particular, the investigators will
investigate the hypothesis that succession drives changes in biodiversity, which
in turn causes altered ecosystem function. Researchers will study the
biodiversity of plant and insect assemblages on islands in the Thousand-Island
Lake in China. This man-made lake was created in 1959 as the result of dam
construction. As the water level rose, previously continuous terrestrial
habitats were fragmented into islands. The project will investigate three
dimensions of biodiversity on islands of different successional stages, their
interrelationships, and linkages to ecosystem function. Field surveys of plant
and insect communities will be combined with experimental manipulations of
biodiversity, and laboratory-based functional and genetic analyses of plant and
insect samples to examine biodiversity and ecosystem function patterns in this
unusual habitat.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will allow this
international team to gain a better understanding of linkages among the multiple
dimensions of biodiversity, ecosystem function, and habitat fragmentation, by
taking advantage of the highly replicated, natural, insular environment of
Thousand-Island Lake. This project will serve as a long-term platform for
collaborations between US and Chinese scientists and students. Results of this
study will be disseminated through publications in peer-reviewed journals,
conference presentations, and teaching/training activities. The project will
provide high-quality research opportunities for young scientists and students
through hands-on research and via organized workshops. It will emphasize the
involvement of underrepresented groups in science via existing student outreach
programs at the researchers' home institutions. The researchers will work with
local managers and tourist groups on the Thousand-Island Lake islands to promote
public education about biodiversity in the face of habitat fragmentation.