* 1342092
* The 2013 IEEE Pulsed Power and Plasma Science Conference; San Francisco, CA
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2014
* John Verboncoeur, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Steven J Gitomer
* 06/30/2014
* USD 10,000.00

This is an internationally renowned, well-attended conference involving topics
of direct interest to the NSF, Universities, DOE, Air Force, and many others.
The IEEE Pulsed Power and Plasma Science conference is a combination of the IEEE
Pulsed Power Conference (PPC) and the International Conference on Plasma Science
(ICOPS), sponsored by the Nuclear and Plasma Sciences Society of the IEEE. The
PPC is held every two years, and the ICOPS is held annually; the combined PPPS
is held every 6 years. ICOPS has been held annually since 1974. Recent meetings
were held in Edinburgh, Scotland (2012), Chicago, IL (2011), Norfolk VA (2010),
San Diego CA (2009), Karlsruhe Germany (2008), Albuquerque NM (2007, a joint
meeting with Pulsed Power). Recent PPCs were held in Chicago, IL (2011),
Washington DC (2009), and Albuquerque, NM (2007, joint with ICOPS). In 2013,
PPPS will be held in San Francisco, CA (http://www.ece.unm.edu/ppps2013/) on
June 16-21. Projected attendance is approximately 800 participants. The
conference will include plenary, oral, and poster sessions on research in pulsed
power and plasma science and technology and Prize Addresses by the recipients of
the Plasma Science and Applications Committee Award, the Ervin Marx Award, and
the Peter Haas Award. Oral sessions will include plenary, invited and
contributed papers. Plenary papers are 50 minutes for presentation with 10
minutes for discussion; Invited papers are allotted 25 minutes for presentation
and 5 minutes for questions. Contributed papers are allotted 12 minutes for
presentation and 3 minutes for discussion. The PPPS Mini-course, organized by
John Giuliani of Naval Research Laboratory, is on High Energy Density Physics.

Plasma technologies are expanding rapidly into new areas including bio-medical
areas, high energy density matter, materials processing, in addition to
continued growth in traditional areas such as basic physics, lighting, radiation
sources, beam physics, inertial and magnetic confinement fusion, environmental
sciences, and pulsed power. These areas depend on a strong foundation of basic
research featured in the PPPS meeting. The PPPS technical program continues to
reflect the dynamic evolution of pulsed power and plasma science through
plenary, invited, and oral talks, as well as interactive poster sessions in a
diverse set of sessions organized by a diverse group of researchers.

This award provides partial support for students to attend the IEEE Pulsed Power
and Plasma Science conference. It will support student travel grants,
particularly underrepresented minorities, promote women in engineering, and help
in awards costs. The travel grant will be awarded to those students who will be
presenting papers (oral talks and posters) as first authors. If a large number
of students will be presenting their work, then a committee consisting of three
members of the local organizing committee will choose students on the basis of
merit and need.