* 1342917
* AIR Option 1: Technology Translation:  Prototyping a smart multi-dimensional micro-gas chromatography instrument with unprecedented peak capacity
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2013,12/31/2015
* Xudong Fan, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Barbara H. Kenny
* 12/31/2015
* USD 165,592.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating smart multi-
channel multi-dimensional micro-gas chromatography (MC-MD micro-GC) technology
to fill portable and rapid vapor analysis gap. The translated smart MC-MD micro-
GC has the following distinct advantages when compared with conventional
1-dimensional micro-GC or comprehensive 2-D micro-GC in the market or under
development in labs. (1) It has unprecedented peak capacity and peak capacity
efficiency while remaining portable, which arise from the long high-dimensional
separation afforded by the smart GC design; (2) It can be scaled up to higher
dimensional separation (such as 3-D or 4-D micro-GC) easily; (3) It does not
require complicated thermal modulators widely used in comprehensive 2-D GC
systems, thus substantially simplifying the GC design, fabrication, and power
consumption; (4) Construction of the multi-dimensional (not only 2-D but also
higher dimensional) chromatogram becomes straightforward by reading the
retention time of each analyte directly from the vapor detector installed at the
end of the each separation column; and (5) the detection limit is improved 3-10
fold, since the entire analyte is sent to the downstream column, rather than
just a slice of it as in the conventional comprehensive 2-D GC. The project
accomplishes this goal by prototyping a fully functional 1x2x4-channel smart 3-D
micro-GC, which will include the following tasks: (1) assembly of all micro-GC
components, (2) development of the corresponding operation/analysis algorithm,
(3) performance evaluation using 100 vapor analytes, (4) assessment of market
potential and commercialization feasibility, and (5) technical and
entrepreneurial training of under/graduate students and post-doctors. The
potential economic impact is expected to be a few billion US dollars in the next
ten years which will contribute to the U.S. competitiveness in fields as diverse
as agricultural and food industry, winery, environment monitoring/protection,
healthcare, and homeland security/battlefield.&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact: Smart
3-D micro-GC has unprecedented peak capacity, easy operation, and simple 3-D
chromatogram construction and thus will have a broad range of applications in
environmental monitoring, homeland security, battlefield, industries, and
healthcare. The students and the post-doctor will receive rigorous technical and
entrepreneurial training and mentoring. Additionally, the team will work closely
with the Master of Entrepreneurship Program at the University of Michigan to
assess the market opportunities and viability of smart 3-D micro-GC.
Dissemination of knowledge will include journal publications, conference
presentations, patent filing, public seminars, and demonstration of the
prototype at the science/technology exhibits in the Detroit area.