* 1342177
* BRIGE:  LEON:  Learning in Optical Neuron
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2015
* Mable Fok, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2015
* USD 174,875.00

ECCS-1342177&lt;br/&gt;Fok, Mable&lt;br/&gt;University of
Georgia&lt;br/&gt;BRIGE: Learning Optical Neuron
(LEON)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
Real-time high capacity signal processing is very challenging to today's signal
processing technologies; however, this kind of powerful processing paradigm is
critical to fulfilling the increasing demand of large bandwidth signals in
various applications that can no longer be supported by electronics, including
biomedical, military, and consumer applications. Therefore, there is a critical
need to investigate a novel approach to tackle these challenges. This BRIGE
project borrows the principle of the Leaky Integrate-and-Fire Neuron and of
Spike Timing Dependent Plasticity-based learning algorithm from physiological
circuitry, and implements it with photonics. The proposed approach is an
interdisciplinary integrated device and systems design study involving basic
research from the standpoint of neuromorphic processing. The project aims to
exploit physical processes in photonic devices, and to solve the problem of
fundamental real-time learning and adaptive control in a dynamic system. This
fundamentally novel approach is a neural-inspired way to solve the problem by
eliminating the computing bottleneck and providing the high fidelities and large
bandwidth processing ability needed for high-capacity and high-bandwidth signal
processing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The educational impact of the
proposed work comes from its multi-disciplinary foundation, broadening students'
views and encouraging them to think creatively. The multi-disciplinary nature of
the project offers a wide array of exciting opportunities for developing new
educational methods that can teach a new generation of students to wield
neuroscience, photonics, and signal processing methods to attack problems.
Toward this end, the investigating team plans to focus its educational efforts
on redesigning fiber optics classes, encouraging high school and undergraduate
students to participate in research, and engaging industrial partners in
continuing educational activities. In particular, the team would like to
increase opportunities for both minority and female students to get involved in
research, and to provide mentoring throughout their early career development.
The long-term societal benefits of the project originate from the high-capacity,
real-time, and unique processing algorithm provided by photonic implementation
of biological neurons. Self-learning and adaptive systems provide accurate and
real-time adaptive capability in sensing systems, which can significantly reduce
avoidable and unnecessary death and property damage due to natural and manmade
disasters. They can also improve national security by enabling more dynamic and
reliable high-capacity communication channels for the military, as well as
forming a fast and accurate processing paradigm for identifying intentional
terrorist actions. The unique properties of photonic neuron form the foundation
for a low false alarm rate health condition alert system.