* 1342273
* BRIGE: Characterization of the human myocardium by optical coherence tomography
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2015
* Christine Hendon, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 09/30/2015
* USD 174,999.00

Background:

Cardiovascular disease is the leading cause of morbidity and mortality in the
United States. Progress within the cardiovascular field towards early diagnosis,
increased efficacy in therapy and understanding the underlying mechanisms of
cardiovascular diseases have been aided in part by advances in medical imaging
technologies.

Technical Description:

Our objective of this Broadening Participation Research Initiation Grants in
Engineering (BRIGE) proposal is to develop high-resolution optical imaging,
spectroscopy and image analysis for diagnosis and therapy monitoring of diseases
of the heart wall. We will develop an atlas of optical imaging of the human
heart muscle, optical catheters and classification algorithms to enable real
time tissue classification. We aim to demonstrate that Optical coherence
tomogoraphy (OCT) and Near Infrared Spectroscopy (NIRS) can address unmet needs
of intramyocardial imaging by providing cellular-level imaging of the
myocardium. The aims of the project are

1) to characterize human myocardium and radiofrequency ablation lesions ex vivo
through an OCT correlative histopathology study, 2) to develop an integrated OCT
and NIRS catheter, and 3) to develop automated algorithms for tissue
classification.

Broader Significance and Importance:

The research activities outlined in this proposal addresses an area that has
broad impact to our entire community by developing optical catheters and image
analysis for improving the diagnosis and treatment of cardiovascular disease.
There are a large range of diseases and therapies of the heart that can benefit
from the information provided by a high-resolution, real time imaging modality.
It is our goal to develop tools for imaging the myocardium, which will provide
cardiac electrophysiologist and cardiologist a view of the heart wall to aid in
disease diagnosis and guide therapy.

Broadening Participation Activities:

The PI will participate in broader participation activities through integrating
materials developed during the research project into the curriculum current and
new optical system courses. In addition, the material will be used within
outreach presentations, demonstrations, and laboratory tours to minority high
school students in the New York City public school system and African American
undergraduates at National Society of Black Engineers (NSBE) conferences and
chapter meetings to encourage them to pursue a Science, Technology, Engineering
and Mathematics (STEM) discipline during undergraduate and graduate school
respectively. Lastly, the PI will mentor minority students within the Columbia
University undergraduate chapter of the National Society of Black Engineers, in
addition to mentoring a diverse laboratory team.

This research has been funded through the Broadening Participation Research
Initiation Grants in Engineering solicitation, which is part of the Broadening
Participation in Engineering Program of the Engineering Education and Centers
Division.