* 1342620
* Promoting Student Education &amp; Outreach at the 17th Annual Green Chemistry &amp; Engineeering Conference
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2013,07/31/2014
* David Constable, American Chemical Society (ACS)
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 07/31/2014
* USD 40,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Green chemistry and green engineering offer
fundamental sustainable solutions to the global challenges facing this planet.
Green chemistry is the design of chemical products and processes that reduce or
eliminate the use and generation of hazardous substances. Green engineering is
the development and commercialization of industrial processes that are
economically feasible and reduce the risk to human health and the environment.
Green chemistry and engineering are absolutely essential to the development of
solutions to global challenges. The impact of green chemistry and engineering
approaches on sustainable development are significant, since these design
philosophies unite the pursuit of economic prosperity with environmental and
public health protection. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The annual Green Chemistry and
Engineering Conference (www.GCandE.org) is organized each year by the American
Chemical Society (ACS) Green Chemistry InstituteÂ® (ACS GCI) with the active
involvement of an organizing committee comprised of scientists from other non-
profit organizations, U.S. government agencies, academic institutions and
industry. Dr. Jennifer MacKellar serves as the PI for the ACS Green Chemistry
Institute. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 17th Annual GC&amp;E Conference in 2013
will have as its theme Sustainable Chemistry and Engineering in the 21st
Century. Students participating in the GC&amp;E workshop and/or conference will
have a unique opportunity to engage in topics not commonly encountered in
traditional university courses and conferences. The meeting is expected to
convene a record number of approximately 700 plus leading international
researchers from industry, academe, and government to discuss the latest
advances in green chemistry and engineering from across the spectrum of the
chemical enterprise. This dynamic event provides students with excellent
opportunities to learn about the newest research developments across all topics
of GC&amp;E, dialog with other academic, industrial, and governmental
researchers, and expand their network of professional contacts.