* 1342964
* I-Corps:  Micro-Harvesting RF Power using Wearable Rectennas (MH-PoWear)
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2014
* Sima Noghanian, University of North Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 12/31/2014
* USD 50,000.00

The proposed system is a power harvesting and charging unit that is integrated
with textile antennas. The unique aspect of the project is the system
integration of wearable textile antennas with signal processing and rectifying
circuits to transfer energy into storage medium. The technology provides a means
of collecting energy from air sent by base stations through radio-frequency and
then storing the energy in a battery that can charge devices. Through the
I-Corps program the research team aims to investigate the technology readiness
for more widespread use. The prototype will be optimized and tested for various
applications. It is anticipated that the findings of this proposed will provide
novel textile antenna and rectifying antenna (rectenna) designs, as well as
guidelines for better engineering and tailoring the system to achieve desired
properties.

This project has the potential to enhance and provide enabling technology for
future wearable systems for various applications such as smart wearable devices,
biomedical health monitoring and situational awareness systems, by proposing a
new generation of wearable rectennas. There are a number of mobile and wearable
medical sensors and devices that monitor biomedical signals and send alerts to
patients or care-givers, these devices could be recharged wirelessly using this
technology. The technology could be integrated into a wearable device or "smart
watch" that could be used in-conjunction with smart-phones and tablets. There
are defense applications where this technology could be integrated into military
uniforms to aid in communications.