* 1342582
* Evaluating the PULSE: Assessing the Impacts of the PULSE Program
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2015
* Teresa Balser, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* christopher meyer
* 12/31/2015
* USD 178,071.00

An award has been made to the University of Florida to coordinate a series of
targeted assessment activities that will help evaluate an ambitious, year-long
project supported by the Partnership for Undergraduate Life Science Education
(PULSE). Last September, the PULSE partners (HHMI, NIH, and NSF) appointed 40
Vision and Change Leadership Fellows to stimulate transformative changes in the
undergraduate life science education community. All Fellows met in October, 2012
and have since organized into four working groups to address different
challenges to reforming how biology is taught at all types of undergraduate
institutions. The Vision and Change Leadership Fellows are focusing on how life
science departments can encourage and reward faculty members? efforts to improve
undergraduate life sciences education. Such improvements should increase student
learning, should increase retention rates for students in the sciences, and
should prepare all students to be more curious and scientifically literate
citizens.

The current award is to fund a multi-step assessment of the PULSE project. The
evaluators will attend the second workshop planned for June 3-6, 2013 to better
understand the PULSE project and to begin planning for stakeholder interviews.
The evaluation team will develop instruments to determine if the PULSE project
is achieving its goals, to evaluate several of the resources and tools being
developed by the Fellows, and to determine the successes and challenges faced by
the Fellows. Evaluation of the PULSE program will help measure the influence and
effectiveness of large-scale initiatives on implementation of organizational
change at the national level. The resulting assessment reports to be used to
initiate conversations about the impacts of the PULSE program with the wider
scientific community, to encourage programmatic revisions, and to use the PULSE
program as an example of how to inspire, motivate, and assist the life science
community in implementing Vision and Change. As appropriate, results from the
evaluation will be submitted to members of the Steering Committee, distributed
to Fellows, and shared with the life sciences community, primarily via the
www.pulsecommunity.org website.

This project is being jointly funded by the Directorate for Biological Sciences
and the Directorate of Education and Human Resources, Division of Undergraduate
Education as part of their efforts to support Vision and Change in Undergraduate
Biology Education.