* 1342921
* EAGER:  A Data-Intensive Instrument for Strongly Correlated System Material Design
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2013,02/28/2015
* Gabriel Kotliar, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 02/28/2015
* USD 297,150.00

Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;This award from the National Science Foundation
to Rutgers University in New Brunswick is for the development of a new computer
architecture with multiple levels of interconnected memory, optimized for the
simulation of strongly correlated materials from first principles calculations.
Strongly correlated materials have the potential to be transformative, two
examples: thermoelectric materials, which can generate electricity from waste
heat with high efficiency; and, superconductors with potential for higher
critical temperatures, fields, and currents, which can revolutionize the
electric grid by reducing transmission losses. The use of computational methods
to accelerate the pace of discovery of materials with desirable properties is
one of the greatest challenges in condensed matter science. Materials with
strongly correlated electron systems are particularly difficult to simulat
because their physical properties cannot be accurately represented in terms of a
system of independent particles moving in an average potential, thus requiring
new methodologies and powerful supercomputers for their theoretical description.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;This award from the
National Science Foundation to Rutgers University in New Brunswick is for the
development of a new computer architecture optimized for the dsicovery of new
materials from first principles calculations. The new computer will enable
collaborations between material synthesis groups and computational physicists.
The instrument will drive computer science research, will be used as a resource
for teaching computational science and engineering at Rutgers, and will serve as
a prototype for a future supercomputer in the national cyber-infrastructure.