* 1342020
* RAPID: Structural Damage Data Collection and Analysis of a Recently Damaged Bridge
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/2013,04/30/2014
* Erin Bell, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Kishor Mehta
* 04/30/2014
* USD 15,000.00

It is proposed to collect structural data of a damaged bridge in the next 4-6
weeks before repair is completed. The Sarah Long Bridge, a 2804-foot double deck
truss bridge, in Portsmouth, New Hampshire, was struck by a 473-foot cargo ship
on April 1, 2013. After visual inspection and assessment, it was determined that
the primary structural damage is the severely bending of two members of the
227-foot segment of the steel truss and they must be replaced. The bridge is
closed to traffic till the repairs are completed. The New Hampshire Department
of Transportation estimates the repair to cost $2.5 million and take 4-6 weeks.
The proposed work fits RAPID's goal given that the collision is a rare,
unanticipated event and the short time period available to collect perishable
vibration data on the damaged bridge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The project team
will deploy wireless sensors on the bridge and record ambient vibrations before
and after the repairs. Additionally, the damaged structural members of the
bridge will be documented and analyzed. The proposed measurements will provide
rare data sets of a major structure at its damaged (pre-repair) and healthy
(post-repair) states, which will help understand structural behavior of a
damaged truss. The vibration data of the bridge at its healthy and damaged
states will be analyzed and compared to identify changes in natural frequencies.
In addition, the bridge data will also be used to develop a finite element
analytical model of the bridge truss. The analytical model will be used to
understand structural vibration characteristics of the truss and can postulate
how frequencies of the truss will change with other damaged members. This
exercise will answer the question of change in vibration frequencies with
different levels of damage; and ultimately help in structural health monitoring
field.