* 1342192
* BRIGE: Engineering a BioMatrix Library Derived from Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Yan Li, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 09/30/2017
* USD 174,737.00

Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Human Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells
(hiPSC) are adult cells (for example, skin cells derived from a biopsy) that
have been genetically reprogrammed to an embryonic stem cell-like state by being
forced to express genes and factors important for maintaining the defining
properties of embryonic stem cells. They have great potential for drug
screening, disease modeling, and eventually cell therapy for humans.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) have great
potential to understand diseases and develop therapeutics. Current matrices that
are used for iPSC self-renewal and differentiation fail to recapitulate the
complex signaling network during lineage specification. To address this issue, a
novel Biomatrix Library will be generated in the proposed research to study the
complex signaling during stem cell development. The unique feature of the
proposed Biomatrix Library is the maintenance of the broad signaling capacity
and preservation of signaling network during tissue development and
morphogenesis. The specific tasks in the proposed study include: 1) generation
and high-content characterization of a Biomatrix Library with various
biochemical and biological properties; 2) high-throughput screening and
validation of the Biomatrix Library for self-renewal and neural differentiation
of iPSCs. The Biomatrix-based functional neural differentiation will be
translated into a bioreactor to confirm the predicative effect from the
screening. The long-term objective of this research is to obtain comprehensive
understanding of cell-biomatrix interactions in regulating lineage-specific
differentiation of iPSCs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Significance and
Importance:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Induced pluripotent stem cells that are
artificially derived from adult cells (e.g., skin cells) provide an alternative
to embryonic stem cells for research. This 2012 Nobel Prize winning discovery
represents an important advance in scientific research as they allow researchers
to obtain pluripotent stem cells, which have the ability to become any cell type
in the body, without the controversial use of embryos. Using well-established
iPSC cell lines, the proposed study will identify the key interactions of cells,
matrices and growth factors that could regulate cell fate decision. The research
outcome will guide the biomimetic material design and the large scale generation
of functional tissue cells for drug screening, disease modeling, and eventually
cell therapy. This proposal details a transformative research plan to achieve
highly efficient differentiation of iPSCs, regulated by the engineered Biomatrix
that will be identified through innovative high content characterization, high-
throughput screening, and functional analysis. The gained knowledge can be
directly transformed to technology commercialization in the biopharmaceutical
and biotechnology industries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broadening Participation of
Underrepresented Groups in Engineering&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The target
populations of broadening participation activities in the proposed efforts
include the African-American, Hispanic, and women students in Florida A&amp;M
University, a historically black college, Florida State University, a major
research university with a large female enrollment, and Tallahassee community.
Globally, the PI will provide mentoring and leadership training for Turkish
women students using Global Educational Outreach in Science, Engineering and
Technology portal. The PI will incorporate the skills required in industry such
as current Good Manufacturing Practices and Quality by Design in the curriculum.
These activities will bridge the gap between education and application, and also
attract the students from under-represented groups to stay in science and
engineering. The results from the proposed research and education efforts will
be disseminated to K-12 students in Leon County School District and in
Challenger Learning Center, to undergraduates in Biomedical Engineering Society,
and to students in National Society of Black Engineers. In particular, the
mentoring activities will broaden the participation of women in science and
engineering locally and globally, especially in Tallahassee and
Turkey.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has been funded through the
Broadening Participation Research Initiation Grants in Engineering solicitation,
which is part of the Broadening Participation in Engineering Program of the
Engineering Education and Centers Division.