* 1342899
* Collaborative CNIC: US-Argentina planning visits for fungal biodiversity investigation
* O/D,OISE
* 02/15/2014,12/31/2015
* Regina Redman, Symbiogenics
* Standard Grant
* Jessica Robin
* 12/31/2015
* USD 31,300.00

This collaborative project aims to catalyze a research collaboration between US
and Argentinian researchers. The project will be led by Drs. Russell Rodriguez
at Symbiogenics and Regina Redman of the University of Washington, both in
Seattle, Washington, and Dr. Laurie Connell at the University of Maine, Orono,
for the US side. On the Argentinean side, Drs. Diego Libkind, Martin Molino and
Virginia de Garcia of INIBIOMA (Instituto de Investigaciones en Biodiversidad y
Medioambiente, an Argentinean National Scientific and Technical Research Council
Institute) and the University of Comahue, are the counterparts for the project.
The Argentinian researchers bring to the collaboration expertise in fungal
taxonomy and biodiversity, particularly of cold and extreme environments. The US
researchers bring expertise in fungal and plant adaptation to stresses,
particularly in diverse habitats of Antarctica. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Overall,
this collaboration aims to understand how function impacts bacterial community
structures, an important challenge in predicting ecosystems responses to climate
change. For this project the researchers will study fungal communities by
investigating their diversity, physiology, and ecology in extreme habitats such
as glacial water run-off in Patagonia. The results of these initial studies will
lay the groundwork for further large-scale projects. The collaboration will
provide training opportunities for students at different levels and has
significant potential to increase our understanding of global nutrient cycling,
inter-organismal relationships, and life in extreme environments.