* 1342699
* Dimensions: Collaborative Research: Bacterial Taxa that Control Sulfur Flux from the Ocean to the Atmosphere
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2014,09/30/2019
* Jeffrey Krause, University of South Alabama
* Standard Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 09/30/2019
* USD 513,777.00

This project is based on the globally important function of bacterial
transformation of the ubiquitous organic sulfur compound
dimethylsulfoniopropionate (DMSP) in ocean surface waters. Recent genetic
discoveries have identified key genes in the two major DMSP degradation
pathways, and the stage is now set to identify the factors that regulate gene
expression to favor one or the other pathway during DMSP processing. The
taxonomy of the bacteria mediating DMSP cycling has been deduced from genomic
and metagenomic sequencing surveys to include four major groups in the ocean.
Understanding how the regulation of DMSP degradation differs among these groups
and maps to the relationships between these groups is important information for
understanding the marine sulfur cycle and predicting its function in a changing
ocean. The project will incorporate the use of model organism studies, microcosm
experiments (at Dauphin Island Sea Lab, AL), and time-series field studies with
an autonomous sample collection instrument (at Monterey Bay, CA). This project
will ascertain how the major taxa of bacterial DMSP degraders in seawater
regulate DMSP transformations, and address the implications of bacterial
functional, genetic, and taxonomic diversity for global sulfur
cycling..&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will train graduate students and a
post-doctoral scholar in microbial biodiversity and provide research
opportunities and mentoring for undergraduate students. Students will obtain
interdisciplinary training in microbial ecology, sulfur
chemistry/biogeochemistry, and environmental bioinformatics, and will
participate in research to improve our understanding of how marine
bacterioplankton regulate the global fate of sulfur. An outreach program will
enhance understanding of the role and diversity of marine microorganisms in
global elemental cycles among promising high school students. Advanced Placement
(AP) Biology students at a racially diverse Athens, GA, high school will
participate in marine microbial research that covers key learning goals in the
new AP Biology curriculum. Students will conduct classroom laboratory exercises
with bacterial strains isolated from coastal Georgia seawater to learn
ecological, microbiological, molecular biological, and bioinformatic concepts.
During an end-of-the-year field trip to Sapelo Island, students will isolate new
strains that become the study organisms for the next class of AP Biology
students. Two high school students will be selected for summer research
internships in the laboratories of the principal investigators. The project also
supports education and outreach efforts at public aquaria (DISL Estuarium and
Monterey Bay Aquarium) and summer graduate courses.