* 1342611
* Center for Theoretical Underground Physics and Related Areas; June 23 - July 26, 2013 at The Lodge of Deadwood, Deadwood, SD
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Akif Baha Balantekin, Dakota State University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 05/31/2014
* USD 12,000.00

This award will provide participant support for early career scientists and
graduate students to participate in the third CETUP* program that is planned to
take place on June 24 - July 26, 2013 in Lead/Deadwood, SD. The main goal of
CETUP* is to bring together people with different talents and skills to address
the most exciting questions in particle and nuclear physics, astrophysics,
geosciences, and geomicrobiology. Scientists invited to participate in the
program do not only provide theoretical support to the underground science, they
also examine underlying universal questions of the 21st century including: What
is dark matter?, What are the masses of neutrinos?, How have neutrinos shaped
the evolution of the universe?, How were the elements from iron to uranium
made?, and What is the origin and thermal history of the Earth?

This summer CETUP* will organize a 5-week long program covering various aspects
of theoretical and experimental underground science. A two week long session
focused on Dark Matter will be followed by a two week long program on Neutrino
Physics. The VIIth International Conference on Interconnections between Particle
Physics and Cosmology will be sandwiched between these sessions covering the
subjects of dark matter, neutrino physics, collider physics, and cosmological
and astrophysical issues with connections to particle physics from both
theoretical end experimental viewpoints.

Among the Broader Impacts, the program will offer a stimulating environment for
research collaborations between scientists of varying ages and nationalities and
training of young scientists including undergraduate and graduate students and
underrepresented groups. Outreach efforts will aim to share the excitement of
the research with K-12 students and the general public. A "Neutrino Day" is
planned through the Sanford Underground Research Laboratory at the end of the
CETUP* program. During the CETUP* 2012 program they established a collaboration
with the Crazy Horse Memorial Foundation and Indian University of North America.
They plan to continue working with them during the CETUP* 2013 program to reach
out to Native American students and include them in the educational activities
at the CETUP* as well as organize an informal get together with the students and
discuss their interests in science and possible future STEM career
opportunities.