* 1342038
* BPR:  Increasing STEM Participation and Success Rates of Latino Youth Using Culturally Relevant Immersive Technologies
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Ann Gates, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Victor Santiago
* 08/31/2017
* USD 297,550.00

The CREST-funded Cyber-ShARE Center of Excellence, a center focused on advancing
research and education through cyberinfrastructures in support of
interdisciplinary efforts, serves as the anchor for the project, Increasing STEM
Participation and Success Rates of Latino Youth Using Culturally Relevant
Immersive Technologies. The goal of the proposed work is to study the
effectiveness of augmenting STEM-integrated learning modules with culturally
relevant, immersive technologies and determine its impact on Latino middle
school students' performance in STEM and motivation to study STEM topics. With
the nation's continuing shortage of scientists and engineers, there is an urgent
need for diverse students who enter and complete STEM education at all levels.
The project activities include development and delivery of integrated STEM
modules that connect locally and culturally relevant materials with the
Smithsonian's Mi Tierra-Mi Mundo interactive role play exploratory game and
professional training that scaffolds Mi-Tierra-Mi Mundo and STEM modules to
present in traditional STEM settings. The project will use a longitudinal mixed
methods randomized control trial research design to determine what aspects of
the intervention affect the differential participation and success rates of
students from underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project
has two unique and important features. First, it aims to enhance knowledge and
develop dispositions for STEM among Latino students in the context of integrated
STEM content and activities. Second, the project will introduce innovative
technology-based simulations of real-world situations that engage Latino
students to address STEM issues related to local watershed problems. These
strategies can be adapted for other STEM areas and teacher education programs.
Prototype activities are adaptable to a variety of teacher professional
development efforts, and the proposed technologies for implementing and teaching
simulations will be widely available for use in the classroom and outreach
settings.