* 1342966
* Belmont Forum-G8 Initiative Collabrative Research:  Transformation and Resilience on Urban Coasts
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2013,10/31/2018
* William Solecki, CUNY Hunter College
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Uhle
* 10/31/2018
* USD 308,731.00

This award provides support to U.S. researchers participating in a project
competitively selected by a 13-country initiative on global change research
through the Belmont Forum and the G8 countries Heads of Research Councils. The
Belmont Forum is a high level group of the world's major and emerging funders of
global environmental change research and international science councils. It aims
to accelerate delivery of the international environmental research most urgently
needed to remove critical barriers to sustainability by aligning and mobilizing
international resources. The G8 Heads of Research Councils developed a funding
framework to support multilateral research projects that address global
challenges in ways that are beyond the capacity of national or bilateral
activities. Each partner country provides funding for their researchers within a
consortium to alleviate the need for funds to cross international borders. This
approach facilitates effective leveraging of national resources to support
excellent research on topics of global relevance best tackled through a
multinational approach, recognizing that global challenges need global
solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Working together in an inaugural call of the
International Opportunities Fund, the Belmont Forum and G8HORCs have provided
support for research projects that seek to deliver knowledge needed for action
to mitigate and adapt to detrimental environmental change and extreme hazardous
events that relate to either Freshwater Security or Coastal Vulnerability. This
award provides support for the U.S. researchers to cooperate in consortia that
consist of partners from at least three of the participating countries and that
bring together natural scientists, social scientists and research users (e.g.,
policy makers, regulators, NGOs, communities and industry).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports research activities that will develop
and test a novel integrated framework to examine the interactions between
development pathways, socio-environmental systems and policy decision-making in
coping with extreme events, such as heat waves and flooding, that are associated
with large scale coastal urbanization. Historical transformations have
facilitated resilience through the construction of critical urban
infrastructures, such as for water and sanitation and air quality. Other more
limited changes, such as in social care, have also further facilitated
resilience. Integrating lessons learned from the interaction of biophysical,
social, and policy dynamics in past transformations and changes is critical to
understanding and assessing stress points, thresholds and policies at which
urban resilience can change and the implications of these changes for societies.
This project will (1) conceptualize resilience, transition and transformation
for urban sustainability and security; (2) develop and test an integrated
approach for biophysical and social vulnerability assessment; and (3) provide a
platform for stakeholders, researchers, and students to interact and contribute
to a collective understanding of urban development and risk management
priorities and approaches. Case studies in five coastal megacities, including
Kolkata, Lagos, London, New York, and Tokyo will be used to test conceptual
models and methodological development. This project will contribute toward
understanding pathways and trade-offs through which interactions constrain or
open opportunities for resilience or transformation of urban systems.