* 1342650
* Southern California Geometric Analysis Seminar, February 22-23, 2014
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2017
* Li Sheng Tseng, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2017
* USD 58,838.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award: DMS 1342650, Principal Investigator: Li
Sheng Tseng, Zhiqin Lu, Lei Ni, Jeffrey Streets, Chuu-Lian
Terng&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Southern California Geometric Analysis Seminar
(SCGAS) is an annual two-day conference that rotates between the University of
California - Irvine and the University of California - San Diego. This award
provides partial support for three years of meetings of the SCGAS, beginning
with the February 2014 session at UC-Irvine. The conference features talks given
by acclaimed researchers and promotes interactions among members of the southern
California mathematics community working in the field of geometric analysis and
related areas. It further seeks to introduce to graduate students and
postdoctoral fellows some of the most exciting recent developments in geometric
analysis. This funding award is geared towards supporting and encouraging the
participation of graduate students and recent PhDs, especially women and under-
represented minorities, by providing them the necessary travel support to attend
the conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Geometric analysis is an important area of
modern mathematics and is related to many other branches of mathematics. Using
analysis as its main tool with differential geometry, topology, and algebraic
geometry as foundations, geometric analysis has solved a large number of
problems in global geometry, topology, several complex variables and
mathematical physics. As the success of the first twenty meetings have
demonstrated, the SCGAS conference has now become an important and anticipated
event for the southern California region and has also attracted a substantial
number of participants from the rest of the country each year. Indeed, it is the
unique annual meeting of its kind in the southern California area, and continues
to foster interests in geometric analysis at all levels. In the years past,
interactions among the participants during the conference have led to a number
of new collaborations and research projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Web sites for
the Southern California Geometric Analysis Seminar may be found at
http://www.math.uci.edu/~scgas/ and https://math.ucsd.edu/~scgas/.