* 1342530
* CAREER:  Confronting Fundamental Theories with Observations in Cosmology
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Stephon Alexander, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Marc Sher
* 12/31/2013
* USD 32,158.00

This award represents the transfer of CAREER-grant funding for the research of
Professor Stephon Alexander from Haverford University to Dartmouth
College.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The search for a quantum theory of gravity has
seen progress with the advent of string theory and loop quantum gravity, but
both lack direct contact with experiment. The PI proposes a five-year plan that
can potentially resolve fundamental problems in cosmology and particle physics
by developing new models that arise from theories beyond the standard model and
quantum gravity. Additionally, he proposes new observational schemes to test
these models. The PI's long-term research plans over the next five years focus
on two themes. One is at the interface of particle physics and cosmology where
he hopes to look at the consequences for LHC physics of his new model that
unifies gravity with the electroweak force. He will also investigate the
phenomenological consequences of a Supersymmetric extension of this model. The
second area concerns the nature of the cosmological singularity. The PI has
proposed several novel theories based on modifying gravity and will also
consider the experimental consequences of these models.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is also envisioned to have significant
broader impacts. The outreach part of this CAREER project will consist of the PI
giving a two-week course on Music and the Cosmos, which will be hands on
presentation on the physics of sound and musical instruments. These lectures
will be presented to urban high school students. The PI will also serve as both
a research and long-term career mentor for two minority undergraduate students
each year, by creating two summer research positions in his group through this
award.