* 1342656
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Testing Colonization Models in New England
* SBE,BCS
* 12/01/2013,05/31/2015
* Robert Kelly, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2015
* USD 28,001.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Robert Kelly, Mr. Nathaniel Kitchel will examine
the earliest human occupations of northeastern North America through an
examination of the stone used by the first settlers of this region to produce
tools. The data produced during this study will provide a better understanding
of large scale settlement processes at the end of the Pleistocene both in the
Northeast and throughout the Americas. This research will address questions of
landscape learning and settlement patterns to explore how the first human groups
moved into previously empty regions following the retreat of continental
glaciers. Geochemical sourcing using nondestructive X-ray Fluorescence (XRF)
technology of the fine grained stone used by prehistoric people to produce their
tools will augment previous visual identifications of these raw materials. This
technique will be particularly advantageous in the case of stone that is
difficult, if not impossible, to identify by visual means
alone.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite more than a century of research the timing
and process of the peopling of the Americas remains poorly understood. Many
competing models that describe the first settlement of the New World during the
Pleistocene exist. Though these models vary in detail, each tends to fall into
two categories; rapid and less rapid models. These model types also make
specific predictions about how these first peoples interacted with their
technology, landscape, and environment. These models also however, derive many
of their predictions from observations of the archaeology of "Clovis" or early
fluted point archaeology. While users of these large distinctive stone
projectile points were once thought to represent the first human occupation in
the Americas recent discoveries indicate this may not be the case. This study
will avoid questions of when the first humans arrived in the New World through
an investigation of landscape learning and settlement practices in the recently
deglaciated Northeast thereby controlling for the possibility of an earlier
settlement in the region. These data will be used to evaluate colonization
models of the Americas providing a greater understanding of how modern human
groups moved into the New World, as well as other large uninhabited landscapes
such as Australia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The data produced by this project will
also have impacts beyond the immediate goals of this study. Through the course
of this project a library of chemical "fingerprints" for at least seven stone
sources used to manufacture tools in the far northeast throughout prehistory
will be created. These data can be used by other researchers to investigate the
movements of these resources throughout the prehistory of the region. The raw
data will be distributed online making all data produced available for public
use. This project will also engage the public through presentations and outreach
with the New Hampshire State Conservation Rescue Archaeology Program (SCRAP) as
well as public presentations at the University of Wyoming for the Wyoming
Archaeological Society. Mr. Kitchel will also present the findings of this study
to the public through non-technical publications and talks to the public at the
Fairbanks Museum in St. Johnsbury, Vermont.