* 1342955
* Travel support for DAMOP2013 for US students in Quebec, Canada June 3-7, 2013.
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Cornelis Uiterwaal, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 05/31/2014
* USD 12,000.00

This award provides funds for student travel to the 44th Annual Meeting of the
American Physical Society Division of Atomic, Molecular, and Optical Physics.
The travel awards ensure the training and education of the next generation of
scientists at this conference, widely accepted as the leading venue for United
States researchers in atomic, molecular and optical physics.

The science addressed includes control of quantum dynamics, cold atoms, dipolar
quantum gases, molecular structure and spectroscopy, positron-matter
interactions, antihydrogen, ultrafast and intense x-rays, single-atom optical
interfacing, dipolar gases, interacting Bose gases, Fermi gases and magnetism,
quantum measurement, strongly interacting cold gases, ultrafast molecular
ionization and high harmonic generation, advances in gaseous electronics,
interactions between hybrid quantum systems, fundamental symmetry tests, heavy
particle collisions, atom circuits, atomic structure and spectroscopy,
attosecond spectroscopy, fundamental symmetries and precision measurements,
excitations in Bose and spinor gases, few-body and molecular collisions,
uitrafast molecular dynamics, advances in quantum communication, cooling of
atoms and molecules, photoionization spectroscopy, atomic clocks, cold
collisions and photoassociation, recollision physics, quantum information
methods, in-situ imaging of ultracold atomic gases, magnetism in optical
lattices, quantum measurement and control of spin ensembles, ultracold
molecules, degenerate quantum gases and alkaline earth atoms, time resolved
spectroscopy, atomic and molecular photo-processes, progress in cavity opto-
mechanics, few-body ultracold systems, collision studies, low temperature
plasmas and Rydberg atoms, intense field physics, novel optical technologies and
quantum information, synthetic gauge fields in ultracold systems, dissipation in
cold atom systems, matter wave interferometry, nanoparticle structure and
properties, and non-linear optics.