* 1342778
* Collaborative Research: Dimensions NASA: Linking remotely sensed optical diversity to genetic, phylogenetic and functional diversity to predict ecosystem processes
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2020
* Philip Townsend, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 04/30/2020
* USD 311,702.00

This project will use three biodiversity manipulations at the Cedar Creek
Ecosystem Science Reserve to test whether plant diversity (including genotypes
within species, species with different functions, and species from different
evolutionary lineages) can be detected remotely at multiple spatial scales. The
study will measure biodiversity from the sky and space by remotely sensing the
reflected light spectra of plants and investigate the consequences of
biodiversity for ecosystem and global processes. Project scientists from four
institutions will investigate linkages between plant biodiversity, soil microbe
diversity and ecosystem function. These efforts will serve in the development of
airborne and satellite platforms that can routinely monitor biodiversity and
provide critical experimental evidence for the concept of surrogacy, i.e., that
one metric of biodiversity can be used to provide information about others.

The project will transform methods for detecting changes in biodiversity
worldwide and will provide numerous training opportunities in science,
technology and math (STEM) for young scientists. Results will be integrated into
the Cedar Creek Schoolyard Ecology program and a NASA-funded STEM Education
Center to train Native American reservation teachers. Citizen scientists will be
engaged through the MN Phenology Network. Data and research outcomes will be
archived in publically accessible data repositories.