* 1342475
* HCG:   Epihybridity in Zea Mays
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2013,09/30/2013
* Jay Hollick, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 09/30/2013
* USD 21,960.00

PI: Jay Hollick (Ohio State University)&lt;br/&gt;CoPI: William F. Tracy
(University of Wisconsin - Madison)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The general observation
that hybrid offspring, in some manner or another, are larger than their parents
is referred to as "hybrid vigor". Although this behavior serves to support much
of the world's food supply, the biology behind this breeding behavior has
remained remarkably intransient and the subject of much debate. The primary
models accounting for hybrid vigor, and the reciprocal behavior of inbreeding
depression, are based on the principles of Mendelian genetics. This project
tests a novel model in which a form of non-Mendelian epigenetic inheritance
contributes to these breeding behaviors. Epigenetic refers to heritable
information that is adjunct to DNA, the widely recognized molecule of genetic
transmission. "Epihybridity" is used here to describe that component of hybrid
vigor attributable to dynamic changes in epigenetic sources of genomic, or
epigenomic, variation. Field-based yield trials will be used to compare the
extents of hybrid vigor and inbreeding depression occurring in normal corn (Zea
mays) varieties versus derivatives in which the function of a specific molecule
(RMR1) responsible for an RNA-based form of epigenetic inheritance is
compromised. Primary studies indicate that RMR1 both enhances inbreeding
depression and conditions parental genomes in ways that affect hybrid progeny
traits. Using a high-resolution RNA sequencing approach, this project tests the
idea that individual plants maintain unique RMR1-dependent small RNA populations
and that hybrid progeny contain novel small RNA profiles that may specify gene
expression patterns having complementary properties to growth and development.
This project further uses an experimentally tractable example of hybrid vigor
occurring at a single chromosome region responsible for producing plant pigments
to identify specific DNA features that interface with this small RNA-based
repression system. Understanding the nature of these features and this
particular mechanism of eukaryotic genetics provides a novel perspective of RNA-
based inheritance promising transformative impacts to the future of agriculture
and human health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project combines research groups
from the Universities of Wisconsin (UW) and California (UCB), fostering
scientific outreach across broad disciplines (epigenetics, genomics, and plant
breeding) and providing education, scientific training and research experiences
for a UCB graduate student, UW and UCB undergraduates, and high school students
from the East Bay area. Minorities traditionally underrepresented in the
sciences are engaged in these research activities through the support of
existing high school and undergraduate programs promoting ethnic and
socioeconomic diversity. The project will generate maize seed resources of
potential interest to the hybrid seed industry [available from the project
leader (hollick@nature.berkeley.edu) and from American Tissue Culture Collection
(ATCC)], and academic researchers [available from the project leader and from
the Maize Genetics Cooperation Stock Center (http://www.uiuc.edu/ph/www/maize)].
Nucleic acid sequence resources including small RNA profiles and limited genomic
DNA sequence from an A619 inbred line will be generated and available for
download from NCBI (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/) or through a genome browser
interface provided by MaizeGDB (http://www.maizegdb.org/). Data from the field
trials will be made available through MaizeGDB. A BAC library representing the
A619 inbred line will be constructed and available for community dissemination
at cost by contacting the project leader. This BAC resource will likely provide
material for an eventual genome resequencing project.