* 1342222
* BRIGE: Delivery of Silencing RNA and TGF-b1 from Biopolymer Hydrogels to Inhibit Osteogenesis and Promote Chondrogenesis in Growth Plate Injuries
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Melissa Krebs, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 08/31/2016
* USD 175,000.00

Project Description:

This research seeks to investigate a controlled, sustained delivery system for
two different types of bioactive factors that could aid in the repair of injured
growth plates in children. If the cartilage tissue in the growth plate is
injured, bony tissue is deposited at the injured site, thus disrupting the
growth plate and leading to abnormal bone growth. A new biomaterial delivery
system that provides local, sustained delivery of silencing RNA and TGF-1 growth
factor will be engineered, and the influence of the co-delivery of these
bioactive factors on the chondrogenic differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells
examined. Short interfering RNA (siRNA) provides a powerful gene silencing
mechanism, inhibiting gene expression at the translational level by targeted
destruction of specific mRNA sequences. Due to this ability to silence the
expression of specific proteins, and since siRNA functions directly in the
cytoplasm of the cell rather than being incorporated into the genomic DNA and
its effect is transient, the impact of siRNA in clinical applications could be
enormous. Unfortunately, the delivery of siRNA is currently a major hurdle to
its clinical use, as siRNA is readily degraded and cleared from the body. The
work in this proposal will provide new methods for delivering siRNA to a local
site in a sustained, controlled manner. Co-delivery of growth factor to improve
cartilage repair of growth plate injuries will also be examined. Thus, the
engineering solution proposed here is the development of a delivery system
capable of releasing two different bioactive factors, one to inhibit the
formation of the bony tissue at the injury site and another to encourage the
chondrogenic differentiation of stem cells that are present in the area so they
form cartilage tissue.

Broader Significance and Importance:

Ultimately this technology could offer a much-needed therapeutic option for
growth plate injuries in children. As children grow, their bones lengthen by
mineralization of cartilage at the bone-cartilage interface in the growth plate.
Injury to the growth plate can lead to the deposition of bony tissue within the
cartilage, thus disrupting the growth plate. This disruption can result in
serious consequences, including the bone not growing to its full length or the
growth occurring abnormally such that the bone curves as it grows. In addition
to addressing a clear clinical need, the results of the proposed work will
provide new methods for localized and sustained delivery of silencing RNA, which
could potentially benefit other applications in the future as well.

Broader Impacts:

This award will support both the increase and continuation of outreach efforts
by Professor Krebs's lab. It will directly support the training of one graduate
student for 2 years and the involvement of at least one undergraduate student
and one high school intern in the project. The PI and graduate student will be
participating in a summer camp for K-6 dyslexic students, designing science
modules that will be presented to the students over the course of 2 of the 5
weeks of the summer camp. This will have a substantial impact on the students at
the camp in awakening their scientific interest, and also on the PI and graduate
student in learning more about dyslexia and ways that individuals can overcome
it and/or use it to their benefit. The PI will also continue her support of
hosting 1-2 female high school interns in the lab during the academic year
through internship programs of local high schools. These students will work
side-by-side with a graduate student and the PI on a specific project, and see
it develop over the course of the year. Finally, the project would have broad
societal impacts by providing a new biomaterial delivery system that could
improve the treatment of growth plate injuries and also be used for other tissue
regeneration applications in the future.

This research has been funded through the Broadening Participation Research
Initiation Grants in Engineering solicitation, which is part of the Broadening
Participation in Engineering Program of the Engineering Education and Centers
Division.