* 1342225
* BRIGE: Minimum-Energy Bio-Inspired Analogic Computing Devices with Stochastic Switching Transistors under Ultra-Low VDD
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Mingjie Lin, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2016
* USD 148,416.00

ECCS-1342225&lt;br/&gt;Lin, Mingjie&lt;br/&gt;University of Central
Florida&lt;br/&gt;BRIGE: Minimum-Energy Bio-Inspired AnaLogic Computing Devices
with &lt;br/&gt;Stochastic Switching Transistors under Ultra-Low
VDD&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This
BRIGE project aims at achieving robust ultra-low power computation by exploiting
the stochastic switching behavior observed within a CMOS digital circuit that is
driven by an ultra-low supply voltage approaching the digital switching limit.
This objective is motivated by two observations. First, probabilistic inference
and stochastic learning are fundamental in sensor data processing. Second,
emerging devices will exhibit sophisticated physical property that may natively
compute probabilistic algorithms. This proposed effort will first model and
analyze the stochastic switching behavior in minimum-energy CMOS transistors
under ultra-low VDD (ยกร 50mV) both analytically and experimentally.
Subsequently, it will develop a field-theoretic methodology to optimize a large-
scale logic circuit built with such stochastic switching devices in order to
improve its robustness. Finally, it will exploit the stochastic switching
behavior natively to design and implement AnaLogic circuits (between analog and
logic circuits) that emulate a robust self-motion algorithm inspired by fly eye
based on optical flow extraction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
Leveraging the physics of field-effect devices to perform computational tasks,
this proposed research could potentially inspire a totally unconventional design
paradigm for emerging nanoscale device technology with severe device variability
and switching uncertainty. Furthermore, the proposed field-theoretic approach
offers a rich mathematical structure, therefore can broaden the current digital
circuit design theory. Finally, the proposed methodology can enable more
accurate understanding of existing logic circuit design methods, especially on
their limitations when directly applied to future device technologies driven by
ultra-low VDD. Besides disseminating its research findings through new curricula
and hardware-based stochastic logic circuit emulations, this project will
approach the challenge of broadening the engineering participation from
underrepresented minority groups in both bottom-up (public STEM education) and
top-down (PhD students recruiting) directions. The PI will create mentoring and
outreach programs specifically designed to attract female, African-American,
Latino, and first-generation college students to join his group, thus preparing
a new diverse work force for the computing industry. Additionally, the Orlando
Science Center will be used as the main platform to stimulate public interests
in STEM education of computing. The success of this educational effort, through
innovative exhibits and engaging mini-lectures, will be judged by the PhD
enrollment of computer engineering from underrepresented groups at UCF and the
size of public audience to its collaborative exhibit efforts with the Orlando
Science Center.