* 1342912
* EAGER: A novel parallel extracellular and intracellular nanoelectrode and nanoelectrode probe array for high throughput electrophysiological recording.
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Gymama Slaughter, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Mona Zaghloul
* 08/31/2016
* USD 150,191.00

Conventional neural interfaces consist of microelectrode arrays (MEAs) that are
in close contact&lt;br/&gt;with neurons to record extracellular potential or
stimulate electrical activity. However,&lt;br/&gt;due to the relative large
microelectrode size, these MEAs are not capable of extracting intracellular
signals, which is of particular interest in restoring functional loss of limb
control of individuals with spinal cord injury or stroke. MEAs
electrophysiological recordings still faces two major challenges, the inherent
noisy data and the limited spatial resolution. These problems especially limit
the accuracy and reliability of the movement parameter due to the unreliable
spike recording for long durations. The objective of this research is the
fabrication and characterization of independently addressable nanoelectrode
arrays (NEAs) and nanoelectrode probe arrays (NEPAs) for high-throughput
recording of extracellular and intracellular electrophysiological measurements
of neural activity. &lt;br/&gt;Objective: This objective will be achieved
through the following specific aims: a) To develop gold nanoelectrode array
platforms for simultaneous characterization of neural activity in multiple
neurons, b) to develop direct methods for growing carbon nanotubes (CNTs) on the
256-gold nanotips using metal-catalyzed chemical vapor deposition, and c) to
validate high throughput detection of neural activities.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: The proposed research is innovative and transformative because for the
first time, simultaneous extracellular and intracellular characterization using
fine pitch NEA and NEPA technology will be developed to probe large numbers of
neurons, while maintaining high spatial resolution, high signal-to-noise ratio,
and excellent selectivity of neural interfaces. Because of the very large number
of neurons that can be potentially interfaced, the resulting NEA and NEPA system
will provide ground-breaking capabilities for parallel extracellular and
intracellular characterization of neurons.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The
proposed NEA and NEPA system represents the frontier challenge for
electrophysiological recording technology. This high throughput approach will
advance electrophysiological characterization by enabling multiple neurons to be
studied simultaneously while controlling other stimulation conditions to enable
the reestablishment of the intricate connections between neurons after spinal
injury or stroke. Results of the proposed research will be integrated into
educational outreach activities by developing summer research experiences for
K-12 and incoming university transfer students and by developing research
experience for undergraduates.&lt;br/&gt;