* 1342476
* RNA-based Mechanisms Specifying Heritable Epigenetic Change
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2013,07/31/2013
* Jay Hollick, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 07/31/2013
* USD 280.00

Modern genetics and evolutionary biology are founded on the principles of
Mendelian inheritance. These principles conceptualize the individual factors
responsible for inherited traits as static entities comprised of DNA sequences
that are borne on chromosomes and sexually transmitted to offspring. This view
of inheritance conforms well to most experimental studies of the past century.
However, exceptional behaviors in which certain trait factors display dynamic,
yet predictable, changes from one generation to the next have long indicated
that additional principles of inheritance remain to be discovered. This project
investigates a form of non-Mendelian epigenetic inheritance occurring in the
corn plant. Epigenetic refers to heritable information that is accessory to DNA,
the primary molecule of inheritance. Recent studies indicate that both small RNA
molecules and some of the enzymes responsible for synthesizing RNA from DNA
templates (RNA polymerases) are causative agents in this type of non-Mendelian
inheritance. The diversity of both RNA polymerase forms and their functions in
corn is particularly extensive. Initial studies point to largely unexplored
relationships of the subunit proteins shared by diverse RNA polymerases that
have potential regulatory significance to genome function. This project will
characterize both the multiprotein structures and mechanistic functions of all
RNA polymerases of the corn genome and thereby develop a model system for
understanding the fundamental roles of RNA polymerase diversity in a highly
repetitive eukaryotic genome. The tools and materials generated will be used to
characterize the complexity and function of RNA polymerases in an agriculturally
important crop species and to test specific hypotheses regarding this RNA-based
mechanism responsible for specifying heritable epigenetic
changes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project produces specific
plant germplasm materials, bioinformatics resources, and experimental reagents
that enable a long-term community effort to understand the roles that DNA-
dependent RNA polymerases, and small RNA molecules, play in defining the
epigenome -- modifications of the DNA or associated chromosome structure that
specify readouts of genome-encoded information. The research activities provide
education and training in reproductive biology, inheritance, Mendelian and
transmission genetics, genetic analysis, chromosome biology, and modern
molecular genetics for one University of California Berkeley (UCB) graduate
student, at least two UCB undergraduates, and high school students from the
California East Bay area. Minorities traditionally underrepresented in the
sciences are engaged in these research activities through the support of
existing high school and undergraduate research programs promoting ethnic and
socioeconomic diversity. The specific example of non-Mendelian inheritance
studied in this project affects a pigmentation gene and is therefore
conceptually easy to convey to a diverse audience because the trait involved is
familiar and visual. Understanding this particular mechanism of eukaryotic
genetics provides a novel perspective of RNA-based inheritance promising
transformative impacts to the future of biological research across broad
disciplines from structural biology to evolution.