* 1342320
* BRIGE: Cellulose saccharification observed in real-time in a high-temperature microreactor - research and outreach
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2016
* Michael Timko, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 12/31/2016
* USD 174,999.00

Technical Description: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite years of effort, breaking
down lignocellulosic feedstocks into small molecule building blocks remains
prohibitively expensive. A major challenge is that the primary component of
lignocellulosic biomass, cellulose, is highly crystalline and recalcitrant to
most enzymatic and biological decomposition techniques. As a result, expensive
and energy intensive pre-treatment steps are required to convert biomass into a
form that is amenable to enzymatic breakdown into constituent sugars -- a
process termed saccharification. Making pre-treatment more efficient can greatly
reduce the capital costs of biofuel production. Progress in this direction has
been impeded by the fact that pre-treatment conditions are harsh -- acidic with
temperatures typically greater than 100 °C. Pre-treatment reactors are therefore
not typically optically accessible, and the vast majority of pre-treatment
studies have only been able to evaluate end effects achieved after the pre-
treatment process has been completed. For this reason, engineering data on how
to design, scale-up, and operate pre-treatment reactors is lacking information
on how the solid biomass phase responds over time during pre-treatment
reactions. In this work, we will use a high-temperature microreactor for a real-
time study of cellulose de-crystallization, an important step in the overall
pre-treatment process. The microreactor will be constructed with an optically
transparent pyrex window that will permit microscopic and spectroscopic
monitoring of cellulose particles as they undergo decrystallization reactions.
Specifically, we plan to use on-line Raman microscopy to follow
decrystallization and sugar forming reactions that occur when cellulose is
heated in the presence of acids. These data will be used to develop detailed
engineering models that can be used to design and optimize large-scale pre-
treatment reactors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Significance and
Importance:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results from this study will help decrease the
costs of converting lignocellulosic biomass into fuels, chemicals, and
materials. Cellulose is the world's most abundant carbon source. Hence,
utilizing cellulose as a feedstock for production of fuels, chemicals, and
materials will reduce reliance on petroleum, a non-renewable resource. Utilizing
biomass cellulose is currently cost prohibitive, largely due to the expensive
pre-treatment processes that are required to render cellulose into a form that
can be converted into simple carbohydrates. Pre-treatment reactors are currently
designed empirically and the data and engineering models developed in this
project will contribute fundamental knowledge to reactor design and operation,
thereby reducing their costs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broadening Participation of
Underpresented Groups in Engineering:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Outreach is an
integrated component of the proposed effort. The primary data product of the
microreactor studies will be sets of vibrational frequencies that are
characteristic of the degrading cellulose. With collaborators in the Humanities
Department at WPI, we will convert the vibrational data into audible sounds, a
process termed "sonification". Following this, we will develop an algorithm to
re-modulate the vibrational "sounds" into a musical form. Given the anticipated
structure of the vibrational data sets, we anticipate that it will naturally be
converted most easily into repetitive, beat-driven, forms of music, such as hip-
hop or techno. The outreach component will recruit graduate and undergraduate
students to participate in the microreactor research, develop the hip-hop
outreach tool, and to serve as mentors and role models as part of the K-12
outreach. Local faculty from underrepresented groups will be invited to give
talks to the outreach students, providing an additional mentorship and role-
model forum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has been funded through the
Broadening Participation Research Initiation Grants in Engineering solicitation,
which is part of the Broadening Participation in Engineering Program of the
Engineering Education and Centers Division.