* 1342362
* BRIGE: New Paradigms in compact Chemical Model Development for Large-Scale Reactive Flow Simulation: A Research and Education Program
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2015
* Perrine Pepiot, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 08/31/2015
* USD 175,000.00

Technical description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Broadening Participation
Research Initiation Grant in Engineering (BRIGE) will support the design,
implementation, and validation of an innovative framework for the development of
chemical models tailored for Computational Fluid Dynamic simulations of complex
reactive flows. This research program will (1) devise and implement a strategy
combining reaction network analysis and model optimization to generate chemical
schemes that optimally and simultaneously satisfy accuracy and computational
cost requirements, as dictated by the user's application and available
resources, (2) benchmark this approach against conventional chemical model
development techniques, (3) apply the resulting tools to the modeling of
practical transportation fuels combustion, and (4) establish an effective
feedback mechanism between model development and actual performances in
Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) to enable further algorithm improvements.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader significance and
importance&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Novel energy conversion technologies show an
increased sensitivity to the chemical kinetics and their interaction with flow
dynamics, a trend that has to be carefully considered to enable computational
design of these systems in the near future. In this context, the proposed
research and education program aims at establishing a practical connection
between the recent outstanding progress made in fundamental molecular chemistry,
computer power, and CFD. In particular, this research provides a path forward to
address the ubiquitous issue in CFD, faced by researchers and engineers alike,
of finding chemical models appropriate for specific applications and
computational resources. A strong educational effort will be established to
raise awareness of the benefits and limitations of using low-order chemistry
description in CFD. This effort initially will take the form of undergraduate-
level course material development, and large-scale dissemination of models and
training material through a dedicated online
platform.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broadening participation
activities&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Coincidently with our research and general
education program, outreach activities will be initiated to specifically attract
and retain women in advanced curriculum in energy sciences with strong high-
performance computing (HPC) components. Our specific goals are to (1) introduce
a series of hands-on initiatives at the undergraduate level, directly inspired
by our research activities, to transform the outlook female students have on
large scale computing technologies in the context of energy science, (2) provide
undergraduate research and mentoring opportunities in HPC and energy through
summer internships with industrial collaborators, and academic year individual
research projects, and (3) create a strong online presence and a sustainable
networking infrastructure at the national level through active participation at
selected events and conferences. The success of our broadening participation
activities will be quantified through events attendance and surveys, class
enrollment numbers and feedback, and the use of Google Analytics to track online
impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has been funded through the
Broadening Participation Research Initiation Grants in Engineering solicitation,
which is part of the Broadening Participation in Engineering Program of the
Engineering Education and Centers Division.