* 1342112
* Representation Theory, Integrable Systems and Quantum Fields:  Emphasis Year at Northwestern University,  May 19-23, 2014
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2016
* Xinwen Zhu, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 04/30/2016
* USD 57,000.00

The main purpose of this grant is to fund the workshop and conference,
"Representation Theory, Integrable Systems, and Quantum Fields: Emphasis Year at
Northwestern University," running May 12-16 (workshop) and May 19-23
(conference) in 2014. Northwestern has a long history of successful 'emphasis
years' following the broad pattern of the proposed activities. This year's
emphasis will be placed on connecting new physics to mathematics. Recent
advanced in physics pioneered by Nekrasov-Shatashvili, Alday-Gaiotto-Tachikawa,
and Kapustin-Witten have spawned hundreds of papers and interest around the
globe. A mathematical perspective has been offered by Maulik-Okounkov and there
is related work of Goncharov-Kenyon. These results should be understood not only
on their own merit, but also as a part of a broader emerging relationship
between integrable systems, representation theory and quantum fields. The
workshop and conference will do just that. The bulk of the proposed funding will
support graduate students and postdocs either directly, by funding their
participation, or indirectly by funding speakers at the graduate workshop. These
students will largely be US nationals from US institutions, thus furthering the
goal of the solicitation to support the development of professional
mathematicians in the United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The general theme of
the program is to explore the interplay between symmetry groups and the physical
systems in which they arise. Physical phenomena have analogous mathematical
descriptions, and vice versa: the geometric Langlands program has an analogue in
a dimensional reduction of a topologically twisted supersymmetric gauge theory,
through the work of Kapustin and Witten. The Alday-Gaiotto-Tachikawa conjecture
relates two-dimensional conformal field theory to four-dimensional
supersymmetric theories. A mathematical manifestation of this conjecture is the
action of Virasoro and W-algebras on the cohomology of moduli spaces of bundles
on a complex surface constructed by Maulik and Okounkov. Integrable systems
relating to string compactification on singular Calabi-Yau threefolds have
descriptions as dimer problems in statistical physics, which in turn relate to
cluster integrable systems (Nekrasov-Shatashvili, Kenyon-Goncharov). All of
these phenomena will be explored in the workshop and conference. The conference
webpage is located at the following address:
http://www.math.northwestern.edu/emphasisyear/.