* 1342920
* EAGER:  Soot Archeology - Fullerenic Nanostructure as an Indicator of C5 Precursor Chemistry
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2013,01/31/2015
* Randy Vander Wal, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Ruey-Hung Chen
* 01/31/2015
* USD 44,407.00

This proposal seeks to establish a correlation between fuel-air ratio and
curvature in soot nanostructure. Partial pre-mixing contributes new pathways to
soot formation via partial oxidation of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs).
Accordingly the first objective is to demonstrate the relevance of C5-membered
rings to fullerenic nanostructure in soot using a simple gas jet diffusion flame
fueled with C5 precursor species. The second objective is demonstrating C5
production, via partial premixing using a Bunsen flame configuration. The third
objective is to test fullerenic formation across temperatures for comparison to
model calculations using a flat flame burner fueled with real and surrogate
fuels. Modeling will be used to guide experimental efforts and support the
correlations sought between nanostructure and gas phase chemistry. Calculated
and measured temperature fields will serve as input to temperature-time
profiles.

Results of this study will create a new paradigm ¡V using fullerenic
nanostructure as a tracer for partial premixing. By showing a definitive link
between nanostructure and specific precursor species this study will provide a
foundation for inferring ?¶ within soot forming regions of practical combustors
and engines based upon the degree of curvature observed in the soot. Beyond
combustion interests, demonstrating a relation between molecular growth species
and solid-state structure would spur modeling studies across carbon
nanomaterials as synthesized via CVD or pyrolysis processes, including
fullerenes, nanotubes and graphene.