* 1342190
* BRIGE: Multiscale Model-Data Fusion for Structural Health Monitoring of Fracture Critical Structures
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Eric Hernandez, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* James Moore
* 08/31/2016
* USD 174,965.00

Non-Technical Descripition of the Project's
Significance&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Broadening Participation Research
Initiation Grant (BRIGE) provides funding to develop a framework for structural
health monitoring, diagnosis and prognosis of fracture critical structures.
Fracture critical structures are those in which the failure of a single
component can generate the failure of the complete system or a large portion of
it. Recent catastrophic failures of these types of structures, especially
bridges, have highlighted the need for a new and transformative approach to the
problem. This project will develop the computational and data analysis tools
necessary to continuously monitor fracture critical structures and help prevent
such failures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description of the
Project&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The multiscale model-data fusion framework relies
on a series of models, which represent the mechanical behavior of the structure
at various scales of interest, and vibration measurements of local and global
structural response. The project will develop algorithms capable of optimally
combining the predictive capabilities of multiscale finite element models and
sensor measurements, to reconstruct in real-time the complete response of the
structure. The reconstructed response allows assessment of the current state of
cumulative fatigue damage throughout the structure, thus anticipating potential
damage before it reaches a critical level. The estimated damage condition, with
its associated uncertainty is projected into the future and an estimate of the
structural reliability can be obtained. The research involves development of
computational algorithms, laboratory experiments and field validation using real
data from an instrumented operational bridge in Vermont. The methods developed
in this project will aide engineers to perform smarter early diagnosis and
predictive maintenance of a multitude of conventional and non-conventional
structural systems spanning civil, mechanical, biomedical and electrical
applications. This project will also provide an opportunity to foster
collaborations and potential applications of the research idea into medical
diagnosis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Activities to Broaden the Participation of
Underrepresented Groups in Engineering&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funding from this
project will enable the principal investigator to recruit under-represented
minorities into engineering education, research and mentoring. It will also
allow him to undertake K-12 activities aimed at educating students about
engineering, diversity and its critical importance in our society. This project
will facilitate collaborations with existing initiatives at the University of
Vermont aimed at recruiting undergraduate and graduate students, especially
female and Latinos interested in pursuing careers in engineering. The PI will
work with various student groups, such as the chapters of the Society of Women
Engineers and American Society of Civil Engineers, which have volunteered to
take part in sharing the engineering experience with K-12 students. These groups
will join the PI in visiting local schools and hosting recruiting and
educational activities at the university. The educational component of the
project involves the development of a hands-on structural engineering lab
designed to help students appreciate the role of models and sensors in
understanding the behavior of structures. The PI will also develop a
multidisciplinary course titled Reliability of Engineering System aimed at
graduate students from all engineering disciplines. This course will incorporate
data and findings from the research project into the course learning
objectives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has been funded through the
Broadening Participation Research Initiation Grants in Engineering solicitation,
which is part of the Broadening Participation in Engineering Program of the
Engineering Education and Centers Division.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is
also funded through the Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR), which is part of the Office of International and Integrative
Activities.