* 1342379
* BRIGE: Effect of Microstructure and Interface Layer on the Fracture and Thermal Behavior of Nanocomposites
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2015
* Addis Kidane, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* James Moore
* 09/30/2015
* USD 174,986.00

Technical Description the Project&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research program
focusses on understanding and exploiting the effect of microstructure and
interface layer on the fracture and thermal properties of particle reinforced
polymer nanocomposites. Well characterized and functionalized nanocomposites
will be fabricated from different particles and polymer systems. Both micro-
scale and macro-scale fatigue crack growth experiments using microscopic stereo
vision and digital image correlation will be conducted. Dynamic fracture
experiment will also be conducted using the modified split Hokinson pressure bar
technique. The thermal conductivity of the nanocomposites as-fabricated and
after subjected to mechanical loading will be measured experimentally and
numerically. Finally, combining the experimental results with a modified
micromechanics model, the effective thermal and fracture behavior of the
nanocomposite as a function of individual component properties will be
determined. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical Description of the Project's
Signficance&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the fracture and thermal
properties in nanocomposites as a function of individual material properties of
the particles is essential and needed from small industry to large research
centers for a better optimized design of nanocomposites. The outcome of this
study is important especially in structures and applications where the
performance of the components depends mainly on the effectiveness of providing
cooling for a device hot spot. Furthermore, the findings can lead to the
development of novel nanocomposite materials that can report damage and micro
cracking by sensing changes in thermal properties before irreversible damage
occurs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broadening Participation of Underrepresented
Groups in Engineering&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project supports the effort to
broaden the participation of underrepresented groups by directly involving
students in the proposed research and through the outreach activities. As a part
of continuous outreach effort, a set of laboratory demonstration events, using
polymer and nanocomposites, will be organized for local high school students, of
which one-third are from underrepresented groups. The students will be exposed
to and familiarized with the current nanotechnology, 3D computer vision and
digital image correlation techniques. The PI will also work with Historically
Black Colleges and Universities in South Carolina and nearby states, through the
Center for Science Education at the USC as well as the SCienceLab program there.
A collaboration with a faculty member at Benedict College has already been
established and will be facilitated through this BRIGE
award.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has been funded through the Broadening
Participation Research Initiation Grants in Engineering solicitation, which is
part of the Broadening Participation in Engineering Program of the Engineering
Education and Centers Division.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is also funded
through the Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR),
which is part of the Office of International and Integrative Activities.