* 1342176
* BRIGE: Developing a model of collective behavior in bat swarms using acoustic communication and applications in robotic systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Nicole Abaid, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Atul Kelkar
* 08/31/2017
* USD 173,867.00

Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This Broadening Participation
Research Initiation Grant in Engineering (BRIGE) provides funding to study
coordination in multi-agent systems with active sensing inspired by
echolocation. This work will enable the design of engineering systems in which
mobile sensing units synthesize pairwise and broadcast communication towards an
untapped group-level decision-making scheme. Bats, which use echolocation to
swarm, will be taken as a model system based on their unique sensing
capabilities. This modeling framework will include constructive and destructive
outcomes of active sensing, which is an untapped problem in the literature.
Research questions will center on the notion of a multi-agent system model that
uses active sensing to increase coordination, gains energetic advantages from
group behavior, and avoids destructive interference between peers. The effect of
such communication strategies on information sharing will be explored from the
perspective of agent-based modeling and network-based algorithms for
coordination over dynamic interaction topologies. The model will be validated
using experimental observations on wild bat swarms and results will be
translated to experiments on sensorized mobile robots designed to mimic and
encode active acoustic communication underlying bat swarms.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Significance and Importance:&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Systems comprising many units- such as autonomous cars driving in a
caravan, computers communicating over a network, or underwater gliders
monitoring ocean currents in a team- are pervasive in engineering. As a result,
engineers across disciplines are challenged to discover how to coordinate units
in these systems to achieve the team?s larger goal. Such large-scale
coordination tasks are well executed in nature by animal groups exhibiting
collective behavior, such as fish schools and bird flocks. This BRIGE project
aims to model coordination in a system of units equipped with a novel type of
communication, inspired by echolocation in bats, where interaction with the
environment is achieved using active sensing, rather than passive sensing such
as vision. We will use the outcomes of this model to inform algorithms for teams
of specialized robots and we will compare our results to wild bat swarms. The
results of this BRIGE project will potentially lead to new ways to engineer
systems with many units by capturing salient aspects of these unique animal
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broadening Participation of Underrepresented Groups
in Engineering:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research efforts will be translated to
broadening participation activities introducing K-12 students to the ubiquitous
concept of coordination in engineered systems. The PI will create a girls?
robotics team, mentored by female undergraduate students, to participate in
annual LEGO robotics competitions. Participants will be assessed to determine if
the activity correlates with changes in academic STEM performance. A local
nature center will also be a forum to design and deliver engineering activities
for the public on bat-inspired robotics, which will capitalize on the project?s
research at the interface of engineering and biology to engage young
participants in biologically-inspired design. The project will broaden the
participation of underrepresented groups in engineering through both the
robotics activity, which is aimed at girls, and through the program at the
nature center, which seeks to engage children with interests in nature and
conservation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has been funded through the
Broadening Participation Research Initiation Grants in Engineering solicitation,
which is part of the Broadening Participation in Engineering Program of the
Engineering Education and Centers Division.