* 1342914
* Collaborative Research: Monitoring inflation at Axial Seamount
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2013,08/31/2014
* Scott Nooner, University of North Carolina at Wilmington
* Continuing Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 08/31/2014
* USD 47,806.00

ABSTRACT (Chadwick/Nooner)&lt;br/&gt;OCE-
0725605/0726093&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This research will
continue measurements of long term volcanic inflation of the seafloor at Axial
Seamount on the Juan de Fuca Ridge using an innovative new pressure
sensor/benchmarking method. Present data show Axial Volcano has been re-
inflating since its 1998 eruption. The center of Axial caldera has been uplifted
2.4 m since then. At the current rate of inflation, it is estimated that in
another 4-8 years Axial will be fully inflated and ready to erupt again. Axial
volcano is the only underwater volcano in the world where inflation and
deflation is being measured, where the magma supply rate can be quantified, and
where an entire volcanic cycle can be documented. Data from the project will be
able to be used to constrain the depth of magma movements beneath the caldera,
show how the magma supply rate changes over time, and help determine whether or
not eruptions can be forecast. Measurements of the volcano will be made in 2009
and 2011 at an array of seafloor benchmarks inside and outside the caldera using
a remotely operated vehicle. The measurements follow a NOAA funded survey in the
summer of 2007 and will provide inflation data every two years until 2011. Data
will then be compared to other volcanic regions and used to optimize crustal
deformation models. Goals will be to determine whether the inflation rate
follows an exponential decay that is governed by the pressure gradient between a
deep source that supplies magma to the shallow reservoir beneath the caldera. It
will also seek to determine if magma delivery is focused, supplied at a higher
rate, and stored in a deeper and larger reservoirs than at normal mid-ocean
ridge segments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Broader impacts of the
work include support of an early career scientist, and support for public
outreach from NOAA's successful NeMO web site which features education and
outreach material for students, teachers, and the general public that are
related to eruptions on Axial Volcano since 1998.&lt;br/&gt;