* 1342742
* Belmont Forum-G8 Initiative Collaborative Research: Southern Africa's Hydro-Economy and Water Security: SAHEWS
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* TINGJU ZHU, International Food Policy Research Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Uhle
* 08/31/2016
* USD 252,033.00

This award provides support to U.S. researchers participating in a project
competitively selected by a 13-country initiative on global change research
through the Belmont Forum and the G8 countries Heads of Research Councils. The
Belmont Forum is a high level group of the world?s major and emerging funders of
global environmental change research and international science councils. It aims
to accelerate delivery of the international environmental research most urgently
needed to remove critical barriers to sustainability by aligning and mobilizing
international resources. The G8 Heads of Research Councils developed a funding
framework to support multilateral research projects that address global
challenges in ways that are beyond the capacity of national or bilateral
activities. Each partner country provides funding for their researchers within a
consortium to alleviate the need for funds to cross international borders. This
approach facilitates effective leveraging of national resources to support
excellent research on topics of global relevance best tackled through a
multinational approach, recognizing that global challenges need global
solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Working together in an inaugural call of the
International Opportunities Fund, the Belmont Forum and G8HORCs have provided
support for research projects that seek to deliver knowledge needed for action
to mitigate and adapt to detrimental environmental change and extreme hazardous
events that relate to either Freshwater Security or Coastal Vulnerability. This
award provides support for the U.S. researchers to cooperate in consortia that
consist of partners from at least three of the participating countries and that
bring together natural scientists, social scientists and research users (e.g.,
policy makers, regulators, NGOs, communities and industry).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports research activities that will address
important knowledge gaps in water supply, demand and sharing, and in the
application of research to the effective management of freshwater security in
Southern Africa. Numerous challenges including population growth, drought-
induced food shortages, increasing energy demands and a variable climate
interact to make Southern Africa especially sensitive to freshwater security
threats. Adding to these challenges is a lack of institutional and policy
instruments for equitable and sustainable management of supply and demand in the
broader hydro-economy. This project will integrate an understanding of short to
medium term hydro-meteorological variability and its socioeconomic consequences
to develop approaches for improved regional water resources management.
Researchers will develop an improved understanding of hydro-meteorological
variability and human-environmental interactions to characterize how this
variability affects the regional hydro-economy. This will be achieved through
careful case study and co-designed research and facilitated high level knowledge
exchange. This project will contribute an improved understanding of the global
climate-water-food-energy nexus to support decision making and equitable and
sustainable freshwater management.