* 1342390
* BRIGE: Metabolic Cell-Process Engineering (MCPE) for High Biobutanol Production by Clostridium tyrobutyricum
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2015
* Xiaoguang Liu, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 12/31/2015
* USD 174,629.00

The proposed research deals with engineering strategies to improve biobutanol
production from low-cost, bacteria-based biomass technologies. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to
achieve high-titer and high-yield butanol production by the bacterium
Clostridium tyrobutyricum. Particularly, an innovative engineering approach,
i.e., Metabolic Cell-Process Engineering (MCPE), will be developed to
substantially increase biobutanol production through understanding the
interaction between a host cell and its fermentation process. Specifically, it
is planned to: 1) Develop a fundamental understanding of the response of a
recently metabolically engineered C. tyrobutyricum mutant cell to various
chemicals (e.g., electron carriers and inorganic salts), and identify cost
effective chemicals to boost the NADH (Reduced Nicotinamide Adenine
Dinucleotide) pool and detoxify the inhibitors from biomass hydrolysate. A
Design of Experiment (DOE) approach will be used to screen and identify the
chemicals needed for redox balance and detoxification. 2) Double butanol
production via MCPE by increasing intracellular NADH and reducing the toxicity
of biomass hydrolysate. The construction of a novel redox engineered mutant
(MCE) and development of fermentation process with timed addition of the
identified chemicals (MPE) will be integrated and utilized in butanol
production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Significance and Importance:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Butanol is an important industrial solvent and a safe
alternative transportation fuel that can be dispersed through existing pipelines
and filling stations. Over the past decades, intensive efforts have been made to
produce low-cost biobutanol using low-value biomass. However, biobutanol
production still suffers from low yields and effective concentrations due to a
variety of chemical issues associated with existing processes. The proposed MCPE
engineering strategy has the potential to double biobutanol production, at a
projected cost under $2.5 per gallon. Therefore, successfully developing the
proposed technology can serve the public interest by providing a safe, renewable
energy source while protecting natural resources and the environment. Many
bioenergy industries and other areas of academic research would benefit from the
development of novel engineering strain using
MCPE.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broadening Participation of Underrepresented Groups
in Engineering:&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project also aims to broaden the
participation of underrepresented groups and increase diversity. The Department
of Chemical and Biological Engineering (ChBE) with over 600 undergraduates has
historically attracted about 40 % women and more than 60 % of the students are
interested in Biotech industry and graduate programs. Therefore, it is very
important to enhance the ChBE curriculum by taking advantage of the unique
6-year Biotech industrial experiences of the PI. Specifically, a serial of
bioproduction unit operations (e.g. novel bioreactor design and biobutanol
fermentation demo run) will be designed and introduced to the traditional ChBE
319 Unit Operation Lab course. These new features can expand the students'
knowledge of industry bioproduction and benefit their career goal development.
Suitable biochemical reaction and titration experiments and guest lectures will
be introduced to K-12 students through Alabama Science in Motion (ASIM) that
covers 9 counties in west Alabama, including the impoverish Black Belt area.
Outreach activities such as recruiting women researchers through SWE and REU and
mentoring them in PI lab are also planned. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
has been funded through the Broadening Participation Research Initiation Grants
in Engineering solicitation, which is part of the Broadening Participation in
Engineering Program of the Engineering Education and Centers Division.