* 1342025
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Community Dynamics in a Traditional Society
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2013,12/31/2014
* Colin Grier, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2014
* USD 23,977.00

Cultural developments of the last 10,000 years have involved two critical
transitions in human lifeways: the emergence of the first settled villages and
the development of complex societies which characterize modern life. Patrick
Dolan, with the support of the National Science Foundation and under the
guidance of Dr. Colin Grier at Washington State University, will conduct
fieldwork at the Dionisio Point site a prehistoric hunter-gatherer village on
the coast of British Columbia, Canada. This village was occupied at a time when
the inhabitants of this region achieved levels of social complexity rarely
witnessed outside of agricultural societies, providing an important counter-
balance to explanations of social complexity as a consequence of the emergence
of food production.

In coastal southwestern British Columbia, Canada, the emergence of settled
plankhouse villages between 2500 and 1000 years ago corresponds to a period of
increasingly demarcated social status, wealth, and eventually greater warfare.
Archaeological research in this and the surrounding region indicates that the
emergence and organization of large multi-family households were critical in the
unfolding of these cultural developments. However, due to a shortage of
empirical data, the social and economic articulations between households within
a village remain uncertain. Were villages cohesive collective socially and
economically? Were they organized from the top-down around the demands of
powerful households? Or were households relatively autonomous of one another,
pursuing their own goals on a regional stage? Few settlements dating to this
period have been sampled in a manner that permits the evaluation of these
alternatives, and this research will fill this gap in knowledge.

This project will be one of the first to systematically examine these questions
within a single village in southwestern British Columbia. The fieldwork
component of this research will be conducted at the Dionisio Point site, a
multi-household, Coast Salish village occupied between 1500 and 1300 years ago
on Galiano Island in coastal southwestern British Columbia, Canada. Evaluating
the structure of inter-household economic relations in this village will require
refining the occupational history for the village at Dionisio Point as well as
characterizing long-term household production and consumption practices. Using
excavated materials collected from household architecture and refuse deposits
associated with each of the five houses at the site, this project will recover
materials that will permit radiocarbon dating, as well as the comparison of the
remains of the fauna households consumed, the tools they used, and their
respective storage capacities.

This research promotes collaboration between researchers in the USA and Canada,
as well as a greater appreciation of the value of prehistory to the public and
of the cultural heritage of local First Nations peoples. This project will
contribute to the professional development of graduate students in both field
methods and laboratory analyses. Results will be disseminated widely in academic
circles through professional publications, and to the public through talks and
newsletters. Ultimately, this project will promote continued engagement of
academic archaeologists with descendent communities and the Galiano Island
resident community, fostering improved collaboration in the preservation of the
cultural heritage of this region.