* 1342164
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Application of Entanglement Theory at Catalhoyuk, Turkey
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2015
* Ian Hodder, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2015
* USD 18,927.00

This project studies how a socio-economic reliance on locally acquired resources
can influence social development. Under the guidance of Dr. Ian Hodder, Adam
Nazaroff will study the procurement and use of chert, a rock composed
principally of microcrystalline silica, at the site of Çatalhöyük, Turkey. This
site was occupied during the Middle Eastern Neolithic from 7,400 to 6,000 BC,
and is particularly well-known for its magnificent artistic motifs, its large
size, and unique ritual and architectural practices. A significant portion of
this project will include large-scale surveys of the landscape surrounding
Çatalhöyük in order to discover natural deposits of chert which may have been
exploited during the Neolithic. Using a combination of visual, geochemical, and
mineralogical analyses, Mr. Nazaroff will identify which outcrops were used by
the people of Çatalhöyük to produce chert objects. By studying the different
objects produced from each chert source, it becomes possible to identify the
different facets of society which were reliant on the use of local resources.
More broadly, by identifying how local chert deposits were important economic,
social, and ideological resources throughout the development of this Neolithic
community, Mr. Nazaroff's research will help demonstrate the range of social
practices which were impacted by the local landscape.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While the Neolithic is a time of wide-spread social
change, encompassing many crucial developments in human history, current
theories often argue that these developments originated in a few key centers
before spreading outward to the rest of the Neolithic world. As a result, many
communities have been envisioned as peripheral to, or subjects of, a
predominantly foreign phenomenon. However, this research will help explain how
Neolithic groups also developed within networks of local practices, which aided
in the production of a heterogeneous Neolithic landscape. By giving a voice to
the role of local processes, this project stands to more thoroughly inform
archaeologists of the myriad of processes involved in community
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is well suited to provide a
broader impact beyond the scope of the above topics. Evident in recent
anthropological and economic literature is a growing recognition of the
directive force of regional and global networks on economic practices and
community identities. Researchers have looked to understand how the origins of
materials used in the manufacture of commodities impact the overall economies in
which they are situated. This project adds the strengths of an archaeological
approach to this discourse by analyzing how long-term processes articulate with
other socio-economic practices to impact community development. This is a stark
contrast to modern economic policies pertaining to the mining, trade, and
exchange of resources which are only interested in short-term gains and ignore
the long-term and nuanced consequences of particular investitures. This project
also operates at the intersection of various disciplines (archaeology,
anthropology, geology, economics) to provide a thorough perspective on the role
of local resources in informing social behaviors. Collaborative research with
local academic and governmental institutions, incorporating Turkish academic and
student researchers, will also bolster connections between local and
international researchers across disciplinary boundaries, which will help to
develop an enriched archaeological discourse.