* 1342973
* Belmont Forum-G8 Initiative Collaborative Research:  Maintaining productivity and incomes in the Tonle Sap fishery in the face of climate change
* GEO,RISE
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Leslie Kaufman, Conservation International
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Uhle
* 09/30/2017
* USD 700,844.00

This award provides support to U.S. researchers participating in a project
competitively selected by a 13-country initiative on global change research
through the Belmont Forum and the G8 countries Heads of Research Councils. The
Belmont Forum is a high level group of the world?s major and emerging funders of
global environmental change research and international science councils. It aims
to accelerate delivery of the international environmental research most urgently
needed to remove critical barriers to sustainability by aligning and mobilizing
international resources. The G8 Heads of Research Councils developed a funding
framework to support multilateral research projects that address global
challenges in ways that are beyond the capacity of national or bilateral
activities. Each partner country provides funding for their researchers within a
consortium to alleviate the need for funds to cross international borders. This
approach facilitates effective leveraging of national resources to support
excellent research on topics of global relevance best tackled through a
multinational approach, recognizing that global challenges need global
solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Working together in an inaugural call of the
International Opportunities Fund, the Belmont Forum and G8HORCs have provided
support for research projects that seek to deliver knowledge needed for action
to mitigate and adapt to detrimental environmental change and extreme hazardous
events that relate to either Freshwater Security or Coastal Vulnerability. This
award provides support for the U.S. researchers to cooperate in consortia that
consist of partners from at least three of the participating countries and that
bring together natural scientists, social scientists and research users (e.g.,
policy makers, regulators, NGOs, communities and industry).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports research activities that will deliver
new understanding of climate change responses and management options of
freshwater indiscriminate fisheries. Freshwater fisheries provide food security
and income for hundreds of millions of people worldwide in some of the poorest
countries on the planet. These fisheries are composed of diverse assemblages of
species and indiscriminate fishing practices. Indiscriminate fishing practices
are likely to have important but yet unconsidered implications for the
sustainability and management of ecosystems. This project will (1) construct a
general theory to understand the social and ecological implications of
indiscriminate fisheries under climate changes and (2) develop and test this
theory in the economically and socially important Tonle Sap fishery in Cambodia.
The Tonle Sap Lake is one of the largest and most productive indiscriminate
fisheries in the world, receiving large annual flood pulses from the Mekong
River. Recent changes in fisheries regulations present the opportunity to
understand how governance and management, climate, and ecology interact to
regulate the sustainability and maintenance of food production. These efforts
will contribute an understanding of the implications of indiscriminate fisheries
and local governance structures and options have for millions living in Cambodia
and for indiscriminate fisheries worldwide.