* 1342941
* Belmont Forum-G8 Initiative Collaborative Research:  Enhancing Adaptation and Resilience to Drought in Dry Tropical Social-Ecological Systems:  The Guyanacaste, Costa Rica Example
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2013,12/31/2017
* Gabrielle Wong-Parodi, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Uhle
* 12/31/2017
* USD 639,240.00

This award provides support to U.S. researchers participating in a project
competitively selected by a 13-country initiative on global change research
through the Belmont Forum and the G8 countries Heads of Research Councils. The
Belmont Forum is a high level group of the world's major and emerging funders of
global environmental change research and international science councils. It aims
to accelerate delivery of the international environmental research most urgently
needed to remove critical barriers to sustainability by aligning and mobilizing
international resources. The G8 Heads of Research Councils developed a funding
framework to support multilateral research projects that address global
challenges in ways that are beyond the capacity of national or bilateral
activities. Each partner country provides funding for their researchers within a
consortium to alleviate the need for funds to cross international borders. This
approach facilitates effective leveraging of national resources to support
excellent research on topics of global relevance best tackled through a
multinational approach, recognizing that global challenges need global
solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Working together in an inaugural call of the
International Opportunities Fund, the Belmont Forum and G8HORCs have provided
support for research projects that seek to deliver knowledge needed for action
to mitigate and adapt to detrimental environmental change and extreme hazardous
events that relate to either Freshwater Security or Coastal Vulnerability. This
award provides support for the U.S. researchers to cooperate in consortia that
consist of partners from at least three of the participating countries and that
bring together natural scientists, social scientists and research users (e.g.,
policy makers, regulators, NGOs, communities and industry).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports research activities that will identify
future drought adaptation options, with an emphasis on building resilience to
water scarcity in drought prone social-ecological systems, using the arid
Northwest region of Costa Rica as a case study. Resilience to drought requires
development of coherent conceptual and scientific knowledge as well as an
improved understanding of human and institutional responses to events and
forecasts. The goal of this project is to contribute to the sustainable
management of water resources for the benefit of both society as well as
ecosystems. The project will do this by (1) characterizing current physical and
social conditions; (2) modeling the impacts of changing climate and weather on
resources, people and other drivers of change; and (3) developing new methods
for and implementation of decision aids, including the development of practical
new heuristics, communication, and outreach. These efforts will contribute
important aspects of drought management and adaptation, with applications both
to dry tropical environments and more broadly to drought sensitive coupled
socio-ecological systems. The project will contribute toward an improved and
integrated understanding of the monitoring and modeling of aquifers,
agriculture, ecosystem services, climate scenarios, and weather forecasts.