* 1342479
* Belmont Forum-G8 Initiative Collaborative Research: Coastal Vulnerability: Global learning for local solutions: Reducing vulnerability of marine-dependent coastal communities
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2013,12/31/2018
* Adina Paytan, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Uhle
* 12/31/2018
* USD 181,890.00

This award provides support to U.S. researchers participating in a project
competitively selected by a 13-country initiative on global change research
through the Belmont Forum and the G8 countries Heads of Research Councils. The
Belmont Forum is a high level group of the world's major and emerging funders of
global environmental change research and international science councils. It aims
to accelerate delivery of the international environmental research most urgently
needed to remove critical barriers to sustainability by aligning and mobilizing
international resources. The G8 Heads of Research Councils developed a funding
framework to support multilateral research projects that address global
challenges in ways that are beyond the capacity of national or bilateral
activities. Each partner country provides funding for their researchers within a
consortium to alleviate the need for funds to cross international borders. This
approach facilitates effective leveraging of national resources to support
excellent research on topics of global relevance best tackled through a
multinational approach, recognizing that global challenges need global
solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Working together in an inaugural call of the
International Opportunities Fund, the Belmont Forum and G8HORCs have provided
support for research projects that seek to deliver knowledge needed for action
to mitigate and adapt to detrimental environmental change and extreme hazardous
events that relate to either Freshwater Security or Coastal Vulnerability. This
award provides support for the U.S. researchers to cooperate in consortia that
consist of partners from at least three of the participating countries and that
bring together natural scientists, social scientists and research users (e.g.,
policy makers, regulators, NGOs, communities and industry).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports research activities that will work to
improve community adaptation efforts by characterizing, assessing, and
predicting changes in coastal-marine food web resources through the provision
and sharing of knowledge across regions experiencing rapidly changing climate
and social tensions. Many coastal communities rely on marine resources for
livelihoods and food security. Increasing populations and associated socio-
ecological changes put pressure on these resources through increased pollution,
development, climate changes and habitat degradation. This project will (1)
build regional skill-sets to reduce coastal vulnerability by evaluating and
characterizing probable changes; (2) create predictive systems to inform
decision makers about expected consequences of coastal changes; (3) deliver
alternative options for adaptation and transformations for coastal communities;
and (4) define long-term implications of selecting particular policy and
management options in terms of economic, social, and environmental outcomes.
This work will focus on southern hemisphere hotspots of change, including
southern Africa, southern and western Australia, Mozambique channel, southern
India, and Brazil. This project will contribute to understanding the
vulnerability of coastal biological and human systems to develop sustainable
adaptation pathways for coastal communities and develop effective mechanisms and
expertise to translate evidence-based results into management strategies.