* 1342869
* Belmont Forum Collaborative Research:   Integrated Analysis of Freshwater Resources Sustainability in Jordan
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Steven Gorelick, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Uhle
* 08/31/2018
* USD 561,351.00

This award provides support to U.S. researchers participating in a project
competitively selected by a 13-country initiative on global change research
through the Belmont Forum and the G8 countries Heads of Research Councils. The
Belmont Forum is a high level group of the world's major and emerging funders of
global environmental change research and international science councils. It aims
to accelerate delivery of the international environmental research most urgently
needed to remove critical barriers to sustainability by aligning and mobilizing
international resources. The G8 Heads of Research Councils developed a funding
framework to support multilateral research projects that address global
challenges in ways that are beyond the capacity of national or bilateral
activities. Each partner country provides funding for their researchers within a
consortium to alleviate the need for funds to cross international borders. This
approach facilitates effective leveraging of national resources to support
excellent research on topics of global relevance best tackled through a
multinational approach, recognizing that global challenges need global
solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Working together in an inaugural call of the
International Opportunities Fund, the Belmont Forum and G8HORCs have provided
support for research projects that seek to deliver knowledge needed for action
to mitigate and adapt to detrimental environmental change and extreme hazardous
events that relate to either Freshwater Security or Coastal Vulnerability. This
award provides support for the U.S. researchers to cooperate in consortia that
consist of partners from at least three of the participating countries and that
bring together natural scientists, social scientists and research users (e.g.,
policy makers, regulators, NGOs, communities and industry).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports research activities that will develop
a framework to understand and evaluate water management options and strategies
in water-stressed countries using Jordan as a model state. Jordan has one of the
lowest water resources availability and is the heart of Middle East trans-
boundary water issues, making it representative of many physical and social
structures that can lead to widespread freshwater security challenges. Existing
models typically neglect interactions and feedbacks between hydrological and
socioeconomic systems, thereby limiting the ability to understand the
implications and feedbacks of long term management strategies and water
availability changes. This project will develop quantitative evaluation tools to
explore ways to enhance sustainability of freshwater systems through a variety
of social and economic mechanisms. Models will incorporate both natural
processes and human decision making and management criteria. These efforts will
be used to evaluate a wide range of freshwater management options. This work
will contribute new tools to understand and forecast water management strategies
and feedbacks between natural and social systems. The project will involve a
range of government agencies, civil organizations and research institutes to
strengthen individual and institutional capacity of the water sector in Jordan,
with implications for water management strategies in water stressed states
everywhere.