* 1342979
* Belmont Forum-G8 Initiative Collaborative Research: Adaptation Research, a Trans-disciplInary transnational community and policy centred approach (ARTISTICC)
* GEO,ICER
* 09/01/2013,02/28/2019
* Gary Kofinas, University of Alaska Anchorage Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Uhle
* 02/28/2019
* USD 541,261.00

This award provides support to U.S. researchers participating in a project
competitively selected by a 13-country initiative on global change research
through the Belmont Forum and the G8 countries Heads of Research Councils. The
Belmont Forum is a high level group of the world's major and emerging funders of
global environmental change research and international science councils. It aims
to accelerate delivery of the international environmental research most urgently
needed to remove critical barriers to sustainability by aligning and mobilizing
international resources. The G8 Heads of Research Councils developed a funding
framework to support multilateral research projects that address global
challenges in ways that are beyond the capacity of national or bilateral
activities. Each partner country provides funding for their researchers within a
consortium to alleviate the need for funds to cross international borders. This
approach facilitates effective leveraging of national resources to support
excellent research on topics of global relevance best tackled through a
multinational approach, recognizing that global challenges need global
solutions.

Working together in an inaugural call of the International Opportunities Fund,
the Belmont Forum and G8HORCs have provided support for research projects that
seek to deliver knowledge needed for action to mitigate and adapt to detrimental
environmental change and extreme hazardous events that relate to either
Freshwater Security or Coastal Vulnerability. This award provides support for
the U.S. researchers to cooperate in consortia that consist of partners from at
least three of the participating countries and that bring together natural
scientists, social scientists and research users (e.g., policy makers,
regulators, NGOs, communities and industry).

This award supports research activities that will develop and apply innovative
trans-disciplinary approaches to improve coastal community adaptation strategies
to climate change. Delivery of products and findings from evidence-based
environmental research to local communities is a critical barrier limiting
coastal adaptation strategies. Accounting for local communities? culture,
history of adaptation and current local to global challenges is needed to
facilitate effective adaptation mechanisms. This project will use a series of
case studies in France, Greenland, Russia, India, Canada, Alaska, and Senegal to
analyze how natural science can be used to better adapt to future changes, how
communities have adapted to past changes and how memories of past adaptations
frame current and future efforts. This will be achieved by developing an
overarching trans-disciplinary framework to understand coastal adaptation,
conducting field work in a range of settings, performing an experiment on
cultural mediation of coastal adaptation, and developing a series of briefs.
This project will contribute toward a better understanding of adaptation as a
scientific, social, economic, and cultural practice in coastal communities by
identifying the key community-level challenges to the definition and
implementation of evidence-based adaptation.