* 1342076
* SI2-SSI: REAL-TIME LARGE-SCALE PARALLEL INTELLIGENT CO2 DATA ASSIMILATION SYSTEM
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Anna Michalak, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Rajiv Ramnath
* 08/31/2017
* USD 1,667,410.00

Intellectual Merit: This proposal seeks to address this need by creating a
state-of-the-art autonomous software platform for real-time integration of in-
situ and satellite-based atmospheric CO2 measurements within a Data Assimilation
(DA) system for producing estimates of global land and oceanic CO2 exchange at
weekly to bi-weekly intervals. The proposed software infrastructure will be
capable of autonomous processing of large volumes of data through a multi-stage
pipeline, without the delays conventionally associated with such processing.
Within the DA component, we will provide options for multiple DA algorithms for
estimating global CO2 exchange. Users will, for the first time, have the
capability to use these multiple methods as part of a single system for
comparing estimates of CO2 exchange, and to obtain an improved understanding of
the relative advantages of the various DA methods. As part of the analysis
component of the software, we will build a carbon-climate surveillance system by
drawing from a range of techniques in pattern recognition and high-dimensional
statistical inference. This system will be able to detect and analyze localized
variations in CO2 exchange within any user-specified spatio-temporal window. In
addition, summaries of the CO2 exchange will be provided at annual and monthly
temporal scales for continents and countries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: This software can be used by researchers and governmental institutions
for evaluating both the natural components of the carbon cycle and anthropogenic
carbon emissions, as well as in the design of new satellites for improved
monitoring of CO2. All data and software will be publicly available and open-
source development platforms will be used whenever possible. The algorithm
prototypes developed as part of this project will be used in undergraduate and
graduate courses at the University of Michigan, and will be made available
online for educators at other institutions. Finally, the project will train
three graduate students, with a focus on developing their cross-disciplinary
skills in the field of Earth science, statistics, computer science, and
atmospheric science.