* 1342207
* BRIGE: Improving Resiliency of Coastal Systems using Bio-Mediated Soil Improvement & Promoting Women in Engineering
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2017
* Brina Montoya, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 12/31/2017
* USD 175,000.00

Background:

Sand dunes are an invaluable geologic feature of our coastal environment. During
Hurricane Sandy in 2012, coastal infrastructure protected by sand dunes had much
less damage than the infrastructure that was not protected. The sand dunes
naturally dampen the energy from the large wave action and prevent damage and
erosion further inland. Large wave action and high sea levels erode the sandy
soil that supports coastal lifelines, including bridges, highways, pipelines,
and other utilities. Damage from these large storm events can result in severe
property damage, loss of revenue, and large repair costs. Preventing the erosion
of the sandy soil can improve the resiliency of these coastal systems by
minimizing damage, reducing repair costs and allowing communities to recover
quicker after the storm events. Current methods to reduce coastal erosion, such
as hardened structures, increase down drift erosion and replace the natural
environment with man-made infrastructure. Coastal sand dunes are also an
integral part of the coastal ecology; therefore a process used to reinforce the
erodible sandy soil should not disrupt the natural coastal ecology.

Technical Description:

The proposed project will provide a new soil improvement method to reinforce
vulnerable lifelines in coastal communities. Applying MICP treatment methods to
coastal sand dunes will require assessing the improved soil properties under new
loading conditions and evaluating the effect the treatment process has on the
surrounding ecology; hence, advancing the knowledge of bio-mediated soil
improvement.

Microbial Induced Calcite Precipitation (MICP) has the potential to reinforce
coastal sand dunes while preserving the natural ecology of the dunes. MICP
utilizes urea hydrolysis with calcium chloride as the chemical reaction to
increase the alkalinity of the pore fluid and induce calcite precipitation.
Sporosarcina pasteurii, a common alkalophilic soil bacterium, has a high urease
activity and is used to facilitate the chemical reaction. The MICP process
occurs naturally in situ cementing sand into sandstone; however, it can be
harnessed and accelerated to be used as a natural soil improvement process.

Assessing the ability for MICP to be used to protect coastal systems will be
achieved by addressing the following objectives: 1) designing a MICP treatment
process suitable for coastal soils, 2) evaluating the increase in shear strength
and reduction of erosion potential, 3) addressing the potential effects (either
adverse or beneficial) the MICP treatment process may have on the coastal
ecology.

Broader Significance and Importance:

Over half of the global population lives near coastal communities, and these
communities often struggle to rebound after large storm events. The proposed
project is developed to advance bio-mediated soil improvement by developing new
sustainable treatment methods for extreme loading conditions while minimizing
the treatment?s impact on the local ecology. With the implementation of the
treatment process developed within this project, lifelines will be able to
resist the loading from large storm events while preserving the natural
environment, which will improve the resiliency of the coastal infrastructure. In
the broader context, the scientific advances from this project would also be
applicable for liquefaction prevention, slope stability concerns, and roadway
support.

Broadening Participation of Underrepresented Groups in Engineering:

In parallel with the bio-mediated soil improvement research, an outreach program
is designed to promote female students to pursue a career in engineering.
Society will benefit from an increase in female engineers by providing a diverse
perspective to solve today?s challenges. The diversity-related goals of this
project include increasing the interest of engineering among young female
students and increasing the recruitment and retention female university students
into graduate programs and academic careers. This goal will be met by exposing
female students to different career paths in engineering and by providing female
engineering role models the students can connect to during their elementary,
middle school, and university education.

This research has been funded through the Broadening Participation Research
Initiation Grants in Engineering solicitation, which is part of the Broadening
Participation in Engineering Program of the Engineering Education and Centers
Division.