* 1342415
* BRIGE: ASPIRE-DATA: Advancing Science Participation through Innovation, Research, and Education Towards Data Association that Transforms Aging
* ENG,EEC
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2018
* Hansuk Sohn, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Paige Smith
* 12/31/2018
* USD 174,999.00

Technical Description of the Project&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This BRIGE project
explores new approaches to sensor-based surveillance in application to the
prevention of age-related falls. Due to aging, all adults experience varying
degrees of functional decline. This results in increased risk of falling in
their daily activities. Importantly, risks of specific falls change dynamically
during human interaction with the environment. Sensor data have been used for
detection of falls shortly before impact. Despite wide use of sensor-based
surveillance for tracking targets, tracking risks or hazards with sensors is an
open problem. This research will examine how measurements from multiple sensors
can be used to dynamically track the risks of falls in aging adults. By
combining methods from statistical estimation and optimization, a new class of
data association models will be created to represent the correspondence of
sensor measurements to the fall related hazards and false alarms. False alarms
are safe conditions that resemble the situations with an exposure to falling. A
simulation of age-related falls on younger adults will be used to quantify risks
of falls in accordance with sensor data. Finally, the combined datasets will be
used to test and validate the new models. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical
Description of the Project's Significance&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
significance and importance of this project is to inform the development of the
next-generation assistive mobility technology. Successful completion of this
project will lead to developed and validated models to be used in smart, sensor-
based devices that can help prevent costly and dangerous falls. This research
has potential to prevent fall-related injuries, disability, and death in elderly
and other vulnerable populations, thus extending the period of functional
independence in older adults, reducing the need for caregivers, and alleviating
the economic burden on society. Despite nationwide efforts to reduce falls, many
elderly live in constant fear of falling in their home or public places. This
BRIGE award provides funding to potentially enable new assistive mobility
devices that will transform the way adults experience aging. This project
overlaps with NSF strategic goal of innovating for
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Activities to Broaden the Participation of
Underrepresented Groups in Engineering&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broadening
participation activities integrated into this research project will build
pathways to success in engineering careers for community college, undergraduate,
and graduate students from historically underrepresented groups, including
Hispanics, women, and first generation students. The PI will engage these
students in experiential learning and research activities that will promote
their interest in interdisciplinary engineering research, in particular in
application to safe, patient-centered wellness and health. The students will be
provided opportunities for structured professional development that will become
a foundation for their long-term success. Specific plans are in place for
enhancement of activities through the New Mexico Louis Stokes Alliance for
Minority Participation, the National Graduate Education for Minorities
consortium, the Society of Women Engineers and other on-campus organizations.
This project will help create a strong foundation for integration of effective
diversity and broadening participation activities into research, education, and
innovation endeavors throughout the PI's career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research has been funded through the Broadening Participation Research
Initiation Grants in Engineering solicitation, which is part of the Broadening
Participation in Engineering Program of the Engineering Education and Centers
Division.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is also funded through the
Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR), which is part
of the Office of International and Integrative Activities.