* 1342345
* Workshop: North American Comparative Immunology Workshop, Santa Barbara, CA
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2013,06/30/2014
* Anthony De Tomaso, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Liliana Jaso-Friedmann
* 06/30/2014
* USD 5,400.00

All organisms require an immune system to protect them from viruses and other
disease-causing microbes. However, comparisons of immune defenses of different
animals, from worms to humans, have shown a surprising diversity. Mammals and
roundworms, for instance, use a completely different set of immune "tools" to
accomplish the same goal: the recognition and elimination of pathogens. The
central question to be addressed in this workshop is: "How do immune systems
operate in different organisms, and what insights can the diversity of immune
mechanisms offer to our understanding of the evolution of immunity in animals?"
This workshop will bring together researchers who study a diverse array of
organisms (worms, flies, fish, sea urchins, tunicates, frogs and humans)for an
small meeting that will foster an exchange of ideas between investigators in
different fields and stimulate new collaborations between investigators. The new
insights arising from this meeting could ultimately provide fresh applied
perspectives, such as novel diagnostic and clinical applications. In addition, a
greater understanding of diverse immune systems could provide fresh ideas on how
maintain the health of animals that are being reared for food, or under stress
due to the impacts of environmental change. Overcrowding due to farming, or
other environmental stress is often reflected in a weaker immune response, with
an increased susceptibility to disease. In addition, the meeting will provide a
venue that gives younger investigators, including undergraduate students,
graduate students, and postdoctoral fellows, the opportunity to present their
research to the community, in an interactive environment conducive to guiding
and nurturing their careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research presented at the
meeting will be publicly available on a website (accessible via
http://www.mcdb.ucsb.edu/people/faculty/detomaso) and published in an immunology
journal.