* 1342055
* PECASE:  Oscillating Flows as a Novel Mechanical Separation Method for Macroscale and Microscale Applications
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2013,06/30/2014
* Aaron Thomas, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Rosemarie D. Wesson
* 06/30/2014
* USD 127,542.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number CTS-0643023&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Aaron M. Thomas&lt;br/&gt;University/Institution: University of
Idaho &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CAREER: Oscillating Flows as a Novel
Mechanical Separation Method&lt;br/&gt;for Macroscale and Microscale
Applications&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Oscillating or pulsatile flows can be used as
a novel mechanical separation and transport mechanism for species in the gas and
liquid phase. Oscillating flows are unique in that the separation is dictated by
the difference in the molecular diffusion of a gas or&lt;br/&gt;liquid species.
A primary goal is to explore and elucidate a novel mechanical method for the
separation of species in gas and liquid systems using oscillating flows at both
the&lt;br/&gt;macro and micro scales. This research will involve 1) prediction
of species movement at&lt;br/&gt;different time and length scales using
theoretical models, and 2) experiments to validate and correct these models. The
first key objective is to perform theoretical and experimental research on the
macroscale. Specifically, unique geometrical configurations such as tubes with
wavy walled boundaries will be analyzed to determine the effect of geometry on
the flow profiles and thus the separation and mass transfer of species in
mixtures. Ultimately, a system having a large separation with a high throughput
is needed. The second key objective is to carry out research on the microscale
with simple liquid systems in microchannels to fully understand the effect of AC
fields on fluid movement and species transport. More complex biological
separations such as DNA and proteins will be studied. The PI's educational goal
is to train students at all levels graduate, undergraduate, and K-12 to think
critically, communicate effectively, and solve problems. At the university
level, new laboratory experiments will be developed and integrated into the
curriculum. These classes will encourage undergraduate students to continue
their education with a graduate degree. Within the community, the PI will strive
to encourage K-12 students, especially Native American students, to enter the
sciences. To accomplish this, he will perform demonstrations at local schools
and on the local Nez Perce and Coeur d'Alene reservations. Further, the PI has
plans to help Native American students make the transition to college life so
that improve their college retention and to help them obtain advanced
degrees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;