* 1342944
* Belmont Forum-G8 Collaborative Research:   DELTAS:  Catalyzing action towards sustainability of deltaic systems with an integrated modeling framework for risk assessment
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Efi Foufoula-Georgiou, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Uhle
* 09/30/2017
* USD 266,470.00

This award provides support to U.S. researchers participating in a project
competitively selected by a 13-country initiative on global change research
through the Belmont Forum and the G8 countries Heads of Research Councils. The
Belmont Forum is a high level group of the world's major and emerging funders of
global environmental change research and international science councils. It aims
to accelerate delivery of the international environmental research most urgently
needed to remove critical barriers to sustainability by aligning and mobilizing
international resources. The G8 Heads of Research Councils developed a funding
framework to support multilateral research projects that address global
challenges in ways that are beyond the capacity of national or bilateral
activities. Each partner country provides funding for their researchers within a
consortium to alleviate the need for funds to cross international borders. This
approach facilitates effective leveraging of national resources to support
excellent research on topics of global relevance best tackled through a
multinational approach, recognizing that global challenges need global
solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Working together in an inaugural call of the
International Opportunities Fund, the Belmont Forum and G8HORCs have provided
support for research projects that seek to deliver knowledge needed for action
to mitigate and adapt to detrimental environmental change and extreme hazardous
events that relate to either Freshwater Security or Coastal Vulnerability. This
award provides support for the U.S. researchers to cooperate in consortia that
consist of partners from at least three of the participating countries and that
bring together natural scientists, social scientists and research users (e.g.,
policy makers, regulators, NGOs, communities and industry).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports research activities that will develop
a versatile modeling framework that can be applied to evaluate the unique
functioning, critical stressors, and vulnerability of the world?s deltas. Deltas
are economically and environmentally important systems, sustaining a large
portion of the world?s populations, economic activity, and ecosystems. These
systems are deteriorating rapidly due to climate changes, catchment changes, and
local exploitation and ecosystem degradation. This project will develop an
evidence-based framework for global delta sustainability by (1) advancing delta
sustainability science as critical coupled human-natural systems; (2) co-design,
-develop, and -deliver an evidence-based sustainability framework for risk
assessment and decision support; (3) build an international repository of
integrated delta datasets; and (4) develop and implement a modeling and decision
support framework in partnership with local stakeholders. Applicable from local
to national levels, this framework will be applied to three case-studies in the
Ganges-Brahmaputra-Meghna, Mekong, and Amazon deltas. This project will
contribute toward effective regional delta management and governance by
providing a mechanism to integrate social, economic, bio-physical, and ecosystem
services components to assess delta vulnerability and guide sustainable
management strategies and decisions across scales, in collaboration with experts
and stakeholders.