* 1342367
* BRIGE:  Investigation of Improved Antenna Reconfiguration Mechanisms
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Jessica Ruyle, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2016
* USD 174,983.00

ECCS - 1342367 &lt;br/&gt;Ruyle, Jessica &lt;br/&gt;University of Oklahoma
Norman Campus&lt;br/&gt;BRIGE: Investigation of Improved Antenna Reconfiguration
Mechanisms&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: This BRIGE proposal describes a plan to develop mechanisms for slot
antennas that will enable numerous unique reconfigurable antenna designs for the
next generation of wireless technology. The project represents the first step of
a long-term goal to build a diverse team of researchers at the University of
Oklahoma (OU) investigating novel antenna architectures that address a national
need to solve the spectrum crisis. The first step in designing practical and
efficient, reconfigurable slot antennas is development of the loading mechanism
that electrically alters a property of the antenna. Slot antennas have many
desirable properties such as omnidirectional radiation and relative placement
insensitivity. However, reconfigurable antennas are challenging with slotline
due to the presence of only one ground plane, which makes the required bias
networks problematic and detrimental to the antenna's performance. The proposed
work will develop easily-biased and efficient loading mechanisms for slot
antennas that will enable many reconfigurable antenna designs and lead to more
practical designs to be implemented in systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: The proposed work will advance many types of reconfigurable antennas,
which have the potential to operate at a range of frequencies, change the main
beam to receive/transmit from a different direction, and/or adapt to changes in
operating conditions. This will enable truly cognitive radio/radar that can find
and operate in unused spectrum - eliminating the requirement for strictly
assigned spectrum use. Transmission line models will be developed for all
investigated structures allowing the structures to be broadly applicable and
transferable for use as loading mechanisms for many different reconfigurable
antenna designs. Accurate models for these structures will have far-reaching
effects beyond the proposed work since with these models the fundamental
structure behavior can be more easily understood. In addition to the broad
impact upon future wireless systems, the proposed work will enhance the
retention and recruitment of women in Electrical and Computer Engineering (ECE).
The PI is the founder and faculty advisor of Women in ECE (WECE) at OU. The
proposed work will expand previously initiated events and implement a laboratory
workshop with WECE. Students who complete the workshop will be recruited to
participate in undergraduate research with the PI. Additionally, the PI will
begin tracking all students in ECE through a detailed data set for each cohort
of students for the next five years to determine critical points for
intervention methods to improve retention.