* 1342949
* Belmont Forum-G8 Initiative Collaborative Research: Drought Impacts Vulnerability Thresholds in Monitoring and Early Warning Research
* GEO,ICER
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Cody Knutson, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Uhle
* 08/31/2017
* USD 542,073.00

This award provides support to U.S. researchers participating in a project
competitively selected by a 13-country initiative on global change research
through the Belmont Forum and the G8 countries Heads of Research Councils. The
Belmont Forum is a high level group of the world's major and emerging funders of
global environmental change research and international science councils. It aims
to accelerate delivery of the international environmental research most urgently
needed to remove critical barriers to sustainability by aligning and mobilizing
international resources. The G8 Heads of Research Councils developed a funding
framework to support multilateral research projects that address global
challenges in ways that are beyond the capacity of national or bilateral
activities. Each partner country provides funding for their researchers within a
consortium to alleviate the need for funds to cross international borders. This
approach facilitates effective leveraging of national resources to support
excellent research on topics of global relevance best tackled through a
multinational approach, recognizing that global challenges need global
solutions.

Working together in an inaugural call of the International Opportunities Fund,
the Belmont Forum and G8HORCs have provided support for research projects that
seek to deliver knowledge needed for action to mitigate and adapt to detrimental
environmental change and extreme hazardous events that relate to either
Freshwater Security or Coastal Vulnerability. This award provides support for
the U.S. researchers to cooperate in consortia that consist of partners from at
least three of the participating countries and that bring together natural
scientists, social scientists and research users (e.g., policy makers,
regulators, NGOs, communities and industry).

This award supports research activities that will develop an innovative
methodological approach combining the use of hydro-meteorological and socio-
economic data to improve drought monitoring and early warning systems and
associated drought risk management strategies. Droughts pose a threat to
freshwater security in diverse areas around the globe. A range of drought
metrics is often used to characterize the impacts of these events separately in
the environment and in society. This project seeks to bridge these natural and
social approaches to develop more effective drought management approaches. The
objectives of this project include (1) compare and evaluate drought impact
indicators across geographic settings and governance structures; (2) identify
and compare drought indicator thresholds that define social vulnerability and
drought impacts; (3) engage in social learning to explore framing, decision
making, and drought practices by a diverse range of stakeholders and (4) develop
pathways to drought resilient communities and ecosystems based on improved
drought monitoring and early warning systems, management, and training.
Researchers will engage with a diverse group of stakeholders and end-users to
understand the characteristics that make communities vulnerable to droughts and
improve the capacity of communities to adapt in different social, economic, and
cultural contexts. These efforts will contribute toward improved freshwater
security by developing a better understanding and assessment of drought impacts.