* 1342229
* BRIGE: Combining High Speed Extrusion and Nanoscale Interactions for Efficient Processing of Renewable Polyester Nanocomposites
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2016
* Margaret SobkowiczKline, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 09/30/2016
* USD 174,846.00

Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This BRIGE project will seek routes
to improved thermophysical properties for renewable polymers through the
formation of nanocomposites. The viability of renewable plastics depends on low-
cost processing and expansion of the thermomechanical properties for a broad
range of applications. The objective of the research is to understand the
effects of novel high-speed extrusion processing of nanocomposites with
renewable polymer matrices. Conventional twin screw extrusion reaches rotation
speeds of 400 rpm, but next-generation extruders are now available that can
achieve 4500 rpm. Extrusion blending at these high speeds has the potential to
transform understanding of nanocomposite processing. Application of high shear
can also degrade sensitive renewable polymers, so the limits to this technique
must be explored. This work will also relate the effects of surface
functionalization to rheological and structural properties of the nanocomposites
to deduce the mechanisms of interfacial toughening. Theoretical findings
relating enthalpic interactions, dispersion and reinforcement are more broadly
applicable to other polymer-nanoparticle systems. The intellectual merit of the
proposed research will be provided through: (1) potentially transformative
capabilities of the new extrusion mixing technology, (2) quantitative
understanding of the roles of interfacial interactions and dispersion in
nanocomposite polymer reinforcement including a rheological model of processing
properties, and (3) foundational knowledge on processing behavior of renewable
polymers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Significance and
Importance:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will have broader impacts on
society through its focus on sustainable materials, education of the next
generation of scientists, and broadening participation of women in engineering.
The new paradigm for reinforcement of polymers from renewable resources will
accelerate their route to commercialization. The improved particle dispersion
achieved through high-speed mixing will lead to lighter, stronger and more
sustainably manufactured nanocomposites. Knowledge gained on the novel
processing technique will be applicable to a range of multicomponent materials.
Integration of research and education will be accomplished through a "teach the
teachers" pilot program that provides polymers-focused experimental examples for
area high school teachers. An important focus of this project is to broaden
participation of women in engineering, specifically addressing attrition from
college entry to the professional workplace. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broadening
Participation: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broadening participation objective of
this project is to create mentorship networks among women at multiple
engineering career and academic levels. Interactive discussions at high school
technical programs will establish a supportive mentorship network among female
students interested in engineering. The success of the cooperative training
program at UMass Lowell will be leveraged for sharing of career experiences
among student groups. Participating students will have the opportunity to
observe and model success in all stages of the engineering career. The
integrated educational and outreach activities with area high schools and
vocational programs will provide opportunities in engineering for at-risk
students and increase retention among female engineering students at the outset
of their careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has been funded through
the Broadening Participation Research Initiation Grants in Engineering
solicitation, which is part of the Broadening Participation in Engineering
Program of the Engineering Education and Centers Division.