* 1342637
* RAPID: Responding to Terror (Again): A National Study of the Boston Marathon Bombings
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2013,06/30/2014
* Roxane Silver, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* kerry marsh
* 06/30/2014
* USD 178,643.00

The recent bombing at the finish line of the Boston Marathon on April 15, 2013
was the first large scale terror attack on US soil since September 11, 2001.
Dual bombs were detonated on a symbolic target; over 25,000 runners participated
in the marathon from around the US and the world; thousands more watched from
the streets. Three individuals lost their lives in the bombings, dozens more
lost their limbs, and hundreds were maimed and injured; thousands of friends and
family members of runners were also affected. Reporters' and spectators' cameras
filmed the mayhem and over the next weeks these images were shown repeatedly in
both traditional and social media around the world. The city of Boston was
locked down as the perpetrators were chased. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Roxane
Silver (University of California-Irvine) and her team will conduct a study to
examine the national impact of the Boston Marathon bombings. To do so, they will
work in collaboration with a Web-based survey research firm that has recruited a
nationally representative panel of individuals for online data collection. They
will collect data from 4100 individuals following the Boston Marathon bombings,
including a representative sample of 800 Boston residents, 800 New York
residents, and a nationally representative comparison sample (N=2500). Data
collection will start within two weeks of the bombings and ten days after the
Boston lockdown and subsequent death and capture of the alleged bombers.
Respondents will complete assessments of acute stress response, as well as
report the degree of exposure (direct and media) to the bombings, their
aftermath, and other recent major collective traumas (e.g., Superstorm Sandy,
the Sandy Hook Elementary School shootings).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific
aims of this research are: 1) to investigate the psychological and social
processes that help explain individual differences in response to a national
traumatic event (i.e., the Boston Marathon bombings); 2) to compare responses to
the Boston Marathon bombings among individuals who have directly experienced
prior collective traumas (e.g., 9/11, Superstorm Sandy, the Sandy Hook School
shootings) to individuals who have not directly experienced such events in the
past; and 3) to explore the role of traditional and social media exposure in
explaining acute stress responses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A terrorist attack
psychologically targets an entire population, not merely those in physical
proximity to the attack. Most research on reactions to traumatic events,
disasters, and mass-murders has addressed the impact on those directly affected;
the psychological consequences for individuals beyond the immediate community
where the event occurs are largely unexplored. Information collected in this
research will further an understanding of the unique needs of individuals
traumatized by terrorism (directly or via the media), and provide information to
help identify those at risk for subsequent difficulties following major
traumatic events. This study may help policymakers, service providers, and the
community at large design educational and intervention efforts that are more
cost-effective and more sensitive to the needs of the populace.