* 1342070
* BRIGE:  Adaptive Vibrational Energy Harvesting Systems through Semi-Passive Control of Nonlinear Oscillators
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Shad Roundy, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2016
* USD 174,404.00

ECCS-1342070&lt;br/&gt;Roundy, Shadrach&lt;br/&gt;University of
Utah&lt;br/&gt;BRIGE: Adaptive Vibrational Energy Harvesting Systems through
Semi-Passive Control of Nonlinear
Oscillators&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: Vibrations are ubiquitous in many wireless sensor application spaces, and
have been widely proposed as a potential source of power. A continuing issue
with vibration energy harvesters is the very tight linkage between the specific
parameters of the vibration environment and the structural parameters of the
harvester necessary for efficient power generation. In reality, most vibration
sources change with time, and therefore a harvester that adapts to its vibration
environment could potentially operate much more efficiently and provide a stable
source of power over a broad range of operating environments as does a battery.
This BRIGE project proposes a new method of providing such adaptability through
control of the nonlinear stiffness function of duffing oscillators. The research
seeks to address the following questions: under what circumstances is closed
loop control beneficial, and under what circumstances will active tuning of a
nonlinear harvester outperform active tuning of a linear harvester?
Understanding the conditions under which closed loop control can provide a net
increase in power and the relationship between the characteristics of input
vibrations and the optimal type of structure to control will lay the groundwork
for efficient adaptable vibration energy harvesters. The models and data
generated by this research will lead to further work on optimal control
techniques for nonlinear harvesters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The
field of energy harvesting for wireless sensors is accessible to and has wide
appeal across age groups and levels of technological sophistication. Leveraging
that interest, this project will integrate two outreach activities with the
express goal of broadening participation and interest in engineering careers
among high school aged female students. The College of Engineering sponsors an
annual summer camp designed to expose young women to a variety of engineering
careers with hands-on experiential learning. A module will be developed for use
in this camp in which students design, build, and test a simple piezoelectric
accelerometer and energy harvester. The second activity is to sponsor
interactive kinetic energy harvesting sculpture design projects for both
undergraduate students and students at a local high school. During the first
year of this grant, the principle investigator will supervise the sculpture
project as part of the senior design course, and the following year he will
sponsor the project at a local high school as a joint engineering / art class
project. The sculpture design has the potential to engage artistically minded
students who may not otherwise be interested in careers in engineering and
science.