* 1342183
* BRIGE: Understanding the generalization of treadmill-assisted motor learning for the rehabilitation of gait after stroke
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2016
* Gelsy Torres-Oviedo, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 12/31/2016
* USD 175,000.00

Technical description:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major issue in rehabilitation
robotics is the fact that motor learning acquired on devices like robots and
treadmills is highly specific and does not improve patients? movements during
?real life? situations. How to manipulate the generalization of robotic-assisted
motor learning? This is an interesting challenge for engineers and an important
question for clinicians. To understand the poor transfer of robotic-assisted
motor learning to natural movements the PI proposes to investigate what the
device changes and how to manipulate it. This will be done though a novel
application of factorization analyses that are conventionally used for image
processing. The PI specifically proposes to quantify changes in muscle activity
post-stroke when subjects learn a new walking pattern on a split-belt treadmill
(research objective 1). This treadmill has two belts that can move at different
speeds to create novel environmental conditions and induced motor learning.
Then, the PI will identify what aspects of the muscle activation patterns
learned on the split-belt treadmill generalize to natural walking, and whether
the acquisition phase on the split-belt treadmill can be manipulated to increase
the generalization effects (research objective 2). Anticipated results will
advance the current knowledge of mechanisms available to post-stroke subjects
for changing their aberrant muscle activity and the generalization of those
changes to natural walking. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader significance and
importance:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential benefit of this proposal is to
advance our knowledge of the ?rules? for motor adaptation and generalization in
the intact and post-stroke human motor system. This should allow us to
understand how to use technology to train individuals, and ultimately
rehabilitate their walking and movement control in general. The risks to the
subjects participating in the proposed studies are minimal, and the benefit to
society could be substantial. According to the Center for Disease Control and
Prevention there are nearly 650,000 post-stroke survivors every year, making
stroke the leading cause for long-term disability in the United States. This
proposal has the potential to help develop effective and efficient
rehabilitation treatments for post-stroke survivors. This would directly benefit
patients by improving their movements and reducing their medical care costs,
which impose a substantial economic burden to the individuals and society.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broadening participation of underrepresented groups in
engineering:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Importantly, the PI will use the research
objectives in this proposal as means to expose students from underrepresented
groups in engineering to solve real rehabilitation needs (educational objective
1), engage them in research that applies engineering tools to inform the field
of physical rehabilitation (educational objective 2), and prepare them to
continue graduate education (educational objective 3). These educational
objectives will be fulfilled through the Pre-PhD Research Experience at Pitt
(PREP) program developed by the PI. To implement her program the PI will
recruit, mentor, and prepare undergraduate students from Hispanic serving
Universities to pursue advanced degrees. She will also incorporate her research
activities with the program INVESTING NOW, which prepares high schools students
(89% from minority groups and 47% females) mostly from underrepresented groups
in engineering to pursue engineering degrees. In sum, the PI?s educational
objectives will prepare students from underrepresented groups in engineering to
pursue advanced degrees, which will in turn redefine the boundaries of education
and professional development available to underrepresented groups in science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has been funded through the
Broadening Participation Research Initiation Grants in Engineering solicitation,
which is part of the Broadening Participation in Engineering Program of the
Engineering Education and Centers Division.