* 1342969
* Belmont Forum-G8 Initiative Collaborative Research: METROPOLE: An Integrated Framework to Analyze Local Decision Making and Adaptive Capacity to Large-Scale Environmental Change
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Kalanithy Vairavamoorthy, University of South Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Uhle
* 08/31/2018
* USD 693,406.00

This award provides support to U.S. researchers participating in a project
competitively selected by a 13-country initiative on global change research
through the Belmont Forum and the G8 countries Heads of Research Councils. The
Belmont Forum is a high level group of the world?s major and emerging funders of
global environmental change research and international science councils. It aims
to accelerate delivery of the international environmental research most urgently
needed to remove critical barriers to sustainability by aligning and mobilizing
international resources. The G8 Heads of Research Councils developed a funding
framework to support multilateral research projects that address global
challenges in ways that are beyond the capacity of national or bilateral
activities. Each partner country provides funding for their researchers within a
consortium to alleviate the need for funds to cross international borders. This
approach facilitates effective leveraging of national resources to support
excellent research on topics of global relevance best tackled through a
multinational approach, recognizing that global challenges need global
solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Working together in an inaugural call of the
International Opportunities Fund, the Belmont Forum and G8HORCs have provided
support for research projects that seek to deliver knowledge needed for action
to mitigate and adapt to detrimental environmental change and extreme hazardous
events that relate to either Freshwater Security or Coastal Vulnerability. This
award provides support for the U.S. researchers to cooperate in consortia that
consist of partners from at least three of the participating countries and that
bring together natural scientists, social scientists and research users (e.g.,
policy makers, regulators, NGOs, communities and industry).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports research activities that will develop
an integrated framework to assess the human dimensions of climate change impacts
in coastal communities in the United States, the United Kingdom, and Brazil.
Often, scientific research and development of policy options focus primarily on
technical or managerial concerns. Social dynamics and values as well as cultural
and institutional structures are often not directly incorporated and addressed
when considering coastal adaptation challenges and sustainability. This project
will work directly with stakeholders and policymakers to co-produce data and
adaptation options when assessing risk vulnerability. Downscaled climate
forecasts and state-of-the-art visualization tools will be used to illustrate
potential impacts on infrastructure, health, economic risk, adaption options,
and cost/benefit analyses. Social research will use a series of surveys, models
and interviews to understand values, beliefs, tradeoffs, and adaptive capacity.
This work will contribute toward understanding how visualization technologies,
engagement processes, and risk assessment models can support decision making
processes and policy actions and toward addressing the complex issue of how
communities of different cultural backgrounds respond to risk.