* 1342318
* BRIGE: Surface-Normal Plasmonic Modulator for Three-Dimensional Board-to-Board and Chip-to-Chip Optical Interconnects
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Alan Wang, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2016
* USD 174,612.00

ECCS - 1342318 &lt;br/&gt;Wang, Alan X. &lt;br/&gt;Oregon State
University&lt;br/&gt;BRIGE: Surface-Normal Plasmonic Modulator for Three-
Dimensional Board-to-Board and Chip-to-Chip Optical Interconnects
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The
objective of this BRIGE proposal is to investigate a surface-normal plasmonic
modulator structure with ultra-high energy efficiency and modulation bandwidth
for three-dimensional optical interconnects based on sub-wavelength metallic
photonic crystals. In recent years, the demand of ultrahigh-speed optical
modulation above 100G bit/sec is becoming increasingly imperative as the
bottleneck of electric interconnects has significantly constrained the
performance of communication and computer systems. Today's research in optical
interconnects focuses on planar-lightwave-circuit devices integrated with
printed circuit boards and microprocessor chips, which is difficult to provide
three-dimensional optical links. This BRIGE proposal explores a surface-normal
plasmonic modulator with &lt;10 femto-joule/bit energy efficiency and &gt;100G
bit/sec modulation speed for three-dimensional board-to-board and chip-to-chip
optical interconnects. Compared with existing surface plasmon waveguide photonic
devices that have high metallic absorption, the proposed surface-normal
architecture efficiently reduces the total optical loss below 3-dB with stable
and convenient couplings to single-mode fibers and surface-emitting laser
diodes. Elucidative exploration and proof-of-concept demonstration of such
innovative plasmonic modulators will lay a solid foundation for further system
integration with electronic circuit and communication systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The proposed research promises to impact
academia, industry, and society at large by providing an innovative surface-
normal plasmonic modulator structure for out-of-plane optical interconnects. If
successful, it can accelerate the frontline research of both plasmonic photonic
devices and optical interconnects. This unique plasmonic device promises to
transcend existing high-speed electro-optic modulation technologies for optical
communication, signal processing, optical sensing and nonlinear optics. The
synergy of this research and education will benefit graduate, undergraduate and
K-12 students, and broaden the participation of women and under-represented
minorities at Oregon State University through the programs of Summer Experience
in Science and Engineering for Youth. This research also aims at promoting broad
participation of under-represented students in industrial partnerships through
short-term visits, summer internships, and research collaboration with local
companies such as Hewlett-Packard and Voxtel. Exposure of students with a
diverse background to cutting edge research will enrich their research
experiences, cultivate their creativity, and train their hands-on skills, which
will contribute to strengthening the quality of the U.S. workforce in the
future.