* 1342019
* Petrographic, ICP-MS, and LA-ICP-MS Sourcing of Quartzite Sources, Gunnison Basin, Colorado
* SBE,BCS
* 11/20/2012,07/31/2013
* Bonnie Pitblado, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2013
* USD 32,318.00

With National Science Foundation support, Drs. Bonnie Pitblado and Carol Dehler
will conduct experiments to determine the extent to which petrographic
(microscopic) and geochemical methods can be used to characterize the unique
"fingerprints" of quartzite sources in the Gunnison Basin, southwest Colorado.
Neither archaeologists nor geologists have previously developed methods for
sourcing quartzite, yet this rock type is the most ubiquitous in the world, and
many prehistoric people throughout time preferred to use it to manufacture their
projectile points, scrapers, and other chipped stone
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will expand pilot sourcing studies
conducted by Pitblado and Dehler in 2005 - 2006, which suggested that contrary
to conventional wisdom, distinct sources of quartzite can be discriminated from
one another both on the basis of microscopic characteristics and chemical
composition. The NSF-supported research will (a) use a geoarchaeological model
to locate and sample a dozen different quartzite formations and numerous
secondary gravel deposits of quartzites in the Gunnison Basin; (b) confirm the
best method(s) for differntiating among the sources; and (c) profile
archaeological occurrences of quartzite at the 8,000 year-old Chance Gulch site,
also in the Gunnison Basin, to determine their likeliest quarry sources on the
landscape. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Component "c" of the research will allow the
researchers to reconstruct the landscape use of some of the most ancient hunter-
gatherers in the Rocky Mountains. This is important because both ecological
theory and what little archaeologically derived data exist suggest that early
hunter-gatherers in the Rockies, in stark contrast to better-known regions like
the Great Plains, followed a geographically restricted annual round. Confirming
or rejecting this suggestion will contribute to archaeologists' understanding of
the peopling of North America, in all the continent's ecological
variability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Utah State University co-PIs Bonnie Pitblado,
a Paleoindian archaeologist, and Carol Dehler, a geologist, will collaborate in
the research with geochemical sourcing specialist Hector Neff (University of
California, Long Beach), geochemist Stephen Nelson (Brigham Young University),
and statistician Dennis Eggett (also of Brigham Young University). Senior
personnel bring to the undertaking a wide range of areas of expertise and
together will maximize the chances for successfully completing all components of
the three-year project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The most important intellectual
contributions of the research lie in the realms of both method and theory.
Methodologically, the project will refine currently non-existent techniques for
fingerprinting quartzite"a contribution that will be valued by earth scientists
aiming to solve a host of research problems. Theoretically, the research will
help refine archaeological understanding of the colonization of the Rockies and
North America in general. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In terms of broader impacts, the
research program will train undergraduate university students both in the field
and in the laboratory. About twenty students will help collect the quartzite
samples and another four or five will be trained to conduct petrographic
analyses of the samples. As well, the co-PIs will continue a tradition of
recruiting Northern, Southern and Ute Mountain Ute high school students to
participate in the fieldwork. This will allow the students to learn about the
life ways of their Rocky Mountain hunter-gatherer predecessors; to earn college
and high school credits; and to gain exposure to a university atmosphere ideally
resulting in their later matriculation to college.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;