* 1342469
* RAPID: Investigation of the Blast Loading for the Fertilizer Plant Explosion at West, Texas
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Zhenhua Huang, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Kishor Mehta
* 05/31/2014
* USD 10,000.00

A severe explosion in a fertilizer plant occurred in the small town of West,
Texas on April 17, 2013. The explosion devastated the populated neighborhood
surrounding the plant. About 150 buildings were damaged or destroyed as a result
of this explosion. Most of the buildings were single family residences; though
two schools, a two-story apartment building, and a nursing home building were
part of the buildings that sustained severe damage. This sudden occurrence of
industrial explosion provides an opportunity to document performance of
buildings to blast loading.

The documentation effort will obtain on-site technical data of damage,
construction, and materials of buildings and variation of damage from the
epicenter of the blast. The data will include on-site, aerial and satellite
photographs and observations. In addition, current blast loading requirements
will be reviewed and recorded for comparison with collected data. The field data
will be collected before the damaged area is cleaned and the debris is removed.
These data will be analyzed and organized for later use by the investigator to
understand blast loads and response of buildings. The investigator plans to
prepare a poster for a science museum in Dallas and make presentation at a
professional meeting.