* 1342408
* BRIGE: Hagfish Defense Gel and the Rheology Zoo
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2013,10/31/2016
* Randy Ewoldt, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 10/31/2016
* USD 175,000.00

Background:

Hagfish make a unique material with remarkable properties. When provoked or
attacked, the animal releases a small volume of biopolymer/biofilament material
that unfolds, assembles, and expands in water by a factor of 10,000. The
resulting gel is cohesive, forming a clogging network used for defense. If
analogous engineering materials could be developed to mimic this behavior,
numerous practical applications could result, as noted in the Broader
Significance and Impact section of this abstract.

Technical description of the project:

The research objective of this proposal to understand the structure-property
mechanics of hagfish defense gel and to articulate this understanding in a way
that will enable future work to design bioinspired soft materials with novel
functionality. Our approach is to develop rheological measurement techniques for
ultra-soft materials generally, pushing the experimental limits of current
rheometers by using techniques such as inertio-elastic ringing for linear and
nonlinear rheology. With these techniques we will measure the rheology of
various hagfish gel composite systems with varying mass fractions and ratios of
mucin and thread components, including those not found in nature. The
mathematical modeling approach will start with transient network theory, based
on strain-stiffening nonlinear elastic elements connected with reversible
crosslinks that weaken under stress and provide stress-softening. We will then
test these structure-property hypotheses by comparing with experiment, refining,
and iterating the mathematical models. The structure-property relationships
developed here will be applicable beyond hagfish gel, and generically include
other physical gels based on polymeric and/or fibrous components. This would
include keratin filament networks, collagen networks, mucin gel networks, and
gluten networks, which have all displayed a similar nonlinear rheological
behavior to that observed with the hagfish gel.

Broader Significance and Importance:

Hagfish defense gel starts as a small volume of material which then undergoes
dramatic volumetric expansion, producing an ultra-dilute, super-elastic gel that
blocks the flow of liquid through it. This behavior is unmatched by current
engineering materials. The understanding developed by the research here could
therefore bring about radical changes in materials available for applications
including but not limited to (i) Oil-drilling safeguards, to plug or slow oil
leaks with a small amount of material that is pre-deposited in the system or
delivered to the system as needed; (ii) Defense, to tangle or clog engine
intakes, respiratory air intakes, or water-cooling intakes by delivering a small
packet of material with big expansion at destination; (iii) Cell cultures, to
provide a sparse network of fibrous thread elements which may offer a unique
architecture and lengthscale for tissue scaffolds and 3D cell cultures,
complementing smaller lengthscale and denser collagen fiber scaffolds; (iv)
Manufacturing non-woven materials with new paradigms of unraveling threads,
complementing melt blowing, melt spinning, and electro-spinning processes. The
hagfish gel material is unique, yet its components are of general interest,
since they are composed of the building blocks of many other soft biological
materials.

Broadening Participation of Underrepresented Groups in Engineering:

The research will be integrated into the educational and outreach objective,
which is to encourage diversity and broad participation of underrepresented
groups in engineering. This will be achieved through the development of The
Rheology Zoo, a hands-on curated library of rheologically interesting materials
that will serve as a platform for outreach, engagement, and undergraduate
research opportunities. Students will, for the first time, see the remarkable
behavior of seemingly simple materials, see how that behavior is so important in
their daily lives, and be encouraged to think creatively about new engineering
opportunities for soft materials. The Zoo will be a venue for part of a six-week
summer program to help incoming students transition to college, including a
large number of students from underrepresented groups. Students will study
interesting viscoelastic materials from The Zoo, make simple measurements, and
present their work to pre-college students outside the university to further
broaden exposure and recruitment to engineering. Student projects will be
integrated into The Zoo, providing a self-sustaining mechanism for the
collection beyond the funding life of this proposal.

This research has been funded through the Broadening Participation Research
Initiation Grants in Engineering solicitation, which is part of the Broadening
Participation in Engineering Program of the Engineering Education and Centers
Division.