* 1343130
* EarthCube domain end-user workshop:   Bringing Geochronology into the EarthCube framework
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2014
* Shanan Peters, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 07/31/2014
* USD 100,000.00

1343130 &lt;br/&gt;Singer&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant supports a GEO
EarthCube topical workshop with a focus on cyberinfrastructure issues germane to
geological dating techniques and their digital publication. The workshop seeks
to engage approximately 70 geochronologists and geoscientists with the intent
to: 1) develop a set of unifying requirements for the organization of
geochronology data; and 2) explore methods for developing and sustaining an
interactive community of domain and cyber-scientists to pursue next-generation
solutions to the identified challenges. The workshop will include invited talks
followed by multiple breakout groups to discuss and produce draft documents
focused on: 1) specific scientific challenges and opportunities in Geochronology
over the next 5-15 years; 2) identification of the data and cyber-infrastructure
obstacles to meeting those challenges; 3) a compilation of known community data
and modeling resources; 4) description of data and cyber-capabilities required
to meet challenges; and 5) development of ideas for at least two ?proof-of-
concept? projects or test cases for scientifically transformative CI
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nothing is more fundamental to understanding
Earth history and processes than geochronology and the expense incurred in
producing robust and high resolution dates implores NSF to help find a modern
digital solution(s) for maintaining the integrity of these data sets and
promoting access as broadly as possible in support of the advancement of the
geosciences. This workshop will help to address many of the issues that continue
to hamper geochonological data curation, digital publication and community
access.