* 1343482
* EAGER: Collaborative: A Multi-Disciplinary Framework for Modeling Spatial, Temporal and Social Dynamics of Cyber Criminals
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2015
* Thomas Holt, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 08/31/2015
* USD 58,000.00

This project designs and deploys a multi-disciplinary framework to model
spatial, temporal and social dynamics of cyber criminals. The framework fuses
theories in both computer science and criminology. Specifically, project
objectives are a) Apply and validate existing theories in the realm of general
criminology (in particular Akers? social learning theory and Gottfredson and
Hirschi?s general theory of crime) to study cyber crimes; b) Derive novel
Internet usage features as fingerprints for cyber crimes; c) Design
classification algorithms (based on multi-fractal analysis and petri-net
designs) to subsequently model multiple dynamics of cyber criminals by
integrating theoretical and practical outcomes from the above two objectives;
and d) Extensively test and validate project outcomes. The core novelty of this
project is in using real Internet data from subjects (initially a cyber savvy
college sample) that is collected continuously, unobtrusively, while still
preserving a high degree of privacy.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Outcomes
of this project will have far reaching impacts. It lays a foundation for fusing
expertise in social sciences (specifically criminology) and cyber security, as a
result of which existing theories in general criminology can be empirically
tested for practical validity in studying cyber crimes. The identification of
unique Internet fingerprints associating with cyber crimes will provide new
insights into human centered aspects of cyber crimes, which is lacking today.
The classification algorithms designed will provide cyber defenders with new
tools to combat cyber crimes from multiple perspectives including prevention,
detection, forensic investigations and prosecution.