* 1343324
* EARS: Title: Energy-Efficient Millimeter-wave Communication via Adaptation and Reconfiguration
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2013,07/31/2018
* Jeyanandh Paramesh, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 07/31/2018
* USD 808,000.00

Energy-Efficient mm-wave Communication via Adaptation and Reconfiguration
&lt;br/&gt;Jeyanandh Paramesh and Pulkit Grover,
CMU&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: In 2013, the number of
interconnected devices exceeded the number of human beings on the planet, and
the number continues to grow at a rapid pace. Applications running on these
devices demand ever increasing data rates, the devices are increasingly
wireless, and operate in dynamic, short-distance environments. To enable fast,
reliable, and consistent access to radio spectrum, two approaches are being
pursued: spectrum-sharing /cognitive radio and networks augmented with short-
range millimeter-wave links. The energy consumption of mobile devices has become
a bottleneck, and the energy overhead of new spectrum access approaches remains
unclear. Today's systems are designed with fixed parameters that enable them to
work in worst-case environments. With energy-minimization as our goal, we
propose to design, analyze, and prototype system components that are able to
respond and adapt dynamically to the environment in order to operate at minimal
system-level energy in changing environments. These designs rely on hardware
(e.g RF/mixed-signal circuits and sub-systems such as beamformers,), algorithms
(e.g. equalization, decoding), and communication strategy (e.g. the error-
correcting code) that are adaptable and reconfigurable in compatible ways so
that they minimize system-level energy. Rigorous modeling, testing, and
implementation as well as strategy design and comparison with fundamental limits
on system-level power consumption will be performed.&lt;br/&gt;We will take a
cross-disciplinary approach to investigate system-level energy minimization of
mmW communication systems. To adapt to variability in the communication
environment, we will design and implement adaptive and reconfigurable systems.
By using fundamental limits on system performance, we will develop insights and
algorithms that approach these limits. The designed systems will be used to
obtain models and parameters for system-level energy-minimization which will in
turn will help understand the benefits of adaptation and reconfigurability. The
research outcomes will impact: second generation mmW networks in the 60 GHz
band, future mmW cellular systems, data-intensive cyber-physical systems,
wireless BigData processing systems etc. &lt;br/&gt;The Broader Impacts include:
(i) training of new scientists with expertise in cross-disciplinary research;
(ii) development of new courses "Advanced Communication ICs" and "The Science of
Information" by synthesis of concepts in coding theory and circuits; (iii)
development of course projects for undergraduate circuits classes based on
implementation of error-correcting codes and equalizers; (iii) development of
theoretical tools for system design and analysis that go beyond our exemplar
applications, such as wired Ethernet communication; (iv) training undergraduate
students in practical, theoretical, and cross-disciplinary research through
internships; and (iv) focus on inclusion of under-represented minorities and
women in this research.