* 1343447
* AIR Option 1: Technology Translation -  Computationally Designed Shrinkage Reducing Admixtures for Concrete
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2013,02/29/2016
* Joseph Biernacki, Tennessee Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Barbara H. Kenny
* 02/29/2016
* USD 173,791.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating shrinkage
reducing admixture formulations to fill technology gaps in the construction
industry wherein more durable concrete is needed for repair and maintenance and
construction of new infrastructure. The translated technology has the following
unique features: rapid identification of new target compounds with high activity
for reducing shrinkage and associated cracking of concrete that provides
exemplary cost savings in the development stage as well as the ability to
identify new and non-intuitive molecular structures for a given application with
improved performance when compared to the leading competing technology in this
market space. The project accomplishes this goal by applying computer aided
molecular design (CAMD) technology resulting in the identification of new
compounds with improved characteristics for use as shrinkage reducing admixtures
in concrete; the efficacy of which will be demonstrated on a prototype-scale
concrete slab. The partnership engages Tennessee Technological University (TTU),
the University of Akron (UA) and technology consultant Mr. Hugh Cameron to
provide guidance in the concrete construction materials industry and other
aspects related to market development, licensing, business planning and
financing as they pertain to the potential to translate the new technology along
a path that may result in a competitive commercial reality. The potential
economic impact is expected to be a reasonable market share of the existing
shrinkage reducing admixture sales in the next five years, which will contribute
to the U.S. competitiveness in the concrete admixture market space. The societal
impact, long term, will be to improve the performance of concrete infrastructure
and thereby save potentially billions of future dollars in lost time and energy
consumption due to avoided early and premature repair and maintenance.