* 1343773
* EAGER:   Coordination of respiratory gene transcription and respiration in cultivated marine bacteria
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2016
* Matthew Cottrell, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 12/31/2016
* USD 198,889.00

Heterotrophic bacteria account for about half of the respiration in the oceans
and they are the main consumers of dissolved organic materials, converting
approximately 80% of assimilated organic carbon to carbon dioxide. Detailed
examinations of the structure of microbial communities reveal that a highly
diverse community of microorganisms must be responsible for the conversion of
organic materials in the oceans. Recent studies suggest that most of growth-
related activity is associated with a rather small number of abundant bacteria
in the oceans. It is unclear, however, if the same observation applies to
respiration, the dominant fate of organic carbon in the oceans. We currently
lack tools for assessing respiration by specific microbes and for linking
specific taxa with their contribution to carbon conversion and to carbon
cycling. The aim of this project is to develop a tool for understanding the
contribution of bacterial groups to bacterial respiration. The proposed work
will determine the relationship between transcription levels of oxidative
phosphorylation genes and respiration rates in cultivated marine bacteria. The
culture-based work is a necessary prerequisite to develop a metatranscriptomic
tool for addressing ecological questions about the role of bacterial diversity
in ocean carbon cycling. The project will include chemostat and batch culture
studies with pure cultures and an incubation experiment with a naturally
community of estuarine bacteria. Laboratory experiments will examine important
heterotrophic bacteria in the oceans such as Pelagibacter ubique of the SAR11
clade and Ruegeria pomeroyi of the Roseobacter clade. Existing genome sequences
will be analyzed to address the phylogenetic resolving power of respiration
genes. The overarching goal of this proposal is to determine the relationship
between abundances of respiration gene transcripts and respiration rates for
bacterial taxa defined at different phylogenetic
distances.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will involve an undergraduate in a
summer research project. Laboratory tours are open to the public (about 1000
visitors per year), and all laboratories at the Lewes campus are involved in
Coast Day, an annual open house that attracts about 10,000 visitors. The results
of these studies will also be submitted to Limnology and Oceanography E-Lectures
(www.aslo.org/lectures). This electronic journal provides a platform to make
results of this project available to the wider academic community, including
undergraduate teaching institutions.