* 1343541
* I-Corps:  Improvements in III-Nitride Materials and Devices through Superatmospheric Epitaxy
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2015
* Edward Stokes, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* lydia mcclure
* 12/31/2015
* USD 50,000.00

The purpose of the project is to further develop a technology and methodology in
"high pressure" metal organic chemical vapor deposition (HP-MOCVD). This
involves a method and technology for high-pressure epitaxial growth of
semiconductor crystalline epitaxial layers. The HP-MOCVD reactor was designed
with computational fluid dynamics to minimize parasitic gas phase reactions and
resulting device-killing particulates. The proposed effort will facilitate
availability of new high quality HP-MOCVD semiconductor materials that have
applications in optoelectronic devices, in particular, the "deep green" light
emitting diodes (LEDs). These LEDs have emission wavelengths near the peak of
human eye response and may allow for full color control in future generations of
solid state lighting

If successfully developed this project may enable the transition of new HP-MOCVD
technology more rapidly into widespread use, accelerating availability of
advanced materials and devices to manufacturers and the general population. The
HP-MOCVD technology may lead to a fabrication process of III-nitride materials
with fewer numbers of crystalline defects. III-nitride materials are used for a
wide variety of electronic and optoelectronic devices including LEDs, laser
diodes, and high mobility heterostructure field - effect transistors for high-
frequency applications and Schottky diodes with high-breakdown field for power
electronics. Devices developed using this technology also have the potential to
form more energy-efficient lighting and electric power management.