* 1343651
* US-Africa Collaborative Research Network in Mathematical Sciences
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2019
* Peter Johnson, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 08/31/2019
* USD 415,000.00

The US-Africa Collaborative Research Network consists of over 40 senior research
faculty from US, Sub-Saharan Africa, Canada, and Europe forming 4 research teams
in Pure Mathematics (Algebra and Geometry, Analysis and Topology, Coding Theory
and Information Theory, and Graph Theory) and 3 research teams in Applied
Mathematics (Epidemiological Modeling, Numerical Approximation of Solutions of
Partial Differential Equations, and Mathematics of Finance and Statistics). Each
team has at least 4 senior research faculty and at least 4 undergraduate and
graduate students. Student participants are recruited from across the US and
Sub-Saharan Africa. The primary goal of the network is to produce, by the end of
the project period, (a) at least 8 high quality new PhDs in the US and a similar
number in Sub-Saharan Africa, (b) numerous high quality joint research
publications, and (c) several prominent US-Africa research partnerships
consisting of researchers from diverse backgrounds; and thus have long lasting
impact on mathematical sciences research collaboration and human infrastructure
in the US and Sub-Saharan Africa.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research problems
being studied have important applications in industry and government as well as
in scientific research. In particular, coding theory, graph theory, and number
theoretic problems being studied have applications in security, network
coverage, surveillance, and transportation, while algebra, geometry, and
analysis problems have applications to mathematical biology, differential
equations, finance, and statistics. In turn, problems in mathematical biology
and differential equations have applications in the spread of contagious
diseases, tumor growth and cell membrane deformation, and biodiversity; and
problems in finance and statistics will provide a better understanding of the
use of financial mathematical models in developing nations. This award is
jointly supported by the Division of Mathematical Sciences and the Office of
Multidisicplinary Activities within the Directorate of Mathematical and Physical
Sciences.