* 1343258
* EAGER: Collaborative: Winning the Internet Lottery: Growing Income Inequality, Social Class,  and Susceptibility to Cybercrime
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2015
* Raheem Beyah, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 08/31/2015
* USD 107,413.00

As the digital divide closes and more groups have access to the Internet,
cybersafety is an increasingly relevant issue. With the connectivity provided by
the Internet comes an inherent interdependency between devices connected to the
Internet. Compromised devices are used in various forms of cybercrime (e.g.,
spam campaigns) that can affect the Internet as a whole. Thus, to increase
cybersecurity, it is important to understand the ways and extent to which
certain groups may be more susceptible to Internet crime. Previous studies have
focused on how factors such as age, gender, occupation, and level of STEM
background affect one?s susceptibility to Internet crime (i.e., phishing
attacks), however little work has focused on how social class factors into
Internet crime susceptibility. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on
understanding new sociological factors that may render particular groups more or
less likely to be affected by cybercrime (in particular, phishing attacks that
highlight opportunities for economic advancement). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
expected results from this project impact both the fields of cybersecurity and
sociology. From a cybersecurity perspective, understanding whether particular
demographics are disproportionately affected by online attacks can lead to: 1)
efforts for prevention (e.g., Internet Service Providers that offer government
subsidized broadband access can also provide cybersafety training); and 2) the
identification of the spawning point of a cybercrime ecosystem, which if caught
and addressed early, can make cyberspace at large more secure. Sociologically
speaking, attention to whether social class influences susceptibility to
cybercrime helps to highlight some of the previously understudied consequences
of economic inequality.