* 1343466
* Building STEM capacity through science center activity in Sri Lanka
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2014
* Walter Staveloz, Association of Science-Technology Centers
* Standard Grant
* Paul Jennings
* 07/31/2014
* USD 49,610.00

This grant supports a workshop focused on catalyzing STEM education R &amp; D in
Sri Lanka and in the U.S. through networking and international collaboration.
The workshop is a collaboration of the US Association of Science-Technology
Centers (ASTC) and the National Science Foundation of Sri Lanka. Its focus is
for ASTC to share its wealth of expertise with Sri Lanka in the creation of a
science center in Colombo that will engage its people in an accessible science-
learning environment and provide its youth with grounding in the scientific
concepts and practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The three day workshop to be held
in Colombo, Sri Lanka, will engage these experts in the discussion and co-
creation of a plan for a science center to be built in Sri Lanka, and to
consider how to develop an ongoing relationship between informal STEM educators
in the US and STEM educators in Sri Lanka. The workshop will cover subjects
critical to the development of an effective and successful science center,
including:&lt;br/&gt; 1 - Inquiry-based learning and the development of
effective exhibits and programs&lt;br/&gt; 2 - Evaluation tools and
techniques&lt;br/&gt; 3 - Local scientific knowledge and expertise that can
influence planning and programing &lt;br/&gt; 4 - Developing effective outreach
programs&lt;br/&gt; 5 - Public Engagement with science and society
issues&lt;br/&gt; 6 - Managing a science center&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While using
the development of the science center as a focus for the meeting, the workshop
will also initiate discussions between STEM educators in the South Asia region
and the United States, with the goal of developing a long-term relationship
between STEM educators in the South Asia region and the United States.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One or more of the US speakers and the invited US doctoral
student will explore and identify new research questions on STEM education and
the role of science centers as a new model for improving human resource
capacities in STEM in developing countries. The workshop outcome should also
advance future international collaborations and inform efforts to serve
immigrant populations from South Asia in the US.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
is designated as a Global Venture Fund Award and is being co-funded by NSF's
Office of International Science and Engineering.