* 1343461
* AIR Option 1: Tech Translation -  Ultrananocrystalline Diamond Coating Tech for Integrated Electrode-Membrane-Inner Wall Case Coating for Long Life Commercial Li-Sulfur Battery
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2013,06/30/2015
* Yves Chabal, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Barbara H. Kenny
* 06/30/2015
* USD 150,000.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating the science
and technology of unique multifunctional ultrananocrystalline diamond (UNCD)
film (coating) technology into superior energy storage cells and solutions that
fill the performance, life-cycle, and production readiness gap evident in
conventional battery applications. The collective goal is to produce a
commercially viable path to the next generation of Li-ion batteries (LIB) and a
new generation of thermal Li-Sulfur (TLS) batteries. The translated science and
technology of UNCD-based LIB and TLS have the following unique features: i) high
performance anodes based on electrically conductive UNCD-coated metal anodes to
increase the battery lifetime by at least 10x with respect to current
technologies, ii) UNCD-based membranes for Li+ ions transport with at least 10x
higher resistance to battery environmental and chemical attacks than for current
batteries, and iii) UNCD films as extremely chemically resistant coatings for
the battery inner walls case to substantially lower the cost, extend cells'
life-cycle, and improve the economic viability of the end product. Currently,
much more expensive metals would be required to survive the targeted x10 longer
life time (given exposure to the harsh environment of the LIB and TLS
batteries). This PFI AIR project intends to deliver a TLS battery that has a
potential volumetric energy density of 2,600 Wh/l with a theoretical specific
energy density of 2,500 Wh/kg, which is at least x10 superior performance to
current battery technologies. The state-of-the-art for cathodes and anodes (two
critical components) for this couple currently features a theoretical volumetric
energy density of 2,125 Wh/l and a theoretical specific energy density of 597
Wh/kg. The resulting TLS approach will provide 22% improvement in volumetric
energy density and ~400% improvement in specific energy density over existing
secondary LIB technologies, when compared to the leading competing LIB
science/technology from manufacturers in this market space. &lt;br/&gt;The
project accomplishes its objectives by developing: i) boron-doped UNCD (B-UNCD)
and nitrogen-grain boundary incorporated (N-UNCD) coated metallic electrodes
(e.g, tungsten (W), titanium (Ti), or W-coated Cu) to determine which is the
best anode material to insert in the new generation of LIB and TLS batteries,
ii) the best approach between a patented chemical etching processes from
Advanced Diamond Technologies (ADT) and UNCD-coated Si-based or anodic aluminum
oxide (AAO) membranes used as templates to produce 10x more chemically robust
UNCD-based membranes than current battery membranes, and iii) chemically
resistant UNCD coating for the inner walls of the battery metal case to make it
possible to use a less expensive metal material as opposed to currently used
molybdenum that is both expensive and chemically less resistant. A prototype
coin-type battery will be demonstrated as a proof-of-concept of the novel UNCD-
based LIB and TLS battery technologies for defibrillators/pacemakers, cell
phones, and computers. The new UNCD-based battery technology will be scalable to
produce larger batteries for larger systems such as car batteries.
&lt;br/&gt;The partnership engages researchers from the University of Texas at
Dallas (Materials Science and Engineering Department), who will provide N-UNCD
coatings for the battery anodes and UNCD-coated membranes based on the Si and
AAO templates. The industrial and commercialization partner is Advanced Diamond
Technologies (ADT), a company currently expanding the commercial application of
thin smooth diamond. ADT will provide the expertise for developing the B-UNCD
films as alternative electrically conductive coatings for battery anodes, as
described above. In addition, ADT will provide expertise on customer
identification, engagement and commercialization, as well as manage production
of the diamond coated battery components (pre-integration) and public
introduction of the first LIB/TLS batteries in the market. The infrastructure is
already in place in ADT facilities to translate the UNCD coating
science/technology along a path that will result in a competitive commercial
reality for a new generation of LIB and TLS batteries with potentially 10x
better performance than current batteries. &lt;br/&gt;The potential economic
impact includes domestic production of high energy density cells expected to
become viable in the next five years, and will re-engage the US as a competitive
fixture in the batteries market space with key, targeted market segments in
medical devices/systems, mobile communication devices, computers and many other
systems requiring long life low cost batteries. The societal impact, long term,
will be in the form of i) at least 10x smaller/longer life for medical implants
(i.e., defibrillators/pacemakers), which will impact positively the quality of
life of people requiring these devices, and ii) longer life/smaller batteries to
power more efficient cell phones, portable computers, and other electronic
devices.