* 1343720
* INSPIRE Track 1: The Mathematics of Balance in Mechanical Systems with Impacts, Unilateral Constraints, Underactuation and Hyper-sensing: Application to Agile bipedal Locomotion
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Jessy Grizzle, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2017
* USD 800,000.00

This INSPIRE award is partially funded by Energy,Power and Adaptive Systems
Program in the Division of Electrical, Communications and Cyber Systems in the
Directorate For Engineering, Control Systems Program in the Division of Civil,
Mechanical, and Manufacturing Innovations, in the Directorate for Engineering,
Robust Intelligence Program in the Division of Information and Intelligent
Systems in the Directorate for Computer and Information Science and Engineering,
Applied Mathematics Program in the Division of Mathematical Sciences in the
Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While
we are witnessing a veritable revolution in bipedal robot construction
technology, the science of balance, as embodied in the feedback control
algorithms that allow these robots to stand, walk, and step over obstacles is
still in its infancy. Current feedback algorithms demand laborious, time
consuming trial-and-error tuning specific to each machine and each gait. If
bipedal robots are ever to fulfill their potential roles from assisting the
elderly or infirm in their homes to disaster and rescue response, their control
software development process must be founded on better science.&lt;br/&gt;
Intellectual Merit: The project draws upon mechanics, MEMS devices, mathematics,
and feedback systems to make a sea change in the practice of modeling and
feedback control design in bipedal robots. The work seeks to advance scientific
understanding of legged locomotion so that performance objectives can be tested
mathematically for feasibility on reliable models and principled methods exist
for model-based feedback controller design. The theoretical results of the
project are being evaluated experimentally on a 3D bipedal robot at the
University of Michigan.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Important medical
applications of bipedal locomotion research include lower-limb prostheses and
devices for the rehabilitation of walking and balance after injury. The PIs use
their interdisciplinary work in mathematics, sensing, feedback systems, and
robotics to promote STEM subjects. The researchers are actively involved in
rapid dissemination including videos posted on YouTube channels, television
programs, and weekly tour of their robotics laboratory.