* 1343228
* EAGER: Development of a rectenna for energy harvesting and detection applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2014,12/31/2017
* Yogi Goswami, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Anil Pahwa
* 12/31/2017
* USD 275,819.00

Growing interest in the utilization of solar energy has significantly stimulated
research in the field of photovoltaics, although most PV devices are still
limited to maximum conversion efficiencies of about 20% to 30%. The power
conversion efficiency of a rectenna, in contrast to most other energy harvesting
devices, has been found to be greater than 85% at 2.45GHz. A rectenna is
basically an antenna that captures electromagnetic radiation and converts it to
direct current (DC) through a rectifier (diode). Because of the lack of diodes
that can rectify at high solar radiation frequencies in the visible and near
infra-red (IR) range, a more practical rectenna can be designed that first
captures the solar radiation and then converts it to IR in the ~30 THz range
using an innovative frequency selective emitter. Once the energy has been
downscaled to ~30THz frequency range, it can be rectified using diodes that
operate using the quantum tunneling mechanism. The rectification property of
metal-insulator-metal (MIM/MIIM) diodes could be used in energy conversion
devices or detectors, where the detectors use external circuits to amplify the
rectified signal and the energy harvesters use the rectified signal as usable
power. Upon the successful demonstration of a working rectenna and because of
inexpensive and widely available materials needed for the roll-to-roll
manufacturing of rectennas, very high efficiency and low cost (few cents per
watt) rectenna solar modules would be achievable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research project addresses the two major scientific obstacles preventing the
development of a working rectenna at the THz frequency range: (a) Plasmonic
emitters will be designed to selectively emit radiation centered around the
working frequency of the antenna (~30THz). Carefully chosen dimensions of
periodic gratings and suitable materials will be used to design an emitter to
selectively emit around the frequency of interest. (b) Tunnel diodes with
MIM/MIIM configurations will be fabricated to rectify the radiation captured by
the nanoantenna. The deposition of a conformal monolayer of uniform and pinhole
free insulator(s) onto the bottom metal surface is required for a successful
diode. In addition, a diode will be developed that can have a higher degree of
asymmetry, sensitivity and sharp turn-on voltage. Resonant tunneling diodes with
multiple insulating layers can exhibit nonlinear and asymmetric I-V
characteristics which makes them well suited for rectification purposes at high
frequencies. Such MIM/MIIM diodes will have THz switching capability while
maintaining low resistance to match the antenna impedance. An array of
nanoantennas and fabricated rectifiers can be used in energy harvesting and
detection applications. The program will integrate research and education and
promote teaching, training and learning at all levels for rectenna applications
in energy harvesting and detectors.