* 1343908
* ANISOTROPY CHANGES DURING DEFORMATION AND PHASE TRANSFORMATIONS
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2014,10/31/2021
* Hans-Rudolf Wenk, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 10/31/2021
* USD 288,177.00

Large regions of the Earth are anisotropic for propagation of seismic waves.
This is best understood for the upper mantle where anisotropy is attributed to
preferred orientation of olivine crystals, attained during convection.
Anisotropy is extreme in sheet-silicate-rich rocks in the crust such as shales
and slates, especially important because of the significance for hydrocarbon
exploration. It also is present in the lower mantle, particularly the lowermost
D" zone at the core-mantle boundary. Much of the anisotropy is caused by
deformation and associated alignment of crystals, but the detailed mechanisms in
the deep Earth are still poorly understood. This project will explore
macroscopic deformation and associated anisotropy development in the Earth by
investigating the underlying microscopic mechanisms with novel methods that have
become available at National facilities, such as synchrotron X-ray and neutron
diffraction, and then applying physical models to project the large picture. The
project will provide data that are critical for interpreting macroscopic seismic
observations. But research methods that will be advanced are relevant for a
broad range of physical sciences as well as engineering. In situ observation of
changes during phase transformations has direct application in materials science
(e.g. transition metals, high temperature superconductors) and civil engineering
(e.g. cement minerals). The experimental methods, data analysis, as well as
modeling capabilities will become available to other researchers through
interdisciplinary collaborations and disseminated to the scientific community
with workshops and training. Participation of students will continue to be an
important part of this project.

During the last years the PI and collaborators have performed in situ
deformation experiments with diamond anvil cells (DAC) and multi anvil apparatus
at the Advanced Light Source (LBL) and the Advanced Photon Source (ANL) on
systems such as perovskite, postperovskite and magnesiowuestite, and were able
to infer deformation mechanisms by comparing experimental preferred orientation
patterns with predictions from polycrystal plasticity theory. When applying the
microscopic mechanisms they could propose an explanation for macroscopic seismic
anisotropy in D". However, conditions of experiments are still far from the real
Earth. They have initiated a program to work at higher temperature and slower
strain rates. A major focus is to develop reliable heating techniques for the
deformation DAC and apply them to study plastic deformation, recrystallization
and phase transitions of high pressure phases. A second focus are polyphase
materials whose deformation behavior is still largely enigmatic, for example
perovskite (strong)-magnesiowuestite (weak) mixtures. Also here experimental
results will be compared with plasticity models. The new full-field fast Fourier
transform formulation developed at Los Alamos which takes local interactions
between grains into account has great possibilities. While emphasis is on the
deep Earth, the PI and his team also plan to pursue recent work on quartz where
mechanical twinning and residual stresses are potential paleopiezometers.
Preliminary deformation, X-ray microdiffraction and EBSD experiments are
promising for not only estimating magnitudes but more importantly the
directionality of the stress field.