* 1343517
* Resolving issues of species, phylogeny, and radiation in a diverse group of Old World tropical mammals
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2013,01/31/2017
* Jacob Esselstyn, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 01/31/2017
* USD 464,371.00

This project will improve our understanding of the diversity and evolutionary
relationships in a poorly known group of mammals, Old World shrews of the
subfamily Crocidurinae. These shrews are diverse, with approximately 240 species
currently recognized, and they are very common members of small mammal
communities, especially in central Africa and Southeast Asia. However, knowledge
of Old World shrew diversity is very limited, in part due to their conservative
morphology. This project therefore emphasizes the use of DNA sequences from
independently evolving regions of the genome to delimit species and infer
relationships among species. Estimated relationships will then be used to test
hypotheses regarding the origins of this diversity, and its connection with
lowland tropical or montane areas of the African
continent.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project provides insights on the diversity
of shrews across the Old World and the evolutionary and ecological processes
that have generated this diversity. More generally, our understanding of these
processes has important implications for society's ability to preserve
biodiversity and our understanding of the evolutionary forces that have shaped
species. This grant provides training for a post-doctoral researcher and
undergraduate students, facilitates collaboration among molecular and field
biologists, and promotes public understanding of biodiversity science through
museum exhibits and project websites.