* 1343398
* EARS: Spectrum Sharing for Short-Latency Immersive Wireless Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 11/01/2013,10/31/2017
* Venkatachalam Anantharam, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 10/31/2017
* USD 700,000.00

This project will develop the key technologies needed for interactive wireless
applications operating in shared spectrum. Sharing is the new spectrum paradigm,
and interactive applications are the most demanding in terms of the quality-of-
service they require. Thus, they are the perfect vehicle to push the frontiers
of our understanding of sharing. This project will explore new high-reliability
coding techniques to protect interactive applications while meeting tight
latency constraints and explore how to coexist with neighboring disparate
systems through explicit and implicit signaling. The project will contribute the
fundamental understanding required to define the correct regulatory structure
for spectrum sharing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broadly speaking, the interactive
applications that this project will study are the key to the next growth phase
in commercial wireless - as machines need to interact with each other to improve
the performance of real-world systems. Because industrial control is a critical
use case, this project can help invigorate the agile manufacturing sector of the
economy. Efficiently shared spectrum is much more economical than exclusive-use
spectrum and hence could help innovative high-skill manufacturing where the
United States has an advantage over low-wage countries. While developing this
technology, the project will train students in a way that encourages cross-
fertilization of ideas between wireless communication, circuit implementation,
control theory, and coding theory. These ideas will be brought into the
classroom, including our new M.Eng. courses aimed at educating innovative
technical leaders. The project will also broaden participation in the technical
workforce by mentoring students from underrepresented groups.