* 1343551
* Collaborative Project: Teaching Cryptography through Hand-on Learning and Case Studies
* EHR,DUE
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2014
* JuAn Wang, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 07/31/2014
* USD 49,167.00

Computer Science (31) &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project from the
University of Tennessee at Chattanooga, Southern Polytechnic State University,
and Tuskegee University develops a sequence of two cryptography courses. The
first course adopts intensive labs and focuses on understanding the properties
and vulnerabilities of various cryptography techniques. The second course
challenges students with real-world cases in emerging areas in a collaborative
environment. The project develops five teaching modules based on labs and case
studies and conducts a detailed assessment of the proposed hands-on learning
materials, case studies, and modules. The PIs organize three summer mini-
workshops to train faculty members from the three campuses and other
universities nationwide on how to use the new courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project proposes novel pedagogies for undergraduate Cryptography and the hands-
on exercises tied with cryptography topics teach students cryptographic
algorithms and their vulnerabilities. The designed case studies bridge the gap
between cryptographic theory and real-world cryptographic applications in
emerging areas. The modules can be used in several courses such as network
security or security management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project facilitates
faculty collaboration and development at three institutions in three states
Tennessee, Georgia and Alabama. It broadens participations of minority students
in Information Assurance due to the leadership of Tuskegee University, an
experienced institution in minority education. Dissemination of the generated
teaching materials is supported by summer mini-workshops, a dedicated website
developed and maintained by the PIs, conference presentations, and journal
publications.