* 1343814
* School on Astroparticle and Underground Science located at the Asilomar Conference Grounds; Monterey, California; September 4-8, 2013
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2013,06/30/2014
* Wick Haxton, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Marc Sher
* 06/30/2014
* USD 20,000.00

This grant provides funds to support a School on Astroparticle and Underground
Science to be held September 4-8, 2013, at the Asilomar Conference Grounds,
Monterey, California, immediately preceding the 2013 International Conference on
Topics in Astroparticle and Underground Physics (TAUP-13).

The field of particle astrophysics is a broad one, stretching from dark matter
and its detection to neutrino physics and astrophysics, cosmic-ray physics, and
the physics of gravitational waves. The purpose of this School is to provide
junior physicists with a broad perspective on the field, as presented by leading
theorists and experimentalists. The participants will also have the opportunity
to discuss their own research with leading physicists in the field, and to
prepare poster presentations on their work. This event will also help to build a
true "community" of junior physicists who are working in this field. By holding
this event immediately prior to the TAUP-13 Conference, it is hoped that the
TAUP conference will help attract participants to the school (both in terms of
senior lecturers and junior participants) and also provide an added bonus in
providing the junior participants with exposure to cutting-edge research in the
field.

This activity will have significant broader impacts. NSF support of this event
will enable young researchers (graduate students and postdoctoral fellows) to
attend at reduced travel expense. Participation by students and post-docs will
enhance their education and promote their research. It will permit face-to-face
interactions between physicists at different stages in their careers, allow all
to network in an informal setting, enable them to share ideas and establish
personal contacts, and provide younger researchers the opportunity to exhibit
their own expertise through presentations of their research.