* 1343785
* Title:   EarthCube Building Blocks: Integrating Discrete and Continuous Data
* GEO,RISE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Ethan Davis, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2016
* USD 899,999.00

Geoscience information is defined on both discrete and continuous spatial
domains. Discrete&lt;br/&gt;spatial domains include point locations of
observations at measurement sites and GIS coverages&lt;br/&gt;of point, line and
area features used for observation and data interpretation.
Continuous&lt;br/&gt;spatial domains are used in geophysical fluid sciences such
as for the atmosphere, oceans,&lt;br/&gt;and land subsurface to describe arrays
of measured or modeled variables defined on a mesh&lt;br/&gt;of uniformly spaced
points. Data defined on either discrete or continuous spatial
domains&lt;br/&gt;may also vary discretely or continuously in time, ranging from
one-time samples, to samples&lt;br/&gt;at random points of time, to samples at
regularly spaced intervals of time. This project&lt;br/&gt;builds upon previous
work called "Crossing the Digital Divide" focused on integrated
discovery&lt;br/&gt;of common information themes including precipitation in
discrete data from the CUAHSI hydrologic&lt;br/&gt;information system and
continuous data from the Unidata THREDDS data server. This
project&lt;br/&gt;will advance that work by investigating in the first year
creating new technologies for publishing&lt;br/&gt;and discovery of information
through the Global Earth Observation System of Systems (GEOSS)&lt;br/&gt;Common
Infrastructure, the definition of a Common Information Model for discrete and
continuous&lt;br/&gt;data, development of shard software tools for using this
Common Information Model, and extension&lt;br/&gt;of the concepts to similar
information in the Polar, Ocean and Solid Earth
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work builds on existing NSF data
infrastructures and extends them in a reasonable way between two domains,
Hydrology and Atmospheric Sciences, which are closely related intellectually,
but have very different data environments. Some&lt;br/&gt;further extension into
the Polar, Ocean and Solid Earth Sciences is also attainable. The project
include the engagement of an international spectrum of
collaborators&lt;br/&gt;through the Global Earth Observing System of Systems.