* 1343380
* Efficient Temporal-Spatial Spectrum Sharing through Voluntary Exchange
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2013,10/31/2015
* Alison Watts, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 10/31/2015
* USD 896,629.00

The goal of this project is to develop more efficient and flexible access to
radio spectrum. Typically radio spectrum bands are allocated by the FCC to
commercial and noncommercial users who can be thought of as "primary users."
Such a user may not need to utilize the spectrum all of the time. This has led
to the existence of "secondary users" who access the spectrum opportunistically.
However, such secondary usage can bring interference to other secondary users
and primary users. Furthermore, primary users have little motivation to permit
this type of secondary use as there is no benefit to them and only
risk.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;To encourage spectrum sharing and enhance spectrum
efficiency, it is important to have a mechanism or solution concept that creates
the correct incentives for both primary and secondary users. However, there are
significant communication costs as well as limitations involved in the sale or
exchange of spectrum bands. Therefore, spectrum sharing through voluntary
exchange is proposed to address these challenges for efficient spectrum access.
The research project outlined here will determine which type of spectrum sharing
mechanisms would be better for primary users, secondary users, and for
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, voluntary exchange mechanisms
including monetary exchange and barter are examined to promote spectrum sharing
between primary and secondary users where both the communication costs and
constraints for information exchange are reflected in the spectrum sharing
models. Moreover, new ways to avoid interference for users located in different
regions are examined to further enhance spectrum
efficiency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sharing spectrum and improving spectrum
efficiency are current priorities of lawmakers and spectrum regulators, as
evidenced through the National Broadband Plan (2010), the PCAST report on
sharing spectrum between the federal government and non-government users (2012),
the Spectrum Act of 2012, and two presidential memoranda on the topic (2010 and
2013). Clearly, development and application of appropriate economic theories to
foster more opportunities for spectrum sharing is a desirable outcome with
significant broader impact to all stakeholders, including commercial broadband
providers, public safety, homeland security, and national defense.