* 1343766
* EAGER: The Role of Emotion in Risk Communication and Warning: Application to Risks of Failures to Update Software
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2013,05/31/2017
* Ross Buck, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 05/31/2017
* USD 214,262.00

End-users' online behavior can significantly affect the reliability and security
of next-generation software systems. For instance, skipping repeated requests to
update software or ignoring security warnings while visiting unknown websites,
while extremely dangerous, are not uncommon. Although end-users' actions (or
inactions) often open up the opportunity for cyber-attacks, the lack of
emotional appeals and poor design of the current software update/warning
messages are to blame to a large extent for such risky behavior, which is
addressed as follows. First, this project identifies the limitations of the
current software update/warning messages from an affective-cognitive
perspective, and addresses the shortcomings by incorporating emotional appeals
that command attention and evoke emotions more effectively. Also, message
designs are changed adaptively based on the context and user's past behavior to
counter the habituation-effect. Finally, to increase the compliance rate, this
project develops emotional education and inoculation strategies that enable
users to recognize and avoid the temptation associated with risky online
behavior. Successful completion of this project will greatly advance the
understanding of the impact of emotion on the decision making process in regards
to safe online behavior, and will revolutionize the way software vendors
communicate the risks of running vulnerable software and warn users. The
research findings will be published in premier academic venues, and will be
disseminated through project website. Research agendas will be integrated with
the curriculum development activities. Existing programs at UConn will be
leveraged to promote diversity and engage students from underrepresented
communities.