* 1343481
* AIR Option 1: Technology Translation -  Plant Based Manufacturing of Orphan Drug Human Biobetter Alpha-1-Antitrypsin
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2015
* Karen McDonald, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Barbara H. Kenny
* 08/31/2015
* USD 165,930.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating a novel
biomanufacturing platform that uses plants for transient expression of
therapeutic proteins to fill the need for rapid, inexpensive, and
environmentally-friendly production of safe and effective human therapeutics.
The translated plant-based biomanufacturing platform has the following unique
features: harvested leaves from wild-type, nontransgenic Nicotiana benthamiana
(a relative of tobacco) are used as production hosts, transient expression of
the recombinant therapeutic protein takes place in a contained system, a novel
Cucumber mosaic virus expression system is used to increase expression level,
and glycosylation of the recombinant protein is modified in a post-production,
in-vitro process providing an exemplary highly scalable approach that
significantly reduces capital investment and manufacturing costs, minimizes
environmental impact and improves product quality in terms of safety and
consistency when compared to the leading competing production technologies in
this market space. The project accomplishes this goal by developing a
technoeconomic engineering-based model to quantify the capital investment costs
and total production costs for a plant-based biomanufacturing facility to
produce a human orphan drug, alpha-1-antitrypsin (AAT), evaluating the market
potential and patent landscape surrounding our technology, identifying the
regulatory pathway and refining our finance and revenue model to bring plant-
made AAT closer to the market and position us to pursue partnerships for
clinical development. Current partners include the UC Davis Engineering
Translational Technology Center, an on-campus incubator that supports technology
translation into venture to provide guidance in licensing, financing,
incorporation and other aspects such as market assessment and freedom to operate
analysis as they pertain to the potential to translate the plant-based
biomanufacturing platform along a path that may result in a competitive
commercial reality. Our current estimates indicate that the potential economic
impact is expected to be hundreds of millions of dollars in healthcare savings
over 5 years following commercialization. As applications are developed for
other biosimilars/biobetters, the economic impact could grow into the billions
of dollars per year with an attendant contribution to U.S. competitiveness in
biotechnology. The societal impact, long term, will be much lower costs of human
therapeutics and new, safer, reliable and expandable supply of biologics for
treatment of diseases.