* 1343265
* AIR Option 1: Technology Translation:  Large-scale manufacturing of polymer nanotube array thermal interface materials for efficient heat removal from high-temperature electronics
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2013,09/30/2015
* Baratunde Cola, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Barbara H. Kenny
* 09/30/2015
* USD 150,857.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating a new type
of thermal interface material (TIM) composed of arrays of &amp;#960;-conjugated
polymer nanotubes with remarkable thermo-mechanical properties to fill a
critical electronic device cooling technology gap, especially at high
temperatures. The translated pure polymer TIM has the following unique features:
thermal conductivity greater than 10 times bulk polymer, excellent chemical
stability at 200 Â°C, ultralow effective shear modulus, and excellent dry
adhesion to surfaces that provides an exemplary combination of low thermal
contact resistance and joint durability when compared to the leading competing
TIMs in this market space. The project accomplishes this goal by developing a
new fabrication approach that eliminates a difficult to control and complex step
and improves bonding to the substrate resulting in a functional product
prototype and a scalable fabrication process. The partnership engages Carbice
Nanotechnologies, Inc., a small start-up company focused on commercializing TIM
solutions, to provide guidance in the high-temperature electronics market (e.g.,
military equipment, automotive systems, oil exploration systems, etc.) and other
aspects including customer-driven product development, intellectual property
positioning, and financing as they pertain to the potential to translate the
polymer nanotube TIMs along a path that may result in a competitive commercial
reality. The potential economic impact is expected to surpass $1 million in
annual sales in the next 7 years with a concurrent indirect economic impact of
$100 million by enabling new electronic device performance capabilities and
resulting products. This will contribute to the U.S. competitiveness in the
power electronics and high-temperature electronics market spaces. The societal
impact, long term, will be to enable reliable thermal management of high
temperature electronic devices while concurrently training and preparing young
entrepreneurs to establish successful technology companies.