* 1343355
* EARS: Accelerating Spectrum Access in Cognitive Radio Networks via Social Analysis of Secondary Users
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2018
* Yu Wang, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Monisha Ghosh
* 12/31/2018
* USD 600,000.00

A fundamental operation for users in cognitive radio networks (CRNs) to access
the spectrum is channel rendezvous. After rendezvous is established, channel
information exchange and propagation among users are also essential for
efficient spectrum access. Existing studies on channel rendezvous in CRNs have
limitations and are unsuitable for efficient access scenarios. Additional
information about users can help generate intelligent designs in CRNs that can
shorten spectrum access delay. However, due to practical constraints, such
information is extremely difficult to obtain before rendezvous is established.
Mining the social patterns of CR users (or secondary users, SUs) and
intelligently utilizing the captured social information is a promising approach.
The objective of this project is to design, analyze, and evaluate fast and
efficient spectrum access schemes for CRNs without a common control channel. One
unique feature of this work is the consideration of SU social patterns and the
incorporation of social analysis to enhance spectrum access efficiency. The
approach involves analyzing the time, location, and spectrum-dependent social
patterns of SUs; identifying and addressing new challenges in channel
rendezvous, security, and recommendation designs with the assistance of SU
social analysis; and proactively utilizing social patterns of SUs for fully
distributed fast and secure spectrum access design. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will have a significant impact on efficient spectrum access. Social
analysis of users is a critical component to further enhance spectrum access
efficiency and accelerate CRN deployment. This interdisciplinary research is
potentially transformative as it will help generate innovative techniques to
numerous CRN applications. It will also greatly enhance the understanding of
social interactions of mobile users in wireless networks. This project provides
an excellent opportunity for graduate and undergraduate research students to
gain valuable educational training and research experiences. The research
results will be presented at IEEE/ACM journals and international conferences.