* 1343498
* I-Corps:  Wildfire Incident Command Decision Support System
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2013,02/28/2014
* Manish Kumar, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 02/28/2014
* USD 50,000.00

This project is focused towards the development of an incident command decision
support solution that is designed to enable generation of accurate situational
awareness in a wildfire situation by providing advantages in safety, cost, and
ability to gather real-time data. The technology, consisting of ground station
software that would work in conjunction with an Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV)
with onboard sensing and communication facilities, would allow UAV control, data
processing, and visualization. Real-time fire monitoring and prediction using
UAVs requires engineering knowledge across multiple disciplines. This technology
combines real-time image processing with telemetry to develop estimation and
prediction models based on weather and vegetation information of the area. This
technology will be one of the first to integrate the various elements of fire
prediction and monitoring into one comprehensive technological tool.

Integrating real-time UAV sensory data into effective fire-predictor software
will allow an incident commander to make timely and informed decisions which can
optimize the resource allocation process and save lives. Wildland fires across
the globe pose a serious environmental and socio-economic threat with far-
reaching consequences. In addition to loss of lives and long-term repercussions
on human health, wildland fires have severe effects on ecological biodiversity
and adverse economic impacts on the affected areas with timber and
infrastructure losses, lost wages, and rehabilitation costs, in addition to
firefighting costs. Data collection and its interpretation for generation of
situational awareness, known as Emergency Informatics, is a major challenge in
responding to any large-scale hazard or disaster. This research, leveraging the
use of UAVs for wildfire monitoring, can yield tools at the disposal of incident
managers that will provide improved situational awareness and help them make
decisions in complex situations resulting in societal benefits such as cost
savings, safety of lives and properties, and benefits to the environment.