* 1343227
* EAGER: Foundations for Advancing Computational Thinking (FACT): Learning and Assessment through an Online Middle School Curriculum
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2015
* Roy Pea, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Kamau Bobb
* 09/30/2015
* USD 252,656.00

Stanford University proposes to develop and evaluate a proof-of-concept online
middle school course (with a teacher version as well) that adapts concepts from
the Exploring Computer Science (ECS) curriculum, specifically algorithmic
thinking and introductory programming. The project will: &lt;br/&gt;(1) Design
and deploy an online six-week "Foundations for Advancing Computational Thinking"
(FACT) curriculum on Stanford University's instance of the open edX online
platform. Aimed at 12 to 15 year-old learners, the curriculum borrows from the
ECS Programming and Problem Solving units. It will be driven by short video
lessons with in-video and stand-alone quizzes for formative and summative
assessments, and programming activities.&lt;br/&gt;(2) Pilot FACT in a Bay Area
public middle school class.&lt;br/&gt;(3) Empirically examine the efficacy of:
(a) the curriculum for the development of computational competencies,
preparation for future learning of computing, and changes in student perceptions
of CS via assessments designed for these purposes, and (b) student attitudes
towards and experiences with online learning, including online course features
such as in-video quizzes and discussion forums.&lt;br/&gt;(4) Create and pilot
an appropriately enhanced version of the curriculum for teachers to effectively
prepare them to facilitate FACT/ECS use in their classrooms.