* 1343761
* EarthCube Building Blocks:   Specifying and Implementing ODSIP, A Data-Service Invocation Protocol
* GEO,RISE
* 09/15/2013,01/31/2017
* Mohan Ramamurthy, Open Source Project for Network Data Access Protocols
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 01/31/2017
* USD 802,000.00

This EarthCube Building Blocks project intends to build ODSIP (Open Data
Services Invocation Protocol) to provide a range of open specification in
client/server libraries. The core idea is that key parts of EarthCube can be
built effectively around clients and servers that employ a common and
conceptually rich protocols for data acquisition. The components will be
developed 1) an open specification for ODSIP (as a DAP4 extension); 2) a
reference implementation of ODSIP in open-source libraries; and&lt;br/&gt;3)
client-server demonstrations that show how ODSIP supports three selected
geoscience scenarios, each demonstration to be guided by a geoscientist. The
three scenarios are: 1) accelerated visualization/analysis of model outputs on
non-rectangular&lt;br/&gt;meshes (over coastal North Carolina); 2) dynamic
downscaling of climate predictions for regional utility (over Hawaii); and 3)
feature-oriented retrievals of satellite imagery (focusing on satellite-derived
sea-surface-temperature fronts).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader implications
of ODSIP include democratizing the use of geoscience data, illustrated in
particular by how two of the three geoscience scenarios will benefit emergency
managers and inform decision makers about region-specific risks of climate
change. The broader implications also include strengthening common
understandings across the EarthCube community.