* 1343048
* CEDAR:   Solar Cyclic and Climatic Influences on Upper Atmospheric Hydrogen Distributions
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2019
* Stanley Solomon, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* John Meriwether
* 03/31/2019
* USD 328,013.00

This project addresses the influence of solar variability and greenhouse gas
increases on upper atmospheric hydrogen distributions from both an observational
and modeling perspective. Fabry-Perot observations of upper atmospheric hydrogen
Balmer-alpha emissions from Northern mid-latitudes over the time period spanning
three solar minima establish a reference data set that can be used to compare
with future observations and with atmospheric models. This data set shows an
apparent upward trend in hydrogen optical emissions of greater magnitude than
predicted alone from increases in hydrogen abundance due to the rise in
greenhouse gases. In order to ensure that this is not a result of a calibration
artifact, the accuracy of the Northern hemisphere long-term Balmer-alpha data
set will be improved through use of updated knowledge of the background Galactic
emission intensity, current analysis tools, and an updated tropospheric
scattering correction code. In addition, observations from the Northern and
Southern Hemisphere will be compared.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The major science
questions to be addressed by this project are as follows: What are the solar
cyclic and climatic influences on mechanisms governing lower to upper
atmospheric coupling of hydrogenous species? What are the solar cyclic and
possibly longer-term trends in emission observations from geocoronal hydrogen,
the upper boundary of the Earth's hydrogenous species distribution? What are the
predicted magnitudes for changes in hydrogen-containing species? To address
this, the Whole Atmosphere Community Climate Model (WACCM) will be used to carry
out sensitivity studies of solar cyclic and climatic influences on middle and
upper atmospheric hydrogeneous species distributions. The NCAR Global Mean Model
will be used to study how these forcings propagate through the
thermosphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A faculty member at a two-year UW college
campus and undergraduate students will be involved in this work. Public outreach
activities will be carried out aimed at increasing public literacy about the
science of climate change, and facilitating opportunities for youth exposure and
involvement in the sciences.