* 1343080
* Analyses of Large-scale Extratropical Climate Variability and Change
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/2014,01/31/2018
* David Thompson, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 01/31/2018
* USD 738,632.00

This project considers the atmospheric circulation in middle and high latitudes
of the Northern and Southern Hemisphere, regions referred to as the
extratropics. The project has two components, one of which is to improve
understanding of the internal variability of the extratropical circulation, and
the other is to examine the processes through which thermal forcing drives
externally forced north-south shifts in the extratropical storm tracks and their
associated eddy fluxes (which occur in part through the air movements associated
with frontal weather systems). Research in the first component is based on the
premise that large-scale variability in the extratropical flow arises in the
context of two primary types of structures: 1) those that dominate the variance
of zonal-mean kinetic energy and the conversion between eddy and zonal-mean
kinetic energy (which occurs through eddy momentum fluxes); and 2) those that
dominate the variance in eddy potential energy and the conversion between zonal-
mean and eddy potential energy (which occurs through eddy heat fluxes). In the
Southern Hemisphere (SH), which would be the focus of research in the first
component, the structure that dominates variance of zonal-mean kinetic energy is
the well-known Southern Annular Mode (SAM), which constitutes a north-south
shift of the jet stream and accompanying storm track. Research in the second
component seeks to understand how the extratropical circulation responds to a
variety of external forcings including the depletion of stratospheric ozone (the
"ozone hole"), reductions in Arctic snow cover and sea ice extent, increases in
greenhouse gases, and solar irradiance. The research addresses the fundamental
dynamics which govern the response of jet streams and their attendant storm
tracks using simplified atmospheric circulation models, guided by the hypothesis
that key aspects of the response can be understood through a diffusive framework
in which eddy fluxes of heat and potential vorticity shift to match, in a down-
gradient sense, the changes in their respective mean gradients.

The work has broader impacts due to the importance of the fundamental dynamics
addressed in the project for understanding and predicting the sensible weather
and climate experienced at the Earth's surface. In addition, the work will
support and train two graduate students from underrepresented groups, thereby
broadening participation in the sciences and contributing to the development of
the workforce in this research area.