* 1343467
* AIR Option 1: Technology Translation -  Wireless control of distributed and implanted micro infusion pumps
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2013,02/29/2016
* Ellis Meng, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Barbara H. Kenny
* 02/29/2016
* USD 154,622.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating the first
wireless, fully programmable, implantable micro infusion pump with integrated
dose tracking for closed-loop control to fill the current technology gap in drug
administration technology for small animals research. The translated technology
has the following unique features: sensors for electronic real time confirmation
of actual delivery and dosed volumes, wireless operation capable of accessing a
wide dynamic range of flow rates, and form factor suitable for use in mice that
provides exemplary performance, efficiency, and efficacy, when compared to the
leading competing infusion technologies, whether implantable or not, in this
market space. The project accomplishes this goal by integrating wireless
circuitry for controlling infusion and tracking doses into a tiny form factor
suitable for use in a miniaturized infusion pump resulting in a working
prototype closed-loop implantable infusion system that will be demonstrated at
the benchtop. The partnership engages Stevens Center for Innovation, Viterbi
Student Institute for Innovation, Lloyd Greif Center for Entrepreneurial
Studies, and industry partners (Fluid Synchrony, SAI Infusion Technologies, and
Charles River) to provide guidance in the drug delivery technology space and
other aspects of commercialization, manufacturing, and financing as they pertain
to the potential to translate the technology along a path that may result in a
competitive commercial reality. The potential economic impact is expected to be
improved scientific discovery and drug development in the next decade, which
will contribute to the U.S. competitiveness in the drug delivery technologies
space. The societal impact, long term, will be new therapies, greater drug
efficacy, reduced side effects, improved treatment outcomes, and quality of
life, especially as they relate to the potential impact of this effort on the
long term goal of realizing closed-loop clinical infusion systems.