* 1343578
* Dimensions US-BIOTA-Sao Paulo: A multidisciplinary framework for biodiversity prediction in the Brazilian Atlantic forest hotspot.
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2020
* Michael Hickerson, CUNY City College
* Continuing Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 08/31/2020
* USD 1,400,956.00

This research will explain and predict of the distribution of animal and plant
species in the endangered yet megadiverse Brazilian Atlantic forest. The
investigators will correlate biogeographic and environmental patterns across
major clades in order to understand patterns in this biodiversity hotspot. The
project will entail study of both climate and landscape, and their changes over
the last 120,000 years. This information will enable understanding of how
species have responded to repeated environmental shifts of the past. Data from
Earth-orbiting satellites will be combined with meteorological data and
paleoenvironmental information from the fossil pollen record and ancient
precipitation data derived from the geochemistry of deposits found in caves.
These data, combined with information on modern species ranges, genetic
diversity, physiological tolerances, host-pathogen dynamics, and regional shifts
in the composition of the biota will demonstrate how the biodiversity of the
Atlantic forest evolved over time.

This study will enable the reconstruction of historical factors influencing
current biodiversity and, given a range of climate change scenarios, permit the
prediction of the future composition of biodiversity in the Atlantic forest or
elsewhere. Forest areas of geological stability, physical connectivity, and
higher genetic diversity will be identified so that forests or species under
extinction threat can be conserved. In response to current concern about the
value of ecosystem services and climate change, this study provides a model of
how to predict biodiversity change. A travelling exhibit will reach out to
commuters in SÃ£o Paulo and New York. Collaborations among research groups in
Brazil and the US is central to the project?s student training plan. The project
also strengthens a minority-serving campus, ensuring that North-American
students underrepresented in science are exposed to trans-disciplinary,
international work.