* 1343381
* Spectrum Sharing in the Shadow of Uncertainty: Risk, Incentives and Investment
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2019
* Michael Honig, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Jon Williams
* 08/31/2019
* USD 1,200,000.00

Sharing of spectrum among government and/or commercial entities has the
potential to unleash large amounts of spectrum to meet the dramatic increase in
demand for mobile broadband services. Although there has been substantial work
on developing technologies for such sharing, the adoption of extensive sharing
by commercial service providers is by no means a forgone conclusion. This
project is addressing three fundamental issues that need to be resolved in order
for spectrum sharing to realize its potential.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first
issue is concerned with developing models and techniques for mitigating the
risks associated with secondary spectrum sharing. Such risks arise, for example,
due to uncertainty in a primary user?s activity. The impact of both different
technologies (e.g., more flexible devices) and different contractual
arrangements (e.g., the possibility of offering "spectrum insurance") on such
risks are being studied.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second issue is addressing how
different spectrum agreements and associated risk may affect competition and
strategic behavior among service providers. That affects their decisions to
invest in both infrastructure and develop new spectrum sharing
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The final issue is understanding how to
balance the benefits of using spectrum to provide a public good, such as
defense, against its use to provide commercial broadband access. Identifying
associated incentive issues and transaction costs with each type of service can
lead to better sharing mechanisms that produce efficient outcomes.