* 1343638
* Second Sustainable Nanotechnology Conference (2013), Fess Parker DoubleTree Inn, located at 633 East Cabrillo Blvd., Santa Barbara, CA November 3-5, 2013
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2014
* Arturo Keller, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 07/31/2014
* USD 45,000.00

1343638 - Keller&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Sustainable Nanotechnology Conference
will be held in November 3 - 5, 2013 in Santa Barbara,California, supported in
part by National Science Foundation resources. The 2013 conference will build on
the previous year's focus on lifecycle assessment, green synthesis, green
energy, industrial partnerships, and environmental and biological fate, and will
include additional emphasis on economic and societal aspects of nanotechnology.
In particular, sessions on Sustainable Manufacturing, Tools for Achieving
Sustainable Nanotechnology, Nano-economics, and Nano science and engineering in
agriculture and food systems will serve to provide more emphasis to these
aspects of sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit
:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central objective of this conference is to bring
together scientific experts from academia, industries, and government agencies
from around the world to present and discuss current findings on the subject of
sustainability of nanotechnology. The Sustainable Nanotechnology Conference will
be held in November 3 - 5, 2013 in Santa Barbara, California. Sustainable
development has been defined as the balance of economic success, environmental
protection and social responsibility. Sustainable nanotechnology strives to
ensure that industrial growth is sustainable while maximizing benefits and
societal acceptance. The current challenge, however, is that many existing
nanotechnologies are not sustainable on account of their dependence on large
quantities of energy, water, and solvents. In addition to being excessively
resource and energy intensive, some existing nanomanufacturing processes utilize
non-renewable materials, and their impacts on human health are not clearly
understood. The conference program will address the critical aspects of
sustainable nanotechnology such as life cycle assessment, green syn thesis,
green energy, industrial partnership, environmental and biological fate, the
economic and societal aspects of nanotechnology, and the overall sustainability
of engineered nanomaterials. The conference will also foster new collaboration
between academic and industrial participants. This community of users,
researchers and developers of engineered nanomaterials will provide a long-term,
scientific assessment of where the science is for sustainable nanotechnology,
where it should be heading, and what steps academics, government agencies, and
others can take now to reach targeted goals. The 2013 SNO Conference will build
on the previous year's focus on lifecycle assessment, green synthesis, green
energy, industrial partnerships, and environmental and biological fate, and will
include additional emphasis on economic and societal aspects of nanotechnology.
In particular, sessions on Sustainable Manufacturing, Tools for Achieving
Sustainable Nanotechnology, Nano-economics, and Nano science and engineering in
agriculture and food systems will serve to provide more emphasis to these
aspects of sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts
:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The sustainable nanotechnology conference will draw
attention to the use of nanomaterials to alleviate adverse consequences from the
greenhouse effect, exhaustion or abundance of natural resources, and
environmental impacts due to the use of non-decomposable materials/composites.
It is anticipated that 200-250 industrial partners, materials scientists,
government stakeholders, physical and social scientists, engineers, and
toxicologists, will participate. The relatively small group of participants will
be ideal to promote vigorous discussion and an interchange of ideas. The
conference will attract at least 25 participants who are junior scholars
(doctoral and postdoctoral students). Thus, the conference will provide
networking opportunities for scientists at different career stages. The two and
half day schedule will foster interactions between young investigators and more
established researchers. The SNO Conference is of particular importance to new
investigators as there are few if any similar conferences that address the broad
topic of Sustainable Nanotechnology. In addition, several scientists from
underrepresented groups in science will play key roles in the conference.
Participants of the Sustainable Nanotechnology conference will come from not
only the US but around the globe, ensuring a diverse and expert group to
facilitate stimulating discussions.