* 1343531
* XII ICFA School/Workshop on Instrumentation in Elementary Particle Physics at the Universidad de Los Andes (UNIANDES), Bogota, Colombia, Nov 25-Dec 6, 2013
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2014
* Marleigh Sheaff, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* James Shank
* 08/31/2014
* USD 30,690.00

This award supports student participation in XII International Committee for
Future Accelerators (ICFA) School/Workshop on Instrumentation in Elementary
Particle Physics to be held at the Universidad de Los Andes (UNIANDES), Bogota,
Colombia, from November 25 through December 6, 2013. The XII ICFA
School/Workshop is one of the regular series of schools held approximately every
two years in countries outside of the highly industrialized parts of the world,
which are Western Europe, the United States, Canada, and Japan.

The ICFA Schools provide an outstanding opportunity for young research students
at the graduate level to learn the latest in state of the art techniques in
instrumentation and to meet and develop contacts and links with their peers in
an international setting that benefits all geographic regions. Members of the
ICFA Instrumentation Panel serve as the international advisors for all ICFA
Schools/Workshops, ensuring that the quality of the scientific program meets
very high standards as evidenced by the success of the previous workshops in
this series.

The ICFA schools are broader impacts in action. U.S. physicists working in the
field of high energy physics find themselves working in an international setting
wherever they are based. Working side by side in the laboratory exercises with
students from all over the world gives U.S. students international experience at
an early stage in their careers. These early peer contacts are invaluable in
developing future scientific collaboration.

The XII ICFA School is supported by the Elementary Particle Physics Program with
co-funding from the ISE Global Venture Fund of the Office of International and
Integrative Activities.