* 1343097
* CEDAR:   Investigations of Gravity Wave Coupling Between the Mesosphere and Thermosphere in the Southern Hemisphere
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/2014,02/28/2015
* Steven Smith, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Sunanda Basu
* 02/28/2015
* USD 33,905.00

The goal of this project is to investigate the occurrence, propagation
characteristics, and coupling processes of atmospheric gravity waves in the
Earth's atmosphere, from the troposphere up to the mesosphere and lower
thermosphere, at Southern mid-latitudes. A multi-wavelength all-sky imager
currently resides at the Mount John Observatory in New Zealand and will be used
to record meospheric gravity wave activity. A second imager will be installed at
a field station further to the south of Mount John, at Lauder, Otago, to provide
greater coverage during DEEPWAVE and to minimize poor weather conditions at
either location during the winter campaign period. The Mount John instrument is
co-located with other ground-based instrumentation relevant to mesospheric and
thermospheric observations. The co-located multi-diagnostic measurements will
consist of mesospheric and thermospheric winds and temperatures obtained by two
Fabry-Perot spectrometers and mesospheric wind profiles obtained by a meteor
radar system, electron density profiles from an ionosonde, and SABER temperature
and OH emission profiles. These measurements will also contribute to the
DEEPWAVE field project which will take place in New Zealand in June-July 2014.
Data will be disseminated via a website at Boston University and the CEDAR and
MADRIGAL databases. The project will be carried out in collaboration with
scientists from New Zealand.