* 1343709
* EarthCube Building Blocks:  Deploying Web Services Across Multiple Geoscience Domains
* GEO,RISE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Michael Gurnis, Incorporated Research Institutions for Seismology
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2016
* USD 1,783,919.00

This Building Blocks project intends to extend the promotion of simple web
services to simplify the task of discovering, accessing and using data from
multiple sources. The investigators will promote the use of this system to
manage data from the long tail of science and make it discoverable, removing it
from the domain of "dark data". Long tail data will come from both funded
partner centers and from collaborators. They will extend their approach of
exposing data sets through web services to those managed by non-NSF data centers
both within the US as well as international data sets by providing resources to
stand up web services&lt;br/&gt;to expose the data holdings of other centers. A
recurring theme in the EarthCube Domain Workshops was the need to simplify the
workflows for sharing and discovery of data in geosciences. A significant amount
of time is currently spent as "hunters and gatherers" of information and once
finding that information to determine&lt;br/&gt;how to understand and use data
from domains outside a given researcher?s area of expertise. The development of
the web services building block will significantly change the way in which much
of the preparatory work will be accomplished. This building block will also
develop the ability to expose "dark data". The balance between the time spent on
preparing and doing science will be reversed from the current state where the
majority of time is spent in preparation and the minority of the time spent on
doing the science. This will in itself have extremely broad impacts in
geosciences research. The web services building blocks inherently enable
horizontal integration across the geosciences with a resulting impact on the
breadth of geosciences&lt;br/&gt;problems that can be
addressed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed expansion of simple web services
into the geosciences will fundamentally change the way geoscientists do their
research, combine information from across disciplines and communicate their
results to the public, policy makers and educators.Exposing such data will
significantly add to the body of knowledge&lt;br/&gt;that can be brought to bear
on geosciences problems. As problems become more and more complex, the diversity
of data sets that must be considered and integrated for a better understanding
of a vast range of geoscience problems will increase, and enhanced technologies
and procedures will be required to synthesize and communicate the resulting
knowledge between scientist and with the public. This building block is an
effort to support that transition by engaging EarthCube cyberinfrastructure in
developing, establishing and adopting international standards to allow
geoscientists to focus on the science, thus increasing their productivity.