* 1343963
* RAPID:  A Damage, Photogrammetry, and Radar Analysis of the Moore, Oklahoma Tornado
* GEO,AGS
* 06/15/2013,05/31/2014
* Nolan Atkins, Lyndon State College
* Standard Grant
* Edward L. Bensman
* 05/31/2014
* USD 13,705.00

This research will conduct a comprehensive analysis of the devastating Moore,
Oklahoma tornado that occurred on 20 May, 2013. The focus of this study will be
the integration of a comprehensive damage survey with high-resolution radar data
from the nearby Twin Lakes, OK WSR-88D operational Doppler radar, as well as
visual data of the tornado and attendant debris.

Intellectual Merit: There are very few analyses of large, devastating tornadoes
published in the referred literature. This study would be unique since, for the
first time, the relationship between radar-detected features associated with the
tornado and attendant debris, visual characteristics of the tornado and debris,
and damage intensity and location will be examined. Such an integrated analysis
has yet to be published in the refereed literature for a large, violent tornado.

Broader Impacts: One of the more important broader impacts is to produce a
detailed damage map of the deadly Moore tornado. The Moore tornado will be
considered one of the most significant weather events to impact the Southern
Plains. The integrated analysis will enhance our understanding of radar features
commonly associated with tornadoes and attendant debris. This project will also
employ an undergraduate student who will gain invaluable experience with the
research process, data analysis and interpretation.