* 1343904
* Statistical and Dynamical Exploration of Land-Ocean-Atmosphere Interactions in Two Contrasting Monsoon Regions: China and Northern Australia
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2019
* Michael Notaro, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 09/30/2019
* USD 231,216.00

Monsoon systems cover much of the tropics and subtropics, and monsoon rains
provide the agricultural and domestic water resource for much of the world's
population. Thus, variations of the monsoons can have dramatic human
consequences, and a better understanding of the processes which cause monsoon
variability is desirable. Research to date has shown that some portion of
monsoon variability can be linked to anomalies in remote sea surface
temperatures (SSTs) such as those associated with El Nino events, which cause
large-scale changes in atmospheric circulation that modulate rainfall in the
monsoon regions. A second potential cause of monsoon variability is the
condition of the local land surface, which is affected by rainfall and can
potentially have a further influence on rainfall through a variety of land-
atmosphere feedback processes.

This project seeks to identify the separate effects of remote SSTs and local
land-atmosphere interactions in modulating rainfall and atmospheric conditions
over monsoon regions. The research is focused on two regions chosen to represent
subtropical and tropical monsoon systems, China and Northern Australia
respectively. Previous work by the Principal Investigator (PI) suggests that
modification of the land surface by a reduction in vegetation cover produces
opposing results in the two regions, with an earlier summer monsoon onset in
China (linked to greater ocean-land thermal contrast) and enhanced springtime
rainfall, and a delayed and weaker monsoon in Northern Australia (linked to
reduction in the source of moisture for precipitation due to transpiration from
plants).

The research addresses the relative roles of remote SSTs and local land-
atmosphere interactions through a suite of regional climate model experiments
and statistical analysis. The model simulations will examine the role of land-
atmosphere feedbacks through experiments in which aspects of the land surface
are held fixed (e.g. fixing the leaf area so that vegetation does not wilt under
dry conditions). The statistical analysis uses a technique pioneered by the PI
known as Generalized Equilibrium Feedback Analysis (GEFA). The method uses
multivariate lagged correlation to identify causal relationships between monsoon
precipitation and forcing from remote SSTs and local land surface conditions
(including vegetation as represented by the Leaf Area Index).

As noted above, monsoon variations have strong human impacts, including impacts
on crops, livestock, and the duration of the Australian fire season. If
successful, the research performed here may lead to improvements in models used
to forecast monsoon precipitation. In addition, the PI plans to lead a 2-day
workshop on land-atmosphere interactions, regional climate modeling and land
surface modeling, which will serve to introduce students and early-career
scientists to methods used for research on regional climate and land-atmosphere
interactions.