* 1343835
* Rapid Landscape Change in Garwood Valley: Monitoring Buried Glacier Melt and Exploring Pewe's Lost Lake
* GEO,OPP
* 04/01/2013,05/31/2016
* Joseph Levy, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* thomas wilch
* 05/31/2016
* USD 270,806.00

Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;An expansive stratigraphic column has recently
become exposed in Garwood Valley by river erosion into a buried ice mass. This
LGM-aged ice is a remnant of the Ross Ice Sheet that filled Garwood Valley
~10-20 ky ago, damming a paleo-lake that has recently been uncovered. The buried
ice mass is preserved beneath a cap of paleo-lake deposits, glacial drift, and
permafrost landforms. The superimposed deposits provide a meters-thick record of
landscape changes that can be well dated due to the presence of several fossil
algal mat and carbonate horizons. The PIs propose to quantify paleo- and modern
rates of climate-driven landscape change in Garwood Valley. The PIs also propose
to quantify the current rate of buried ice removal from Garwood Valley to
generate a geomorphological baseline for documenting landscape change associated
with future ice removal. Measurements and modeling of the current ablation of
buried ice will quantify present landscape changes in the MDV that are being
caused by disequilibrium between climate and the landscape. This proposal will
address ambiguity over the timing and extent of valley filling in the southern
MDV by LGM ice sheets, and the rates and processes of ice sheet drainage from
the valleys.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: &lt;br/&gt;This project will
provide Antarctic field research opportunities for undergraduate students and
graduate students. The dramatic melting occurring in Garwood Valley will serve
as a vivid example of climate-driven landscape change in Antarctica will be
shared with K-12 students and the public at large through live, in-the-field
teleconferences mediated by a public school teacher and expert in science
outreach. The data that the project will generate will be synthesized into a 3D
tour of the field site with expert commentary, suitable for museum display.