* 1343492
* US-Egypt Workshop: Water Resources Research Collaboration, Cairo, Egypt, January 2014
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2013,03/31/2015
* Jagath Kaluarachchi, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 03/31/2015
* USD 51,268.00

1343492 &lt;br/&gt;Kaluarachchi &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award
supports a US-Egypt workshop on water resources to share research expertise
related to hydrology and water resources, to develop a roadmap for future Egypt-
US collaborative research; and to identify support opportunities for that
research. The outline for this workshop was endorsed for funding by the US-Egypt
Joint S&amp;T Board in its May 2012 meeting in Cairo, Egypt. The US organizer is
Dr. Jagath Kaluarachchi, Utah State University and the Egyptian co-organizer is
Dr. Mohamed Abdel-Motaleb, President of the National Water Research Center in
Cairo, Egypt.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The workshop is to bring
US and Egyptian scientists to exchange information on research practices in
addressing water shortages, and discuss areas of research needs including: non-
conventional water; remote sensing in irrigation water management; impact of
climate change; and transboundary water issues. Water issues are highly relevant
for Egypt's future and for other countries facing water shortages and the 4
topics are all very important in the context of Egypt's water resources. The
proposed workshop should enhance collaboration between Egyptian and US
universities and water resources agencies. The project may significantly
contribute to water resources research through the introduction of new
techniques for addressing projected water shortages in Egypt and other
countries. Participants from Egypt will include senior and junior hydrology and
water resource scientists from governmental research centers and from
universities. The US identified participants have a broad range of expertise and
represent a number of US universities with major water resources research
programs as well as from USG agencies, and the PI has substantial international
water resources experience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The proposal
brings together Egyptian and US experts to address topics of importance for the
management of the water resources in Egypt and in similar conditions. It is
highly likely that this will lead to catalyzing new collaborations between US
and Egyptian experts in water resources and engineering. The selected research
themes to be discussed all have broad impact, including contribution to water
resources management in an area where water is a scarce commodity, and
contribution to education and capacity building in Egypt. The project will also
expose US researchers to water resources issues in other countries and involve
them in international collaboration. The workshop could potentially have
significant impacts on the development of sound water management and practices
in Egypt and in similar settings elsewhere in the arid regions in the world. The
benefits to the host country can be very significant including the
identification and development of innovative water saving techniques. This
proposal is supported under the US-Egypt Joint Fund Program where NSF supports
the US side and the Government of Egypt funds the Egyptian side.