* 1343813
* EarthCube Conceptual Design:  Enterprise Architecture for Transformative Research and Collaboration Across the Geosciences
* GEO,RISE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Amarnath Gupta, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2016
* USD 313,640.00

EarthCube design is a complex socio-technical systemof systems, in which
communication between various domain subsystems and previously disconnected CI
components,people and organizations enables more comprehensive, data-intensive
research designs and knowledge sharing. The main features of project include an
approach that:(1) follows and enhances existing patterns of data, information
and knowledge exchange within and between geoscience domains, (2) integrates
?traditional? layered cyberinfrastructure components (e.g.information sources,
catalogs, vocabularies, services, analysis and modeling tools) with CI
components supporting scholarly communication, self-organization and social
networking (e.g.research profiles, Q&amp;A systems, annotations) and (3)
supports continuous EarthCube architectural&lt;br/&gt;evolution. The proposed
work will be done in close collaboration with other EarthCube activities,taking
input from a wide group of geoscientists and CI experts engaged in EarthCube, as
well as information system architects from a range of academic and commercial
projects.Design parameters include system abilities to: a) evolve by factoring
in the impact of maturing movements like linked&lt;br/&gt;data, ?big data?, and
social collaborations; b) handle the volume, complexity and diversity of
geoscience information; (b) incorporate new informational and analytical
requirements, tools, and techniques,(c)accommodate different ideas and
approaches to research and data stewardship;(d)make best use of NSFs current
investment in the geoscience CI.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The innovative aspect of
this architecture planning will include three component. It will be designed as
a system of systems,i.e., the basic information objects and infrastructure of
any community will be re-used, but will be modeled in a manner that higher-level
operations(e.g., vocabulary mashup) can be performed on them. It will be based
on emerging interchange practices and protocols for scholarly objects, a
paradigm that will be designed to foster inter-community research collaboration
and exchange. It will be centered on a social network of communicating
scientists who will use the interchange protocols. The social network will
consist of both people and the information objects they choose to share as they
conduct research.