* 1343860
* EAGER: Nonlinear and Data-Adaptive Compressive Sampling for Big Data Processing
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2013,03/31/2016
* Konstantinos Slavakis, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* chengshan xiao
* 03/31/2016
* USD 160,000.00

As pervasive sensors continuously collect and record massive amounts
of&lt;br/&gt;high-dimensional data from communication, social, and biological
networks,&lt;br/&gt;and growing storage as well as processing capacities of
modern computers&lt;br/&gt;have provided new and powerful ways to dig into such
huge quantities of&lt;br/&gt;information, the need for novel analytic tools to
comb through these "big&lt;br/&gt;data" becomes imperative. The objective of
this project is to develop a&lt;br/&gt;novel framework for nonlinear, data-
adaptive (de)compression algorithms to&lt;br/&gt;learn the latent structure
within large-scale, incomplete or corrupted&lt;br/&gt;datasets for compressing
and storing only the essential information, for&lt;br/&gt;running analytics in
real time, inferring missing pieces of a dataset, and&lt;br/&gt;for
reconstructing the original data from their compressed renditions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit lies in the exploration of the
fertile but largely&lt;br/&gt;unexplored areas of manifold learning, nonlinear
dimensionality reduction,&lt;br/&gt;and sparsity-aware techniques for
compression and recovery of missing and&lt;br/&gt;compromised measurements.
Capitalizing on recent advances in machine&lt;br/&gt;learning and signal
processing, differential geometry, sparsity, and&lt;br/&gt;dictionary learning
are envisioned as key enablers. Effort will be put also&lt;br/&gt;into
developing online and distributed (non)linear dimensionality
reduction&lt;br/&gt;algorithms to allow for streaming analytics of sequential
measurements&lt;br/&gt;using parallel processors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact is to contribute to the development of novel
&lt;br/&gt;computational methods and tools useful for data inference, cleansing,
&lt;br/&gt;forecasting, and collaborative filtering, with direct impact to
&lt;br/&gt;statistical signal processing and machine learning
applications&lt;br/&gt;to large-scale data analysis, including communication,
social, and&lt;br/&gt;biological networks.