* 1343020
* INSPIRE Track 2: Defining the Organizational Principles of Microbial Communities Colonizing Plant Roots
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Elizabeth Shank, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 07/31/2019
* USD 3,000,000.00

This INSPIRE award brings together research areas traditionally supported in the
Division of Integrative Organism Systems in the Directorate for Biology, the the
Division of Chemistry in the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences,
and the Division Information and Intelligent Systems in the Directorate for
Computer &amp; Information Science &amp; Engineering. Plants are rooted in soil
teeming with micro-organisms (bacterial, fungi and nematodes). Many of these can
help plants grow better by, for example, making minerals directly usable by the
plant, or by inhibiting the growth of plant-pathogenic microbes. The community
of microbes on the surface of plant roots, and indeed inside the root, perform
specialized functions to maintain their association with the plant. This
community is called the root microbiome. Almost nothing is known about how
plant-associated microbiomes are assembled from the very diverse soil microbial
community. This project features a diverse group of investigators located at
four institutions from New York, North Carolina and California, who aim to use
interdisciplinary approaches from genomics to computer modeling to chemistry, to
study the bacterial, and fungal microbes associated with plant roots. The goal
of this project is to learn how to create communities of defined microbes that
can be applied to crops as "probiotics" that will improve plant health and crop
yield, and may replace chemical controls of disease and fertilizers. The diverse
investigators will provide learning and mentoring opportunities for
undergraduate, post-graduate and post-doctoral scholars, and via outreach
through the University of North Carolina's Morehead Science Center.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators wish to understand communication between
bacteria, fungi and plant roots (and between microbes in those roots) at spatial
scales of nanometers (chemical signals) to centimeters (small scale ecosystems).
Root microbiome organization is at least partly deterministic, as opposed to
merely niche filling, at least at higher taxonomic levels. The project will
deploy controlled microcosms and statistical modeling to define (1) principles
driving root microbiome assembly in simplified synthetic communities, and (2)
specific host and microbial genetic and chemical signaling mechanisms governing
the winnowing from complex soil communities into reduced complexity endophyte
communities. Anticipated results will lead to: (1) definition of reduced
complexity communities of sequenced microbes that influence plant growth and can
be deployed in re-colonization microcosm experiments to define and iteratively
test experimentally models of the principles that drive community formation; (2)
mutational identification of loci that tune root microbiome assembly from both
microbes and plant hosts; and (3) collections of novel sequenced microbes that
provide specific plant growth advantages and that are amenable to detailed
mechanistic studies in both mono-association, and as members of defined
complexity communities, with the host.