* 1343480
* AIR Option 1: Technology Transition -  Commercialization of Additive Manufacturing of Metallic Parts Using Selective Inhibition from Sintering
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2013,05/31/2017
* Behrokh Khoshnevis, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 05/31/2017
* USD 184,254.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating an Additive
Manufacturing technology called Selective Inhibition Sintering (SIS) to fill the
gap for an inexpensive and capable 3D Printer for fabrication of metallic parts.
Currently all metallic part printers are highly priced and are unaffordable by
small manufacturing firms as well as by the growing maker community which is
increasingly becoming the source of much innovation in the U.S.&lt;br/&gt;The
translated technology has the following unique features: a) It will be an order
of magnitude less expensive than current metallic part printers, b) it can
process very high temperature metals and alloys such as super alloys which have
extensive uses, and c) it can build a large number of parts concurrently hence
is suitable for small to medium lot size manufacturing. The technology provides
exemplary cost effectiveness and high throughput when compared to the leading
competing technologies (such as DMLS, EBM, and LENS) in this market space.
&lt;br/&gt;The project accomplishes this goal by a systematic research,
development and experimentation process resulting in a reliable process
knowledge and a pre-production machine that can be mass produced at low cost and
will be able to print precise parts out of a variety of metals and alloys.
&lt;br/&gt;The partnership engages RapidTech, ASCO Sintering, ProMetal and 3D
Systems to provide guidance in the technical aspects of metallic AM domain and
other aspects of commercial relevance as they pertain to the potential to
translate the technology along a path that may result in a competitive
commercial reality. The potential economic impact is expected to be over $30M in
two years after the commercial introduction of the technology and much more in
the succeeding years, which will contribute to the U.S. competitiveness in the
rapidly growing metallic Additive Manufacturing market space. &lt;br/&gt;The
societal impact, long term, will be paramount as the proposed project will yield
an affordable machine that will be capable of rapidly fabricating parts out of
bronze, stainless steel, and titanium as well as other metal powders generally
used in powder metallurgy. Practical uses of such a technique includes
fabrication of functional parts for the aerospace and automotive industries, and
custom design parts for medical devices, primarily using hard-to-machine
materials such as stainless steel, titanium and super alloys. The SIS process
will be particularly useful for the conventional powder metallurgy industry
because it can eliminate the need for fabrication of expensive molds. Finally,
metallic 3D Printing has so far been out of the reach of the growing maker
community. SIS has the promise of making the needed capability available to this
creative community which is already making significant economic and social
impact in the US.