* 1343740
* Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement Grant: The Origins of Modern Human Behavior
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2015
* Sally McBrearty, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2015
* USD 24,172.00

Under the direction of Dr. Sally McBrearty, Mr. Nicholas Blegen will collect
data for his doctoral dissertation. The project explores the origin of modern
human behavior through archaeological research into the technologies,
subsistence strategies and environments present in the later middle Pleistocene
(~300-130 thousand years ago) of Sub-saharan Africa, the time and place that
Homo sapiens originated. National Science Foundation support will be used for
archaeological excavation of the Sibilo School Road Site (SSRS) in Baringo,
Kenya. This site preserves stone tools and fossil bones in sediments recently
dated to 284 thousand years before present, roughly 90 thousand years before the
first appearance of Homo sapiens. The rare associations of stone tools and bones
in a well-dated context at the SSRS suit it to answer three important questions
about hominin behavioral evolution in this important time period: 1) What types
of stone tools were present in the East African later middle Pleistocene? Stone
tools from SSRS have the potential to characterize the types of tools present in
African later middle Pleistocene as well as how they were made and used. This
can reveal if advanced composite technologies such as spears or projectiles were
already in use around the origin of Homo sapiens or whether older technologies
such as large hand-held technologies persisted. 2) What types of fauna were
present in the later middle Pleistocene? The SSRS has the potential to produce
an ecologically informative fossil fauna in a well-dated context, and provide
insight into the environments that hominins of this time period occupied. 3)
What were hominin subsistence strategies like in the later middle Pleistocene of
East Africa? The SSRS has the potential to produce a rare record of subsistence
behavior in the later middle Pleistocene of East Africa through recovery of an
in situ archaeological fauna. An archaeological fauna would provide insight into
the abilities of hunters in this period to take large and dangerous prey,
choices of which prey body parts to transport and the distance this prey is
transported. All of these are important to demonstrating similarities and
differences between later middle Pleistocene hominins and modern hunter-
gathers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The later middle Pleistocene of Africa encompasses
significant behavioral and biological adaptations in human evolution. Many
researchers in the field agree that all behavioral characteristics unique to
Homo sapiens did not appear simultaneously. However, the rarity of associated
stone tools and fossil bones in well-dated contexts for this time period poses
challenges for establishing the order in which modern behaviors were acquired as
well as the timing their appearance relative to environmental changes and the
biological origin of the human species. Results of this project will: 1) Produce
a new later middle Pleistocene stone tool assemblage in a well-dated context
from East Africa. 2) Produce a new faunal assemblage to the small but growing
later middle Pleistocene data set. Individually both are valuable contributions
to the understanding the origin of Homo sapiens. Take together the presence of
multiple behavioral characteristics in association offer the rare opportunity to
relate behaviors like technology, subsistence behavior and habitat preference
around the time of our species origin&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data collection will
be conducted in collaboration with Kenyan researchers in the National Museums of
Kenya and local communities of Baringo, Kenya. Research funded by this proposal
will assist in the doctoral training of the Co-PI, Nick Blegen, and benefit the
National Museums of Kenya and local community.