* 1343033
* EAGER: Ecosystem Modeling for Infrastructure Evaluation
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2016
* John McGregor, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Rajiv Ramnath
* 07/31/2016
* USD 247,240.00

This research investigates how scientific software developers, maintainers,
users, and funders interact, with the goal of maximizing the effectiveness of
funds for scientific software development. The interactions among these groups
are modeled and analyzed through techniques used to study ecosystems. The
ecosystem analogy is being used successfully to describe the relationships among
interacting entities particularly when organizations may collaborate on some
activities and compete in others. These techniques support the representation
and analysis of large numbers of artifacts such as the thousands of individual
files integrated to form a complete software package. The relationships are
diverse, so a basic graph representation is used to model the interactions.
Then, a variety of algorithms are used to compute graph attributes such as
betweenness centrality, from which characteristics of the relationships can be
derived. This information can be used to determine certain qualities of the
software, the diversity of its use, and the amount of code reused from other
projects and libraries. This research will make fundamental contributions to
socio-technical ecosystem methods in the form of new techniques for making
decisions about the viability of an ecosystem. The results of this research will
help development managers and funding managers make effective decisions by
addressing long-term viability and sustainment issues. This includes the
appropriateness of specific software modules and packages for use in scientific
infrastructures. New techniques for evaluating software for adoption by an
organization for use or inclusion in their own products will be developed. By
taking the comprehensive ecosystem approach and using graph-based quality
metrics, an organization will be able to more accurately estimate the effort
that will be required to initially renovate, and eventually maintain, a software
component. The results will demonstrate how the developed techniques can help to
manage risk in a science project, and how these techniques will result in more
efficient use of resources, including federal funding.