* 1343967
* INSPIRE Track 1: Mahali: Space Weather Monitoring Everywhere
* GEO,AGS
* 12/01/2013,11/30/2017
* Anthea Coster, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Ruth S. Lieberman
* 11/30/2017
* USD 840,097.00

This INSPIRE award is partially funded by the Geospace Facilities Program in the
Division of Atmospheric and Geospace Sciences in the Directorate for Geoscience,
and the Computing Research Infrastructure and Networking and Technology and
Systems Programs in the Computer and Network Systems Division in the Directorate
for Computer and Information Science and Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
investigators will perform a proof-of-concept demonstration of a revolutionary
architecture that uses mobile devices to form a global space weather monitoring
network. Current sensors observing the space weather environment are sparsely
deployed and relatively costly to operate. A promising technique to overcome
this issue leverages existing Global Positioning System (GPS) infrastructure;
more specifically, delays in the multi-frequency GPS signals observed at the
ground that are caused by ionospheric electron density. Modern mobile devices
constitute a vast network of multicore parallel computers that provide the
computational power needed for geospace data processing and storage. With
connectivity available worldwide, even in remote places, mobile devices are thus
excellent candidates to establish global relays that feed sensor data into a
cloud processing environment that reconstructs the structure of the space
environment, and its dynamic changes. This project will enable space weather
data collection even in the most remote places on Earth, resulting in dramatic
improvements in observational gaps that exist in space weather research today.
Kila Mahali means "everywhere" in the Swahili language. Space weather phenomena
in Earth's upper atmosphere influence our daily lives, but prior technical
limitations have made a thorough understanding of these phenomena difficult. In
today's networked society, it is critical to monitor and predict extreme space
weather events and their impacts on the ionosphere, because they can affect
human systems for power, communications, and navigation. Recent studies have
also demonstrated that tsunamis and earthquakes perturb the density of electrons
in the ionosphere, and that even climate change has a measurable impact on
ionospheric electron density. This interdisciplinary project explores how to
make this possible by leveraging mobile devices as enabling relays for a dense
mesh of measurements. This approach will create totally new opportunities for
Space Weather monitoring, scientific investigation, and potentially use of the
entire ionosphere as a sensor to monitor natural disasters and help save human
lives.