* 1343147
* Exchange Relations in Prehistoric Northwest Alaska: Phase 2, Tracing Biological and Social Networks
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2015
* Douglas Anderson, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 06/30/2015
* USD 180,968.00

This is a RAPID award to complete the research project begun in 2010 to
investigate the development of trading relationships among Alaskan Inupiat
villages occupied in the late 17th/early 18th century, a time period of
particular interest because it straddles the historic/prehistoric occupation
boundary. The project concentrates on excavations at the village site of
Igliqtiqsiugvigruaq, which was occupied when European explorers first arrived in
the region. Importantly, the project will include recovery and analysis of human
remains, originally uncovered in 2011 but left unexcavated pending completion of
consultations with local Alaska Native communities, as agreed to in the Section
106 Memorandum of Agreement between the National Park Service, the National
Science Foundation, and the region's Alaska Native traditional councils and
communities and as required under the Native American Graves Protection and
Repatriation Act (NAGPRA). This site is one of the only known proto-historic
sites in Northwest Alaska where the preservation and access provides an
opportunity to learn about the lifeways of people in the region on the eve of
Western contact, a period when European trade items first appeared prior to the
arrival of Europeans themselves. In addition, the fact that human remains were
present in one of the houses adds additional interest for researchers and local
communities. At the request of local Alaska Native communities, the analysis of
the human remains will include a paleodietary study by Dr. Peter Ditchfield of
the Stable Isotope Laboratory in the Research Laboratory for Archaeology and the
History of Art, Oxford University Oxford (England) to determine if starvation or
nutritional status contributed to the causes of death. Also at the request of
local Alaska Native communities, Dr. Dennis O'Rourke, University of Utah, will
conduct a DNA analysis of the human remains from the house as part of his larger
study of the ancient and modern genetic history of the peoples of Arctic Alaska.
The project will complete the geophysical mapping of the area to determine the
relationships between the various structures at the site, a study that promises
to contribute new technologies and methodologies for conducting non-destructive
research of buried human activities. Finally, the project will continue oral
historic research on the genealogical and social history of the living
descendants associated with the site, a contribution toward developing new
methodologies for integrating archaeological and oral historic findings to
resolve questions of local interest and historical importance. This research
project is an important opportunity for a scientific team to collaborate with
Alaskan Native people to investigate the genetic relationships between their
ancestral and descendant families, a collaboration that is unprecedented in
Northwest Alaska and has the potential to provide a model for Alaska Native-
Scientist-State and Federal Agency cooperation in the future. In addition,
working closely with the local communities in the Kobuk Valley region promises
to provide a model for how the scientific community can assist Native Village
Elders in their on-going attempts to construct local histories that can be
passed on to their future generations.