* 1343126
* WORKSHOP: Young scholar support for the 2013 annual meeting of the Society for the Study of Nanoscience and Emerging Technologies (S.NET), October 27-30, 2013, Boston
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2014
* Michael Bennett, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2014
* USD 25,000.00

Introduction

This award support is to provide support for an international conference, the
fifth annual meeting of the Society for Study of Nanoscience and Emerging
Technologies (S.NET). The conference will be held October 27-30, 2013, at
Northeastern University in Boston. The funds being sought will enable students,
postdoctoral researchers, and young scholars with few travel resources to fully
participate in the 2013 meeting.

Intellectual Merit

The conference will serve to facilitate further development of the S.NET. The
requested support will enable participation in the conference by the rising
generation of scholars, many of which may otherwise be unable to attend. This is
worthwhile effort to encourage growth of the community of researchers devoted to
anticipating the societal and ethical impacts of emerging technologies. It will
promote broad ranging intellectual inquiry and contribute to the continued
development of diverse bodies of literature on society and emerging
technologies. and will

Broader Impacts

The awards will promote the professional development of the recipients at a
crucial stage in their careers, and it will help to ensure a diverse and
representative society. In addition, it will enable scholarly work with applied
benefits for the advancement of science and technology, product innovation and
commercialization, sustainable economic development, and, as a consequence, the
long-term material and physical betterment of humankind. It will also provide an
important opportunity for the dissemination of US-funded nanotechnology in
society research to international audiences, and will further the cross-cultural
approaches to understanding technology development and social change.