* 1343193
* INSPIRE:   Bioelectronic Systems for Investigating Neural Plasticity
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2014,09/30/2020
* Dong Song, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 09/30/2020
* USD 2,999,995.00

PI: Weiland, James D.&lt;br/&gt;Proposal: 1343193&lt;br/&gt;Title: Bioelectronic
Systems for Investigating Neural Plasticity&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This INSPIRE
award brings together research areas traditionally supported by the Biophotonics
and Nanobiosensing programs in the Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental, and
Transport Systems Division (CBET) of the Engineering Directorate (ENG); the
Neural Systems program in the Integrative Organismal Systems (IOS) Division of
the Biological Sciences Directorate(BIO); the Cognitive Neuroscience program in
the Behavioral and Cognitive Sciences Division (BCS) of the Social, Behavioral
and Economic Sciences Directorate (SBE); the Physics of Living Systems program
in the Physics Division of the Mathematical &amp; Physical Sciences Directorate
(MPS).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Significance&lt;br/&gt;The formation of connections
in the human brain is driven by experience. Particularly in development, but
also in adulthood, repeated activity leads to lasting changes at the synaptic
level. Understanding the mechanisms behind synapses formation and modification
remains a fundamental question in neuroscience. To enable novel experiments that
will expand our basic understanding of plasticity, the PIs propose to create and
test bioelectronics systems designed specifically for neuroscience experiments.
This approach is transformative because it sheds the usual constraints applied
to bioelectronics systems, which are almost uniformly designed for human use. By
focusing from this beginning on the need for systems to enable novel,
fundamental neuroscience experiments, this interdisciplinary team will create
bioelectronics implants optimized for investigating basic questions underlying
plasticity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;An
ultraminiaturized bioelectronics system capable of both stimulation of and
recording from nerve cells will be utilized. The system will feature novel
approaches to integrated circuit design, wireless operation information
transfer, microelectromechanical systems for integration of the circuit with
tissue, and materials for improved neural interfaces. System power will be
provided by a rechargeable microbattery, allowing the system to be completely
implanted and the animal to be untethered and freely roaming across several
meters of experimental space. These systems will allow extended periods of
bioelectronic stimulation as well as multi-animal experiments. Visual cortex
plasticity in response to bioelectronic retinal input will be investigated in
long-term studies with frequent monitoring of visual cortex anatomy using two-
photon microscopy. Different mouse knockout models that either increase
plasticity or decrease plasticity will be utilized to thoroughly investigate
anatomical changes driven by bioelectronic input. Experiments related to
hippocampal neurophysiology will be conducted to precisely measure activity at
the neural level and compare this activity to recorded behavior. From this,
sophisticated multi-input, multi-output models can be created that explain the
behavior.