* 1343991
* Multifunctional Nanodiamond Platforms for Targeted Imaging and Therapy
* MPS,DMR
* 08/11/2012,07/31/2015
* Dean Ho, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph A. Akkara
* 07/31/2015
* USD 313,639.00

This award by the Biomaterials program in the Division of Materials Research to
Northwestern University is to study the interactions of nanodiamond
(ND)-gadolinium III (Gd(III)) conjugates, and to further optimize the relaxivity
and integration with polyethylenimine (PEI) for enhanced imaging and medical
treatments. The development of novel imaging and therapeutic modalities with
significantly enhanced performance over current standards remains an important
focus at the intersection of biomaterials and nanoengineering. Nanodiamonds
serve as promising biomaterial platforms as they unite a spectrum of unique
chemical/physical properties, enabling significantly improved capabilities in
imaging and therapy. Recent studies have shown that ND-gadolinium (III)
complexes can produce a 12-fold enhancement in per-Gd relaxivity, yielding among
the highest values that have been reported. Furthermore, gene therapy challenges
are often based on the inability to develop platforms that integrate both safety
and efficacy. We have shown that complexes comprised of NDs and the
polyethylenimine polymer yield a 70-fold enhancement in DNA transfection
efficacy. Furthermore, both the ND-Gd(III) and ND-PEI hybrid complexes are
biocompatible. This project will modulate the linker length between ND surfaces
and Gd(III) to optimize relaxivity. The ND-Gd(III) complexes will then be
combined with PEI and a targeting agent to generate order of magnitude increases
in both imaging and therapy into a single platform. Optimized by fundamental
science and engineering investigations, this nanodiamond platform will combine
unprecedented improvements to contrast and therapeutic efficacy in targeted drug
delivery and imaging. These advancements will further serve as the foundation
for developing new educational modules and hands-on research experiences for
K-12 students. The planned preparation of ND block and magnetic resonance
imaging kits to educate students is expected to provide the interesting nature
of ND facets/electrostatics and how these materials could mediate drug
binding/release and imaging. In addition to their research training in science
and engineering, the graduate students supported by this proposal will also
serve as mentors for undergraduate researchers as well as K-12 students and high
school teachers from partnering institutions who are taking part in the learning
modules prepared. The integration of scientific discoveries and educational
resources from this project will thus serve as a foundation for the education
and training of the scientific and engineering leaders of tomorrow.

Current challenges in understanding, diagnosing, and treating cancer are based
on the needs of improved imaging and therapy. To address these challenges, the
investigators are developing a nanodiamond-based platform that is capable of
mediating greater than 10-fold increases in imaging and drug treatment
efficiency, which are significant improvements over current standards. The
integration of fundamental studies with applied engineering will be used to
synthesize integrated nanodiamond complexes to target, image, and treat a
selected breast cancer model, with the ultimate goal of optimizing diagnostic
capabilities and therapeutic efficiency while remaining biocompatible and safe.
It is envisioned that this novel technology will provide unprecedented advances
in imaging/diagnostics and cancer therapy, among other areas. The discoveries
realized from this study will also inspire new methodologies for educating and
training the next generation of science and engineering leaders. To merge
scientific discovery with educational impact, the investigators are planning to
develop innovative experimental modules using imaging kits and nanodiamond
blocks that could be used to educate students from K-12. Furthermore, these kits
will be used as a hands-on tool for magnetic resonance imaging instruction.
Graduate students supported by this study will serve as educational module
leaders to instruct partnering K-12 teachers on the emerging applications of
nanodiamonds, as well as the use of these kits. Furthermore, these graduate
students will mentor undergraduate students in designated research projects, and
these activities are expected to provide an optimal framework for scientific
impact and educationally developing the next generation of scientific
leadership.