* 1343413
* AIR Option 1: Technology Translation:  Gliding Robotic Fish for Long-duration Sensing in Aquatic Environments
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2013,02/29/2016
* Xiaobo Tan, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Barbara H. Kenny
* 02/29/2016
* USD 154,359.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating the gliding
robotic fish technology recently developed at Michigan State University to meet
the market need for an inexpensive mobile sensing technology for various aquatic
environments. The translated gliding robotic fish technology has the following
unique features: low cost, compact size, high maneuverability, long operational
duration, and adaptability to versatile applications. It provides exemplary
advantages in performance, cost-effectiveness, and portability when compared to
the leading competing technologies in this market place, including propeller-
driven autonomous underwater vehicles (AUVs) and ocean gliders. The project
accomplishes its goals by (1) developing a modularized payload architecture to
facilitate convenient customization and cost-effective maintenance of the
product, (2) developing a solar and wave-energy harvesting system to enable
continuous, long-duration field operation, and (3) demonstrating a prototype of
a gliding robotic fish incorporating these advances. The partnership engages the
environmental monitoring industry and potential users of the technology to
provide guidance in prototype development and market analysis as they pertain to
the potential to translate the gliding robotic fish technology along a path that
may result in a competitive commercial reality.

The potential economic impact is expected to be over $200M for the next 15
years, which will contribute to the U.S. competitiveness in the autonomous
underwater sensing market. The societal impact, long term, will be enhanced
capabilities in monitoring water quality and aquatic ecosystems, in inspecting
underwater structures such as subsea drilling infrastructure for the oil and gas
industry, and in securing ports and maritime borders.