* 1343159
* INSPIRE Track 2: Discovery and Development of Optimized Photonic Systems for High Volume, Low Surface Area Solar Energy Harvesting: Learning from Giant Clams
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2020
* Alison Sweeney, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 07/31/2020
* USD 2,999,287.00

This INSPIRE award brings together research areas traditionally supported in the
Division of Integrative Organismal Systems in the Directorate for Biology, in
the Materials Research Division in the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical
Sciences, and the Division of Electrical, Communications and Cyber Systems in
the Directorate for Engineering. Giant clams evolved an elegant system for
efficiently harvesting solar energy in areas of extremely high light intensity
using algae adapted for much lower light intensities. They do this by arranging
algae within their tissues into vertical pillars parallel to incoming sunlight.
The surface of the tissue is covered by cells called iridocytes; these function
to redistribute light incident on the horizontal surface of the clam tissue
evenly over the much larger vertical surfaces of the algal micropillars. The
project will explore the wealth of biophysical complexity in the system to
understand exactly how the clam optimizes solar energy capture. PI Sweeney will
characterize the clams' evolved structural responses to changing light
environment over the lifetime of a clam and over evolutionary time as observed
in differences between closely related clam species. Co-PI Yang will make new
materials inspired by the clam by synthesizing top-down and bottom-up design and
fabrication techniques to rival biology in hierarchical structural control. The
clam's design will be especially useful for utilizing inexpensive polymer
photovoltaics efficiently and with low photodamage in novel devices, and for
improved photobioreactor technology. The project includes internships for
college students from Palau and Philadelphia to provide pre-college students
with cultural knowledge of scientific career paths and concrete lab experiences.

The PIs seek to turn new insights from this biophotonic symbiosis into
transformative, high volume, low surface area, defect tolerant photovoltaic
devices, and algal fuel culture systems. Giant clams in the genus Tridacna
support microalgal symbionts with a remarkable photonic arrangement that
addresses such design challenges as how to concentrate sunlight into smaller
footprint devices while tolerating device imperfections and avoiding overheating
and photodamage. The project integrates biological fieldwork, physical/optical
modeling, and the development of at least two novel materials/devices. Evolved
responses of the clam to shifts in light environment will be explored; this work
will generate a matching function between light environment and iridocyte/algal
pillar design that will directly inform device design. New materials will be
made by synthesizing top-down and bottom-up design and fabrication techniques to
rival biology in hierarchical structural control. The project will produce
synthetic iridocytes which can be engineered to enhance radiance reaching any
arbitrary solar energy absorber, and copy the clam's micropillar + iridocyte
arrangement for a paradigm-shifting, micron-scaled photobioreactor for biofuel
production. Fieldwork in Palau will allow the investigators to probe the
evolution of the clam system in variable light environments.