* 1343220
* EARS: Collaborative Research: Cognitive Mesh: Making Cellular Networks More Flexible
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2014,11/30/2015
* Pan Li, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Thyagarajan Nandagopal
* 11/30/2015
* USD 286,649.00

Innovative use of wireless devices such as smartphones in various mobile
applications has exacerbated the congestion over cellular spectrum. On the other
hand, many licensed spectrum blocks are left unused. Although cognitive radios
(CR) technology has emerged as an enabler for unlicensed users to
opportunistically access the unused licensed spectrum, most previous works
commonly assume that each user is equipped with a CR which can operate across a
wide range of spectrum. This may be possible in theory, but may not be practical
for light-weight devices such as cell phones. How to effectively utilize the CR
technology to build more flexible networks so that even non-CR capable devices
can benefit from the opportunistic access to the unused spectrum is therefore in
dire need.

In this project, the PIs propose a novel cognitive mesh assisted cellular
network (CMCN) and investigate: 1) the architectural design of CMCN so that
unoccupied licensed spectrum can be efficiently utilized and non-cognitive
cellular devices can benefit from the CR technology, 2) spectrum and energy
efficient CR mesh router placement under uncertain spectrum availability, 3) how
to construct a fine-grained spectrum map to facilitate efficient spectrum
allocation and intelligent traffic delivery, and 4) experimental validation and
implementation for the proposed design. The research outcome provides a viable
solution to the spectrum congestion in cellular systems. Moreover, with this
flexible architecture, telecommunication industries can be rejuvenated with new
innovations, leading to further development of cellular networks with high
capacity and better support of new applications such as mobile healthcare, which
has significant impact on individuals' lives and further provides greater
opportunities for job creation and economic growth. The results of the project
will be disseminated through publications and presentations. Finally, this
project will actively recruit and train minority students for the future
workforce and mentor junior faculty.