* 1343256
* EARS: Collaborative: Comprehensive Network State Inference for Robust and Policy-Cognizant Spectrum Access
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2013,07/31/2016
* Robert Baxley, Georgia Tech Applied Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* chengshan xiao
* 07/31/2016
* USD 425,000.00

Objective:

The objective of this project is a compendious cognition infrastructure enabling
robust, cross-layer protocol designs under governance policy constraints, so as
to maximize the cognitive radio (CR) network performance and end-user
satisfaction, notwithstanding the challenges associated with dynamic and
opportunistic radio-spectrum access, as well as the incomplete, corrupt and
sporadic data reflecting the cost and restrictions in acquiring network state
measurements.

Intellectual merit:

The intellectual merit is to transform state-of-the-art learning tools for
comprehensive and resource-aware cognition of the "global" network state (which
includes interference, any-to-any link gains, band occupancies, queue lengths,
and path delays), jointly with stochastic, state-cognizant optimization of CR
networks with policy implications, to pioneer transformative adaptation
approaches to routing, medium-access, and physical-layer designs of wireless CR
networks endowed with the much needed robustness to state uncertainty.

Broader impacts:

The broader impacts include tangible implications to mobile ad hoc, smart grid,
intelligent transportation networks, as well as medical telemetry, geo-
monitoring, and surveillance systems. Advances in the foundations of kernel-
based learning, kernel matrix completion, inference on graphs, and sampling-
based scenario optimization, will benefit a gamut of research areas including
social analytics, bio-informatics, medical imaging, and surveillance using
sensor networks. Policy research integrated with technical components will
encourage community embracing of novel CR technologies and open up investment
and business opportunities yielding greater economic impact.

Undergraduate Design Projects and Botball Competition, facilitated by the
proposed Cognitive Spectrum Operations Testbed, will also benefit student
training with hands-on experience in state-of-the-art learning, wireless systems
on mobile robots, and network optimization subjects.