* 1343520
* Workshop on Robust Socio-technical Architectures in Support of Displaced Persons
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Elizabeth Belding, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 08/31/2016
* USD 49,453.00

Armed conflict and natural disasters are increasingly driving people from their
homes. This displacement--being torn from physical possessions, familiar
surroundings and community--generates acute demands for connectivity,
communication and connectedness. The displaced must navigate their connectivity
and information needs while experiencing two types of mobility. First, they face
macro-mobility as they leave their homes and communities in search of safety and
shelter. Next, they must contend with resituated micro-mobility. As they work to
establish and maintain ties within their new location, whether a refugee camp or
temporary shelter.

These mobilities, as well as the physical environment of the displaced, create
challenges for successful implementation of wireless networks, applications and
devices. Moreover, displacement also creates extreme resource scarcity,
dependency, geographic change and conflicts between individuals and
organizations, further challenging information technology implementation and
use. This situation demand robust and rapidly deployable network technologies,
together with the applications to support victims in their time of need. It also
calls for novel social science theories, providing a deeper understanding of the
information requirements of the displaced along with informing technical
development.

This award supports a workshop to generate relevant novel technologies and
theories, and to define a research agenda derived from insights from a variety
of scientific disciplines, namely computer, information, organization and
geographic information sciences, as well as communication and refugee studies.
The workshop will also include practitioners, particularly those working with
refugees and displaced populations. Outcomes of the workshop will include a
research agenda, with implications for academic research in wireless network
architectures, information service design, geospatial visualization, community
self-organization and international organization governance. An additional
outcome will include publicly available multimedia use-case studies, designed to
focus discussions during the workshop but also for subsequent educational use.

To assemble this diverse group, the workshop will be held in advance of the ACM
DEV and ICTD2013 conferences at the University of Cape Town, South Africa in
December 2013. This location allows the organizers to draw upon the diverse
scientific expertise present at these two conferences. It also enables them to
tap into local expertise developed as South Africa has and continues to host
refugees fleeing conflicts in many parts of the continent. In particular, the
organizers will invite officials from the field office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and the Cape Town Refugee Center.

Intellectual Merit:

The workshop will generate a research agenda for technologies and social science
theories to support the diverse forms of mobility and their effects as
experienced by displaced persons. Together, the technologies and theories must
overcome challenges including limited access to power and network
infrastructure, dense settlements, rapidly changing geography, and new and
changing social relations among individuals and between individuals and
organizations. The research agenda will prioritize technical developments and
their associated social scientific implications to meet the most pressing
information needs, generating innovations for both organizations and
individuals.

Broader Impacts:

The technologies and theories resulting from these efforts will potentially
enhance the lives of tens of millions of displaced persons. In addition to
making their lives easier, the application of technologies and social theories
may also enhance their resiliency, thereby making recovery faster and more
complete, limiting the overall negative impacts of armed conflict and disasters.
The interdisciplinary nature of the resulting project teams will foster cross-
fertilization between computer and information sciences and social sciences.
Also, the international nature of the workshop and subsequent teams will enable
U.S. scientists to draw upon the resources and expertise of international
counterparts. Finally, the multimedia use-case studies can be used in a variety
of educational contexts, enhancing the international dimension of STEM
education.