* 1343519
* NSF/FDA SIR:  Isolation of cancer stem cells and the determination of the role of microRNA in B cell differentiation by flow cytometric techniques
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2014
* Elizabeth Raveche, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey-RBHS-New Jersey Med
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 08/31/2014
* USD 114,534.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;#1343519&lt;br/&gt;Raveche,
Elizabeth&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal employs multiparameter analysis of
individual cells using markers with specific fluorescence tags that upon laser
excitation emit a signal that can be distinguished from all other signals and
background. Through this multi-color analysis exquisitely small samples can be
identified and ultimately sorted and employed in molecular and functional
assays. . This proposed research will test the ability of this technology to
define unique malignant precursor cells that will be important for future
scientific breakthroughs. This proposal initially takes advantage of the
engineering advancements that have allowed fluorescent dyes with unique
excitation and emission profiles to result in the ability to differentially
excite and collect these emissions. The analysis of individual cells (or
particles) rather than the whole population allows for detection of multiple
properties measured on the same cell. The detection is rapid (as fast as the
cell in the fluid sheath passes through the laser beam). In addition to analysis
of individual cells, some types of flow cytometers can physically sort cells
based on signals associated with the parameters being detected. and scientific
research.