* 1343353
* Conference on Geometric Methods in Representation Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 11/01/2013,10/31/2014
* Frauke Bleher, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 10/31/2014
* USD 7,000.00

The Conference on Geometric Methods in Representation Theory will be held at the
University of Missouri-Columbia on November 23-25, 2013. The conference brings
together experts working on geometric methods in the representation theory of
finite dimensional algebras and related topics, and beginning researchers in
this area, such as graduate students and postdocs. There will be expository and
other research talks on topics such as: semi-invariants for bound quivers;
moduli problems for finite-dimensional algebras; degenerations of modules and
the geometry of orbit closures in module varieties; universal deformation rings
and their connection to moduli spaces; cluster algebras. This conference will
help strengthen and advance the interaction of geometry and representation
theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the main objectives of the Conference on
Geometric Methods in Representation Theory is to introduce beginning researchers
in representation theory to the power of geometric methods. These methods have
become more and more fundamental in many areas of mathematics, and in particular
in the representation theory of finite dimensional algebras. The key note
speaker for this conference will be Jerzy Weyman who will give two one-hour
lectures which will be accessible to graduate students and postdocs. There will
also be several expository lectures given by well-known experts. The remainder
of the lectures will be research talks given by both senior and junior
mathematicians. This will include several talks given by graduate students and
postdocs related to their theses. The conference will provide an inviting
atmosphere in which new collaborations can be formed and young researchers have
the possibility to learn about cutting-edge geometric methods in representation
theory. Moreover, the conference will enable junior representation theorists to
present their work and interact with the broader community, which are crucial
activities in the pre-employment season in the fall. More information about the
Conference on Geometric Methods in Representation Theory at the University of
Missouri-Columbia can be found at
http://www.math.uiowa.edu/~fbleher/CGMRT2013.html