* 1343454
* AIR Option 1: Technology Translation -  Superadiabatic Combustion in Porous Media for Efficient Heat Production
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2015
* Nina Orlovskaya, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Barbara H. Kenny
* 08/31/2015
* USD 153,266.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating the science
of catalytically enhanced superadiabatic combustion for efficient heat
generation to fill a technology gap of efficient heat utilization for water
heating purposes. The proposed technology translation research allows the
development of a prototype of the residential water heater for efficient heat
production as well as cost effective and clean water heating. The translated
science of catalytically enhanced superadiabatic combustion inside porous
ceramic media allows the use of ultra-lean fuel to gas mixtures in
superadiabatic combustion to generate heat. The heat is used to operate natural
gas/heating oil powered residential or commercial water heaters to provide
exemplary efficiency, safety, and cost saving when compared to the leading
competing open flame or electric water heaters in this market space. The project
accomplishes its objectives by (i) studying the fundamentals of catalytically
enhanced superadiabatic combustion; (ii) studying materials aspects of the
catalytically active coatings; (iii) designing and testing of water heater
prototype with incorporated porous burner; (iv) and initial customer discovery
and formulation of product launch and business development strategies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These efforts will result in the development of a
prototype residential water heater, which will increase the potential to
translate this technology along a path that may result in a competitive
commercial reality. The partnership engages the University of Central Florida as
an academic partner and Siemens Corporate Research Center, an industrial partner
whose role is to provide guidance in the heat harvesting and efficient energy
conversion implementation and commercialization. The potential economic impact
is expected to be in decreased energy consumption and pollution as well as a
safer water heating unit, which will contribute to the U.S. competitiveness in
the residential housing market space. The long-termsocietal impact will be in
development of new competitive commercial products. It is expected the project
will also increase public awareness of the importance of the science of energy
conversion for future technological development of humankind.