* 1343673
* NUE: Development of Multidisciplinary Nanotechnology Undergraduate Education Program at the University of Rochester Integrated Nanosystems Center
* ENG,EEC
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2016
* Svetlana Lukishova, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 12/31/2016
* USD 200,000.00

This NUE in Engineering program entitled, "NUE: Development of Multidisciplinary
Nanotechnology Undergraduate Education Program at the University of Rochester
Integrated Nanosystems Center", at the University of Rochester (UR), is under
the direction of Dr. Nicholas P. Bigelow. The Integrated Nanosystems Center
(URNano) is truly interdisciplary, and involves faculty and students from the
Departments of Optics, Chemistry, Physics, Biomedical, Chemical, Mechanical and
Electrical Engineering, as well as the UR Medical Center. The primary goals of
this NUE project are: 1) creating a coherent education program at the UR,
promoting collaboration between several UR departments to introduce
undergraduate students to the field of nanotechnology; 2) creating a
transformable model of collaboration in nanotechnology between a university with
state-of-the-art, experimental facilities, and Monroe Community College (MCC);
and 3) developing reproducible hands-on experiments ("mini-labs"), learning
materials and pedagogical methods to educate students with diverse backgrounds,
including freshmen and non-STEM-major community college students. The same
"mini-labs" will be introduced in various UR courses for UR freshmen and
sophomores. Based on earlier NSF supported collaboration between the UR and MCC,
both institutions will continue this collaboration to educate nanotechnology
students with diverse backgrounds. Establishing the URNano education program and
involving in it MCC will lay the foundation for future projects of the UR and
MCC with other community colleges of Upstate New York.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project impacts a variety of science and engineering students with diverse
backgrounds including under-represented groups (~34% of MCC students are
minorities and over 50% are women). This project will attract more community
college students to the universities involved in this NUE program. Summer NSF
REU and RET programs and interactive workshops including participation in the
ALPhA immersion program will provide students and teachers from other
institutions, especially community colleges and small univesities, with an
opportunity to learn about affordable "mini-labs' at the UR and MCC. Teachers
from the City of Rochester Northwest College Preparatory School serving mostly
minority students will be invited to the interactive workshop.