* 1343282
* EARS: GOALI: Low-Power, Multi-Tiered, Shared-Spectrum Access Terminals using Compressive Scanning and On-Top-of-CMOS BAW Filter Banks
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2017
* Peter Kinget, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 05/31/2017
* USD 768,000.00

Cognitive mobile devices that sense and exploit available spectral resources
have the potential for very broad societal impact, from business and government
to the education and non-profit sectors.The proposed research leverages the
interdisciplinary nature of the team and the industry-academic partnership
towards realizing the cognitive radio vision to enhance access to the radio
spectrum. The industrial partnership will specifically provide the essential
system and application context to facilitate faster translation of the research
into practice. Three graduate students will be trained in this highly cross-
disciplinary area. The PIs will further develop Research Experience for
Undergraduates (REU) projects as part of the program to expand undergraduate
participation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As wireless systems continue to proliferate
and the demand for instantaneous, over-the-air access to large volumes of
content continues to grow, radio spectrum (especially in the 500MHz-6GHz range)
is an increasingly scarce resource. Most of the useful spectrum has been
licensed. A few license-free bands are crowded to capacity, while many licensed
bands are underutilized. Cognitive radios propose to scan and opportunistically
share spectrum. They have the potential for expanding the available spectrum
through opportunistic use, if conflict can be sensed and avoided by continuously
monitoring higher priority traffic. This requires agile, low-power solutions for
spectrum scanning and bandwidth aggregation receivers. This project studies
these challenges in the context of a multi-tiered shared-spectrum access
communication system. It focuses on tier-3 cognitive radio terminals that scan
and dynamically use radio spectrum that is underutilized by higher tier users.
It proposes novel bandpass compressed spectrum scanner architectures and
recovery algorithms, that promise to substantially reduce power consumption and
scan time compared to existing solutions. To enable interference-robust,
reconfigurable receiver architectures with noncontiguous bandwidth aggregation,
reconfigurable arrays of bulk acoustic wave devices fabricated on top of CMOS
will be investigated. The industrial partnership is key to provide system and
application knowledge, as well as system integration expertise to test and
evaluate the innovations. The cross-disciplinary research questions are
important for broadband RF systems in general, and the proposed solutions will
have impact beyond multi-tiered cognitive radio systems.