* 1343708
* NUE:  Multifunctional Nanostructures for Integrated Electrical, Chemical, Mechanical and Geological Applications: A Multidisciplinary Laboratory Education Program
* ENG,EEC
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2016
* Carlen Henington, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 12/31/2016
* USD 200,000.00

This NUE in Engineering program entitled, "NUE: Multifunctional Nanostructures
for Integrated Electrical, Chemical, Mechanical and Geological Applications: A
Multidisciplinary Laboratory Education Program", at Mississippi State University
(MSU), under the direction of Dr. Priscilla Hill, will be a collaborative effort
between the Colleges of Engineering and Arts &amp; Sciences. This exciting new
educational approach builds upon the research collaborations of faculty in
nanoparticle synthesis/characterization, nanowire fabrication/device
development, nano-electromagnetics, geo-nanomaterials, and nanomechanics; and
builds on a recently developed nanotechnology certificate program. This recently
developed certificate program consists of lecture classes with little simulation
or laboratory experience. The proposed laboratory education program will address
these deficiencies by (a) developing a new laboratory course to accompany a
recently developed nanotechnology-intensive lecture course, (b) developing
simulation modules for four courses including two core courses and two
nanotechnology-intensive courses, and (c) developing laboratory modules for six
courses including two nanotechnology-intensive courses. The proposed program has
strong support across two colleges and five departments and would be easily
accessible for any MSU student enrolled in science or engineering (~5000
students). Professional audio/video documentation of the nanotechnology modules
will help to recruit students into the program while fostering outreach through
existing university mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Undergraduate students will
be excited about nanotechnology via professional audio/video materials, course
content, laboratory experiments and projects and simulation projects. Outreach
to K-12 students will be performed through the NanoClub. There will be active
recruitment of students from underrepresented groups for this program. In
addition, significant impact is anticipated with university/industry
collaborations including technology commercialization and development of spin-
off businesses. By equipping students with stronger interdisciplinary background
in nanotechnology, this NUE will further promote MSU technology
commercialization, helping to create new local employment opportunities and
opportunities for student co-op/training.