* 1343174
* INSPIRE Track 2: Molecular Brain Connectomics: from Genes to Cognition
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2020
* Winrich Freiwald, Rockefeller University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2020
* USD 2,999,995.00

This INSPIRE award brings together research areas traditionally supported in the
Division of Integrative Organismal Systems in the Directorate for Biological
Sciences, in the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering,Environmental, and
Transport Systems in the Directorate for Engineering, and in the Division of
Behavior and Cognitive Sciences in the Directorate for Social, Behavioral and
Economic Sciences. Cognition arises from the activity within complex brain
circuits. These brain circuits are laid out according to a species' genetic
blueprint. Past and current successes in uncovering the biological basis of
cognition include the discovery of areas in the human brain supporting specific
cognitive functions, the determination of the roles that specific cell types
play in the behavior of animals like the mouse, and the increasingly detailed
understanding of the impact specific genes and their alterations can have on
cognitive functions in health and disease. The goal of this interdisciplinary
project, conducted at The Rockefeller University, is to directly determine the
genetic specificity of brain circuit elements that are critically important for
high-level cognitive function. This project will be significant by 1)
elucidating the complexity of biological organization from the level of genes,
through cell types, brain areas, and neural circuits to behavior, 2) developing
new technology that will allow researchers to dissect brain circuits underlying
cognition with the precision and specificity of model organisms, and 3)
improving the understanding of how genetic alterations impact cognition. The
interdisciplinary project at the interface of cognitive neuroscience, neural
systems, and neurotechnology, is expected to have broader impacts on society by
providing insights into some of the deepest questions about the human mind and
by offering unique educational and outreach opportunities to improve public
understanding of the organization and function of the
brain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will investigate the genetic specificity
of a multi-node brain circuit that supports cognitive function. The circuit will
be localized with functional and structural magnetic brain imaging. Genetic
expression patterns of projection neurons within multiple circuit nodes will
then be determined using cutting edge molecular techniques. The functions of the
projection neurons linking the nodes will then be determined through advanced
and custom-designed optogenetic and electrophysiological techniques. The same
optogenetic approach will then be used for causal interrogation of projection
neurons in cognitive and emotional behaviors. Combining the gene expression and
functional data, predictions for how specific polymorphisms in human genes may
alter cognitive-emotional abilities will be generated. These predictions will be
tested through functional brain imaging and behavioral testing of genotyped
subjects. Together, these investigations will provide deep insights into the
brain circuits and genetic underpinnings that make possible the cognitive
functions of the human mind.