* 1343218
* AIR Option 1: Technology Translation:  Glycan based point-of-care diagnostics
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2013,04/30/2016
* Suri Iyer, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Barbara H. Kenny
* 04/30/2016
* USD 149,999.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating basic
research in glycoscience to fill a technology gap in the field of rapid
detection kits for infectious agents. The translated science has the following
unique features: The small molecules are sensitive, selective, and robust, easy
to produce in large quantities with no lot-to-lot variation, easy conjugation to
different sensor surfaces, can be used directly as recognition molecules in bio-
sensing applications or can be used in combination with existing technologies.
These features provide rapid test kits that will have extended shelf life
without the requirement of refrigeration and therefore can be used in a variety
of settings including low resource areas, can be used by untrained personnel,
and are inexpensive when compared to the leading competing antibody or nucleic
acid based technology in this market space. The project accomplishes its
objectives by developing and integrating glycoconjugates in a rapid diagnostic
test resulting in a proof-of-concept prototype for select infectious agents. The
partnership engages industrial partners to provide guidance in the biosensor
marketplace as the partners are actively involved in the research and
development of rapid diagnostics and other development aspects such as
optimization, testing, product positioning, etc. as they pertain to the
potential to translate the science/technology along a path that may result in a
competitive commercial reality. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential economic
impact of this project is expected to be very significant in the next five to
six years as the market for point of care diagnostics is estimated to be over
twenty billion dollars. This novel technology can overcome some of the problems
associated with current rapid test kits, which will contribute to the U.S.
competitiveness in this market space. The societal impact, long term, will be
decreased morbidity and mortality as early diagnosis is key to selecting
appropriate countermeasures to control and minimize the impact of harmful toxins
and pathogens.