* 1343058
* INSPIRE Track 2: Public Health, Nanotechnology, and Mobility (PHeNoM)
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2020
* Aydogan Ozcan, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 07/31/2020
* USD 3,000,000.00

PI: Erickson, David &lt;br/&gt;Proposal: 1343058 &lt;br/&gt;Title: INSPIRE Track
2: Public Health, Nanotechnology, and Mobility (PHeNoM)
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This INSPIRE award brings together research areas
traditionally supported by: the Biophotonics and Nanobiosensing Programs in the
Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport Systems Division (CBET)
of the Engineering Directorate (ENG); the Communications, Circuits and Sensing
Systems Program in the Electrical, Communications and Cyber Systems Division
(ECCS) of the ENG Directorate; the Science, Technology and Society Program in
the Social and Economical Sciences Division of the Social, Behavioral and
Economic Sciences Directorate (SBE); and the Smart Health and Wellbeing Program
in the Information and Intelligent Systems Division (IIS) of the Computer &amp;
Information Science Engineering Directorate (CISE).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Significance &lt;br/&gt;The science and technology enabled
by the Public Health, Nanotechnology and Mobility (PHeNoM) project may
ultimately lead to widespread access to health information obtainable from lab-
on-chip technology. This research project could alter the domestic healthcare
landscape by enabling earlier-stage detection of disease, reducing the cost of
public healthcare delivery, and allowing individuals to take better control of
their own well-being. Such advances require the integration of the social and
technical contexts of health care device deployment. This integration is
accomplished by gathering feedback on early versions of the technology and
modifying future designs based on that initial feedback. Iterations between
feedback and design are facilitated by research efforts that interpret the
feedback and guide the development process. The ultimate transfer of the
technology to the marketplace is enabled by a new education effort that involves
a unique combination of coursework, business plan development, pre-seed grant
workshops, and collaborations with existing start-ups in the mobile health
space. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description &lt;br/&gt;Advancements in
nanotechnology and microfluidics have enabled the development of lab-on-chip
devices that can detect and quantify protein, genetic, and other biochemical
markers of diseases with precision. Currently-available personalized diagnostic
devices are limited to conditions that require either frequent monitoring (e.g.
glucose for diabetics) or "binary" results (e.g. pregnancy). The goals of the
PHeNoM program are to demonstrate that deployment of lab-on-chip technology can
be fundamentally altered by taking advantage of ubiquitous smartphone technology
and show that the fusion of physical sensing and molecular assays on mobile
platforms enable healthcare diagnostics that are more informative than either
technology alone. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To meet these aims, the investigators
are focusing their efforts on developing and deploying three systems that may
have an immediate impact on advancing personalized healthcare in the United
States: a Stress-Phone for long term stress management, a Nutri-Phone for
bloodwork-enabled nutritional awareness, and a Hema-Phone for monitoring viral
loading in HIV+ patients. Beyond the immediate merits of these technologies, the
broader merit of this project is the demonstration of new "bioinfo-mobile"
diagnostics that intertwine the advantages of mobility, computation, physical
sensing, and biomolecular assays.