* 1343432
* Conference: Cell Decision Making Workshop, Arlington VA
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/2013,05/31/2014
* Herbert Levine, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 05/31/2014
* USD 49,992.00

Conference: Cell Decision Making Workshop, Arlington VA, June 10-11,
2013.&lt;br/&gt;Cells from across the biological kingdoms are continuously
engaged in the process of decision making, by which is meant that cells take
information from their surroundings (including neighboring cells), process this
data through complex signal transduction and genetic circuits, and modulate
their cellular phenotypes in response. Decision making implies that choices are
made from competing options and that once made, these choices have some degree
of persistence even as conditions change. This workshop will bring together
theoretical and experimental scientists to discuss major issues in cell
decision-making processes and the new approaches that may be employed to study
these issues. This workshop will serve to catalyze discussions between research
scientists with shared interests, but working on very different cell systems
(eukaryotic vs. prokaryotic). Broader impacts. The workshop will point the
direction to new research partnerships between theorists and experimentalists,
and help develop a consensus for this field of research driven by the
similarities in the biology of diverse cellular systems. The workshop organizers
will write a report summarizing the status of the field, including the limits to
current understanding; identification of the key questions for future research
efforts; and the barriers to be overcome as the field moves forwards. The
workshop supports the goal of broadening participation by the inclusion of women
and members of groups under-represented in science.&lt;br/&gt;This award is
supported by all clusters in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences
and by the Physics of Living Systems Program in the Division of Physics.