* 1343083
* I-Corps:  Electrically Polarized Hydroxyapatite Coatings
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,08/31/2014
* Matthew Yates, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 08/31/2014
* USD 50,000.00

The project will use a coating method that results in uniform hydroxyapatite
coatings with near perfect alignment of crystal domains. The unique structure of
the coating promotes high temperature proton conduction, and allows the coating
to have a strong, permanent electrical polarization near room temperature.
Experimental conditions will be tuned to make uniform coatings of controlled
thickness and porosity on titanium alloy parts of complex shape, such as small
pins and screws, used in actual surgical implant applications. Electrically
polarized hydroxyapatite coatings have been shown by others to promote bone
growth and healing. The aligned crystal domains in the novel coatings allow much
higher stored electrical charge after polarization than any previously measured
for hydroxyapatite. The total stored charge of the polarized coatings on
implants will be measured through thermally stimulated depolarization
experiments. The prototype implants with highly polarized coatings will be
investigated for their ability to adsorb and release drugs and other species
through ion exchange with the surface.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Synthetic
hydroxyapatite has found widespread use as a coating to improve bio-
compatibility of load bearing metallic implants. The unique electrical and
surface properties of the hydroxyapatite coatings in the present study can
improve performance in orthopedic and dental applications, as well as present a
number of potential applications previously not possible with this material.
Strong electrical polarization of the coatings can potentially speed healing by
promoting osteoblast adhesion and enhancing calcium phosphate deposition.
Infections can slow recovery, necessitate additional surgery to replace the
implant, or in worst cases lead to amputation or even lethal sepsis. Strong
electrostatic charge on the surface can be utilized for controlled delivery of
antibiotics or other drugs at the site of surgery through ion exchange with the
surface in order to reduce complications. The strong polarization and high
proton conductivity also opens up potential applications in membrane filters,
sensors, and fuel cells.