* 1343906
* EAGER: Generalized Network Slicing for NSF OpenCloud
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2016
* Nick McKeown, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* John Brassil
* 07/31/2016
* USD 296,143.00

This project will demonstrate the feasibility of generalized network slicing for
Software Defined Networks (SDN) that would enable multiple multi-tenant virtual
clouds on the same physical infrastructure. The generalized network slicing is
aimed at network operators as opposed to the end users or tenants of a cloud.
The network operators require network slicing with the ability to specify
performance, topology, network programmability, and independent address space
and require performance isolation. In this regard the proposed network slicing
is distinct compared to other efforts in the broader area of network
virtualization and can be used independent of network virtualization aimed at
supporting 100s and 1000s of cloud tenants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will demonstrate generalized network slicing system by focusing on four
fundamental challenges:&lt;br/&gt; - Topology Mapping. Goal is to allow an
experimenter or a tenant to specify topology of her network slice and map the
(virtual) slice topology on the physical network and maintain this mapping as
both physical and slice topologies change over time.&lt;br/&gt; - Address Space
Mapping. Goal is to allow a tenant to use her own private address space and
translate the private address space to the physical address space while
exploiting packet forwarding capabilities of the existing devices.&lt;br/&gt; -
Control Function Mapping. Goal is to allow each tenant to have SDN style
programming capability of her virtual network slice and map control functions on
to the corresponding physical instantiation of the network.&lt;br/&gt; -
Performance Isolation. Goal is to allow each tenant to specify resource
requirements for her network slice and allocate and police resource usage for
each virtual slice to ensure performance isolation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will focus on demonstrating the functionality and gaining valuable
experience with experimentation. This will help the community to subsequently
focus on performance, scale, robustness, and other attributes of the solution
that are needed for a real world deployment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The cloud is
rapidly changing the face of computing, and as such, is having an increasing
effect on experimental systems research, teaching and research in the broader
Computer Science community, and how research is done across the breadth of
science and engineering. By demonstrating the feasibility of network slicing as
an important building block of a research cloud this project will inform the the
on-going discussion about the cloud?s evolution.