* 1343925
* Workshop: Parental Incarceration in the United States: Bringing Together Research and Policy to Reduce Collateral Costs to Children
* SBE,SES
* 06/15/2013,05/31/2014
* John Hagan, American Bar Foundation
* Standard Grant
* susan sterett
* 05/31/2014
* USD 49,195.00

A one day workshop will engage researchers and policy makers about collateral
consequences of parental incarceration for U.S. children. The U.S. is a leader
internationally in incarceration levels and the majority of incarcerated adults
are parents. This workshop will: (1) review current knowledge about parental
imprisonment and child well-being, including theoretical and empirical puzzles
concerning variance in effects of incarceration; (2) document programs designed
to reduce negative effects of parental incarceration on children; (3) address
problems stemming from parental involvement with the justice system; and (4)
identify theoretically informed, empirically groundedbest practices for
improving the lives of children of incarcerated parents. The overarching goal is
to inform efforts to mitigate costs to a generation of affected children.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will bring together scholars and policy
makers across professional disciplines and policy sectors. The participants will
range from rising researchers to senior professionals selected from across the
nation based on their expertise and ability to engage underrepresented groups
including racial and ethnic minorities and women. A similarly diverse array of
postdoctoral and graduate student observers will be invited to advance the
training of the next generation of contributors to this area of work. These
participants will extend networks urgently needed between policy makers,
practitioners, and academics and will thereby expand policy and program
coverage. A key output of this workshop will be the identification of processes
and outcomes of parental incarceration, with particular attention to vulnerable
groups of children. The workshop will result in a report detailing findings and
recommendations. Power point slides and papers from the workshop will be made
broadly available through a page devoted to the conference on the website of the
American Bar Foundation.