* 1343937
* New Directions for Tissue Engineering and Regenerative Medicine Conference to be held in Sonoma, California on July 10-12, 2013
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Robert Nerem, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Athanassios Sambanis
* 12/31/2013
* USD 50,000.00

PI: Robert M Nerem Proposal Number: 1343937

Overview: Tissue engineering and regenerative medicine show great promise for
improving human health by restoring damaged and diseased tissue. The field has
grown and evolved significantly over the last 25 years and stem cells,
specifically specialized engineered stem cells, have emerged as a major
contributor to new advancements in regenerative medicine therapies.

The worldwide importance of stem cell engineering was the focus of a recent
World Technology Evaluation Center (WTEC) report titled Global Assessment of
Stem Cell Engineering (WTEC, December 2012). The WTEC panel that conducted the
assessment was led by Robert M. Nerem, a pioneering tissue engineering
researcher at the Georgia Institute of Technology. The primary purpose of the
assessment was to analyze the global status and trends of stem cell engineering
and to compare U.S. research and development programs with those abroad. The
WTEC report lays out important steps that need to be taken by the U.S.
scientific leadership to continue advancements in stem cell technologies.
Examples include the need to expand and strengthen international research
collaborations, as well as enhancing U.S.-based academic-industry partnerships
to successfully translate research into commercial successes.

The focus of this workshop is to discuss emerging stem cell and regenerative
medicine technologies. The main objective of this workshop is to bring together
key global leaders in stem cell engineering and regenerative medicine from
academia and industry to (1) discuss the critical issues and challenges facing
the further growth and development of tissue engineering and regenerative
medicine, and (2) identify future research directions in this field with
emphasis on the role of stem cell engineering. The topics that will be discussed
include programming stem cells and their environments, stem cell bioprocessing
and manufacturing, computational stem cell biology and system analysis, and
interface of stem cell technology with applications of the future.

Intellectual Merit: The intellectual merit of the proposed workshop is the
stimulation of creative, original, and potentially transformative new ideas and
concepts and the identification of future directions in the field of tissue
engineering and regenerative medicine, with emphasis on the role of stem cell
engineering. This workshop is unique as it brings global stem cell engineering
experts to discuss the challenges faced both nationally and abroad in the field.

Broader Impact: Workshop discussions will help to advance current understanding
of the underlying scientific and technological issues and challenges currently
impacting stem cells engineering. Information produced from the workshop will be
disseminated broadly to the scientific community to enhance scientific and
technological understanding. Efforts will be made to involve underrepresented
populations, as well as new investigators and trainees.