* 1343599
* Doctoral Mentoring Consortium at at the 23rd International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI 2013)
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2014
* Maria Gini, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 06/30/2014
* USD 25,000.00

This grant supports student travel for select students participating in the
Doctoral Consortium at the International Joint Conference on Artificial
Intelligence (IJCAI 2013), that will be held in Beijing, China, August 3-9,
2013. The biannual IJCAI conference is the premier international conference
spanning all topics in AI across a fully international research community.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This consortium is oriented on research and career
development for students who have identified their PhD topics and are just
embarking on that independent research. This consortium is covering topics that
are important and relevant to the success of these students, including, "funding
and strings attached to them, use of subjects in research (including IRB), data
collection, maintaining privacy and integrity of data, authorship (single and
multi-author submissions, ghost writing), plagiarism and self-plagiarism, proper
use of citations, reviewing of papers and proposals, and how to get the best out
of attending a conference."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Student participation in this
conference has direct impact through encouraging promising U.S. students to
engage in internationally-competitive research. This program will also enhance
the broader scientific community through exposure to emerging research topics.
IJCAI is the major international conference that will figure prominently in the
research careers of these young investigators. Students gain valuable research
insights from the exchange of technical ideas in this broader venue. In the
process, they make valuable connections with potential collaborators from around
the world. In addition, students participate in the main IJCAI conference
activities. This allows them to attend presentations of the leading research in
AI, as well as avail themselves of the available tutorials, workshops, and
demonstrations.