* 1343455
* AIR Option 2: Research Alliance-  Identification Technology Transition Readiness and Accelerated Innovation Network (IT-TRAIN)
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2013,06/30/2015
* Stephanie Schuckers, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Barbara H. Kenny
* 06/30/2015
* USD 233,332.00

This PFI: AIR Research Alliance project focuses on the translation and transfer
of sensor and software middleware technologies to fill the security and
performance limitations present in current biometric recognition systems. The
technologies have the following market-valued features: accurate detection of
spoofing attempts in fingerprint, iris and face recognition, and sensor
interoperability enhancements for biometric systems. They will provide
significant performance and security benefits when compared to the leading
commercial systems currently available in the biometrics market. The project
accomplishes this transfer of research products to the market through the
development of robust software, systems and processes. The outcomes include
creation of new high tech jobs in West Virginia?s I-79 technology corridor and
in St. Lawrence County, New York, commercial products for the growing biometric
authentication market, with the potential to license the products and create a
spinoff. The partnership engaged to transfer the technologies to the market
domain include commercial companies affiliated with the Center for
Identification Technology Research (CITeR) at West Virginia University and
Clarkson University, including the research and commercialization partner NexID
Biometrics, LLC and technology investors, Morpho and Seaway Private Equity Corp.
The potential economic impact is expected to be the range of five to ten million
dollars in the next five years, which will contribute to the U.S.
competitiveness in the biometric security market space. The societal impact will
address the national security needs for accurate human identification as well as
quickly expanding commercial authentication markets. The project will develop
new pathways for the creation of entrepreneurial workforce through student-led
project teams. The activities will benefit from our strong commitment to
bringing research and educational opportunities to students from the
underrepresented groups. The project will serve as a catalyst and a unique model
for much needed technology-based economic growth in West Virginia and upstate
New York.