* 1343434
* Air Option 1: Technology Translation -  The Gear Bearing Drive: A Novel Compact Actuator for Robotic Joints
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Nader Jalili, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 06/30/2017
* USD 191,921.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating advanced,
compact ac-tuator technology, called Gear Bearing Drive (GBD) Technologies to
fill a technology gap in the robotics and motion control industry that requires
a new generation of actuators able to exhibit a number of desirable
characteristics ranging from high power density and high efficiency, high
positioning resolution, high torque capacity and torsional stiffness,
lightweight designs and low-cost packages. The Gear Bearing Drive or GBD is a
compact mechanism with two key abilities. It operates as an actuator providing
torque and as a joint providing support. This is possible be-cause of the novel
combination of external rotor (outrunner type) DC motor technology and Gear
Bearing technology. The GBD is a bearingless powered joint with large power
density. It utilizes a unique two stage planetary gear arrangement that allows a
high reduction ratio while maintain-ing a compact form factor. The project
accomplishes its goals by completing three specific ob-jectives: A) To fully
analyze, characterize and experimentally test existing preliminary proof of
concept prototypes of GBD; B) To develop and fully characterize experimentally
advanced pro-totypes of GBD optimized using design for manufacturing approaches;
C) To integrate a series elastic and torque sensing element with the GBD to
facilitate human-machine interaction in GBD powered systems. In this project
Northeastern University will be partnering with the start-up company Foodinie to
investigate commercialization of the GBD. Foodinie, located in New York City,
aims at de-veloping and commercializing novel robotic systems for assistance of
the elderly at home. Food-inie is interested in developing both a novel robotic
system actuated by the GBD and GBD actu-ated joint modules that could be sold as
standalone components to other manufacturers. The PI and Northeastern University
have recently been issued US patent 8,016,893 (Sep. 13, 2011) for this
invention. The intellectual merit of the proposed project is the design,
advanced prototyping and thor-ough testing of an innovative compact, advanced
actuator assembly that could find immediate commercial application in important
markets such as rehabilitation, medicine, aerospace and others. The GBD will
considerably improve the torque density and mechanical efficiency of ac-tuated
robotic joints, and enhance the portability and effectiveness of robotic systems
engaged in biomechanical applications such as rehabilitation robots and wearable
exoskeletons. The current market size for robotic devices is 12 billion dollar
with an expected expansion to 25 billion over the next 5 years. This market
includes established manufacturing, defense and aerospace industries and
emerging medical/health markets in prosthetics, bionics, and rehabilita-tion
robotics. The GBD has potential to permeate all of these markets to varying
degrees. These market opportunities seem large and with the validation attained
from this investigation, we ex-pect to be able to attract and secure venture
capital support for commercialization of the GBD. The specific educational,
broader impact and outreach activities of this project are: 1) The in-itiation
of undergraduate students (including students from under-represented groups) in
research in robotics; 2) The establishment of collaborative projects in advanced
actuators and robotics with the science and technology high schools of
Massachusetts with the objective to attract new students in this field; 3) The
organization of a one semester I-cubator (student) project on market analysis
and business planning for the proposed GBD technologies; 4) The establishment of
a seminar series and of a webpage in the area of advanced actuators for robotic
systems; and 5) The performance of graduate and undergraduate student
internships in industry.