* 1343607
* NUE:  Printing Innovative Nano Technology Research and Elite Education (PINE TREE) Program
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Lawrence Murr, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 09/30/2017
* USD 191,240.00

This NUE in Engineering program entitled, "NUE: Printing Innovative Nano
Technology Research and Elite Education (PINE TREE) Program", at the University
of Texas at El Paso (UTEP), under the direction of Dr. Namsoo Kim, will be a
supplemental program for the Printing Nano Engineering (PNE) concentration
option available at UTEP beginning in the Fall of 2014. The goal of this
proposal is to design and implement a 24-credit-hour PNE concentration (with
opportunities for international experiences) under the Bachelor of Science in
Metallurgical and Materials Engineering (MME) program, which will prepare
graduates for advanced, high-tech engineering and manufacturing careers in
printed electronics. The PINE TREE Program has established three objectives to
achieve its goal: 1) Recruit and prepare lower-division pre-engineering students
to pursue a career option in Nanotechnology. 2) Modify, evaluate, and refine
upper-division PNE courses to ensure that students are prepared to enter careers
in printing nano-engineering. The strategic actions include the assessing and
evaluating of the upper-division curricula and refining courses based on
assessment results. 3) Integrate research and development into undergraduate
education to reinforce the concepts acquired in the PNE curricula. The PINE TREE
program builds on nano-scale and pedagogical research that is already
established at UTEP, as well as on the newly established program between UTEP
and Seokyeong University (SKU) in Seoul, South Korea that offers upper-division
PNE courses to SKU students who transfer to UTEP in their junior year. This
international collaboration between UTEP and SKU will help advance PNE education
in the U.S. and has the potential of serving as a model which can be replicated
by other universities and strengthen the U.S. global manufacturing position.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The students who complete the PINE TREE program will be
experts in the field of printed electronics and able to manufacture printed
electronics in the areas of printable material development, system
manufacturing, and development of flexible electronics. Since the UTEP MME
Department has an undergraduate student population that is 81% Hispanic and 31%
Female, the PINE TREE Program will create a diverse group of engineers with the
skills and qualifications needed in industry for printed electronics; the
students will be diverse not only in ethnicity and gender, but in educational
background. The program also features international collaborations that will
help advance PNE education in the U.S.