* 1343671
* Allocation, life history and senescence: an integrated approach
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2013,08/31/2014
* Carol Boggs, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 08/31/2014
* USD 56,127.00

Animal life history traits include survival, dispersal and reproduction, all of
which change with age. These life history traits depend on food intake and on
allocation of that food to body maintenance, activity and making offspring.
Variation in the amount of food eaten can affect nutrient allocation among these
traits, changing age at death, activity patterns, and timing, numbers and
quality of offspring. Likewise, increased demands for allocation to activity can
reduce allocation to other traits. Feeding and allocation patterns also affect
trait senescence, or loss of function with age. How the set of life history
traits changes with food stress or with activity stress is not well understood.
Using an insect test system, this work will examine how such environmental
stresses alter life history traits, using both laboratory physiological
experiments and field observations. Techniques will include stable isotope
analysis, insect respirometry, micro-analysis of chemical composition of eggs
and measurements of body morphology. This work will contribute to understanding
the impacts of environmental change on organisms' survival and reproduction. To
do this, the work will connect experimental laboratory results with field
observations, to build an understanding of how life history traits respond to
environmental variation in the wild, and of trait senescence in the wild. The
work will also test the theory of nutrient allocation as the basis for life
history trade-offs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will include mentoring of
undergraduates, women and minorities in research. Research results will be used
in teaching, and teaching ideas will be published for use by others. The work
builds on extensive field databases at a field station. Educational outreach
associated with the project will also be directed to the general public.
Outreach will include a continuing studies course, work with a public education
program, development of museum exhibit materials, talks for community groups and
radio shows, and newspaper articles. Journalists will participate, both to learn
about the project and in turn to educate students and scientists on
communication with the press and the public.