* 1343255
* AIR Option 1: Technology Translation:  Enabling High Efficiency &amp; Clean Combustion through the Integration of Low Heat Rejection Concepts with Advanced Low Temperature Comb Eng
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2013,06/30/2017
* Jerald Caton, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 06/30/2017
* USD 181,326.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating the
synergistic combination of low heat rejection (LHR) and low temperature
combustion (LTC) to fill the technological gap between existing commercially
available internal combustion engines and the clean high-efficiency advanced
combustion engine. The translated LHR/LTC technology has the following unique
feature: low heat rejection from a low temperature combustion engine that
results in more favorable thermodynamics compared to either conventional or
ordinary low temperature combustion engines. This provides exemplary efficiency,
engine-out exhaust emissions of nitrogen oxides and fixed carbon, and suitable
exhaust temperatures for favorable operation of exhaust emission control systems
when compared to the leading competing internal combustion engine. The project
accomplishes its objectives by performing a proof-of-concept that experimentally
and computationally realizes LHR concepts with LTC in a compression ignition
engine resulting in a prototype LHR/LTC combustion mode operating in a light-
duty automotive diesel engine. The partnership engages General Motors, which
engineers and manufacturers the prototype-intended light-duty automotive engine.
GM provides guidance in the global automotive market space such as operating
constraints, cost limitations, and technology integration with a marketable
product in order to translate LHR/LTC combustion along a path that may result in
a competitive commercial reality. The potential economic impact is expected to
be nearly $40million in the next 10 years (based on new diesel vehicle
registrations in the United States demonstrating on average $256/year in fuel
cost savings at $4.00/gallon fuel cost), which will contribute to the U.S.
competitiveness in this automotive market space. The societal impact, long term,
will be improved vehicle fuel economy with reduced emission of criteria
pollutants (e.g., nitrogen oxides), thereby reducing vehicle carbon footprint.
Additionally, this effort will augment the investigators? efforts to increase
female and underrepresented students in STEM disciplines and improve
undergraduate student course instruction in thermodynamics by leveraging
resources used for summer STEM camps and course redesign activities. Finally,
scholarly articles and conference presentations will be disseminated to ensure
scientific and technological pathway discoveries are made known.