* 1343214
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Stable Isotopic Evidence for Landscape Reconstructions, Kapthurin Formation, Kenya
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2013,07/31/2016
* Sally McBrearty, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2016
* USD 21,161.00

Under the guidance of Dr. Sally McBrearty, David Leslie will analyze fossil soil
organic carbon, soil carbonates, and animal tooth enamel for stable isotopic
values useful for environmental reconstructions. These fossil indicators were
collected during the field seasons of 2011 and 2012 in the Lake Baringo basin,
Kenya, where a geologic formation, the Kapthurin Formation, preserves sediments
that date to 545 - 235 thousand years ago, during the Middle Pleistocene. The
Kapthurin Formation preserves archaeological evidence for the transition from
the Acheulian to the Middle Stone Age, a time period that marks significant
technological change and culminates with the emergence of our own species, Homo
sapiens. Mr. Leslie's research will focus on reconstructing environments during
this time period, while also developing a novel technique to link the biomass
productivity of modern environments with stable isotopic indicators from modern
soil organic carbon and carbonates using computerized remote sensing and
geography information systems. This technique offers a new environmental proxy
to use when reconstructing past environments, and is broadly applicable to other
time periods and archaeological and paleontological
sites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is widely accepted that changes in environments
can affect species diversity and speciation. During the Middle Pleistocene of
East Africa, significant biological and technological change occurred and could
be driven by changing environments. This project will reconstruct two separate
landscapes, dating to 545 - 509 and 509 - 235 thousand years ago, available to
Acheulian and Middle Stone Age human ancestors, to discern any differences or
similarities in the use of landscapes, environments, resources, and technology.
Stable isotope values will be derived from 720 samples of modern and fossil soil
organic carbon, carbonates, and animal tooth enamel to reconstruct these
environments. Ultimately this research seeks to test the effect of environmental
change on technological and biological changes during the Middle Pleistocene of
East Africa and the accuracy of continental models of climate change in relation
to the Lake Baringo basin. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will highlight
the importance of using multiple lines of evidence when reconstructing
environments to arrive at the best approximation of past environments.
Preliminary research was conducted with the help of Kenyan colleagues during the
summers of 2011 and 2012, and was supported in part by grants to Dr. McBrearty
from the National Science Foundation (BCS 0917965) and grants to Dr. McBrearty
and Mr. Leslie from the University of Connecticut. The results of this research
will be shared with colleagues through conference presentations, lectures, and
peer-reviewed publications. The raw data created from this project will be made
available via an online data repository, thereby making it accessible to the
public. In the future, Mr. Leslie plans to incorporate remote sensing and
geography and information systems methods developed, as well as stable isotope
extraction and analysis techniques, into hands-on laboratory classes for
undergraduates.