* 1343316
* EARS: Joint Circuit and Waveform Optimization for Cognitive, Spectrally Confined Radar Transmission
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2013,10/31/2018
* Robert Marks, Baylor University
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 10/31/2018
* USD 432,000.00

Joint Circuit and Waveform Optimization for Cognitive, Spectrally Confined Radar
Transmission&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Due to the continued
development and use of new wireless broadband devices and the resultant
congestion of the spectrum, future radar systems will be required to perform
their ever-critical societal and military functions in a frequency-flexible,
cognitive manner. To facilitate this new paradigm, this research involves
investigation of an adaptive radar transmitter with jointly optimizable circuit
and waveform to operate within a dynamically varying spectral mask based on
locations of nearby communication nodes. The specific intellectual and
scientific aims of this research are to (1) create a useful circuit optimization
approach for linearity and efficiency, (2) innovate an approach to optimize the
radar waveform for spectral compliance and desired detection/ambiguity
properties, (3) simultaneously optimize the waveform and matching networks in
the reconfigurable radar transmitter, (4) investigate sources of additional
information to speed the search, and (5) recommend an approach for dynamic radar
spectral mask construction based on the relative locations of the radar
transmitter and communication nodes. The proposed work will provide enabling
technology for cognitive radar systems to exist in a dynamic spectrum access
environment with changes in radar operating frequency, and will also allow
optimization of radar detection capabilities and power efficiency based on the
surrounding environment and potential victims of interference. This work is
interdisciplinary, fusing work in areas of RF/microwave circuitry and robust
intelligence/optimization to accomplish a transformative paradigm shift in
radar/communications coexistence. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: For the purpose of
garnering expert input from policy and economic perspectives, the principal
investigator, along with a multidisciplinary steering committee, will add a
Spectrum Forum to their already successful Texas Symposium on Wireless and
Microwave Circuits and Systems. The research team has constructed collaborations
to channel outcomes of this research into relevant regulatory efforts and
already underway involvement in the North Atlantic Treaty Organization Research
Task Group on Spectrum Engineering. The principal investigator also will
continue successful efforts in educating high school students about spectrum
issues and science, technology, engineering, and math careers by partnering with
schools in the Central Texas region. The research group of the PI has a history
of significant female and minority representation in his research group, and the
placement of this research at a university with significant female involvement
in engineering will allow this grant to continue to involve underrepresented
groups in research