* 1343124
* AIR Option 1: Technology Translation:  Development and Evaluation of Field Prototype for Determining Excavator Proximity to Buried Utilities
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2013,03/31/2016
* Vineet Kamat, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Barbara H. Kenny
* 03/31/2016
* USD 162,000.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating fundamental
research findings in Georeferenced Augmented Reality (AR) and Emulated Graphical
Monitoring to develop a technology for estimating excavator proximity to
invisible buried utilities in real-time while a machine is digging. AR is the
superimposition of computer-generated images over a user-view of the real world.
Emulated Graphical Monitoring is the concurrent 3D visualization of an
engineering process ongoing in the real environment. The translated technology
has the following unique features: it can allow excavator operators to
persistently see what utilities are buried in a digging machine?s vicinity, thus
helping prevent utility strike accidents; it can also allow the monitoring of a
working excavator?s proximity to buried assets, thereby enabling real-time
knowledge-based excavator control. These features provide exemplary situational
awareness, safety, and confidence to excavator operators when compared to the
leading competing machine control technologies in this market space that are
limited to providing grade control guidance during excavation. The project
accomplishes is goals by pursuing an accelerated plan to develop and evaluate a
field-deployable prototype of the technology for customer demonstration and
evaluation along the path to commercial reality, resulting in a market-ready
capability that can allow an excavator operator to be visually aware of buried
underground utilities and other assets in the vicinity of a machine, and can
offer quantitative feedback of machine distance to vicinal obstructions. The
partnership engages DTE Energy Company (Michigan?s largest electricity and gas
provider), Miss Dig System (Michigan?s One-Call excavation safety agency), and
member companies of the Michigan Infrastructure Transportation Association
(MITA) to provide guidance in the excavation safety market space and other
commercialization aspects as they pertain to the potential to translate the
developed technology along a path that may result in a competitive commercial
reality. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An excavator unintentionally hits a buried
utility every 60 seconds in the U.S. causing fatalities, injuries, and property
damage that annually cost billions of dollars. It is widely documented that
these accidents occur either because excavator operators do not know where
utilities are buried, or because they cannot perceive where the utilities are
relative to the digging excavator. The potential economic impact of this project
is expected to be the transformation of excavator operation from a skill-based
activity to a knowledge-based practice, leading to improvements in productivity
and safety within the next three years, which will contribute to the U.S.
competitiveness in the burgeoning civil infrastructure construction and
rehabilitation industry. Such benefits will also accrue in manufacturing,
transportation, mining, and ship-building where transition from skill-based to
knowledge-based processes is seen to be of value. The societal impact, long
term, will be the reductions in construction and underground infrastructure
life-cycle costs that will be possible through safe and efficient excavation.