* 1343407
* AIR Option 1:  Technology Translation:  Microbial fatty acid production from renewable biomass sugars
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2015
* Ka-yiu San, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Barbara H. Kenny
* 08/31/2015
* USD 151,367.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating an efficient
bioprocess for domestic production of fatty acids from renewable biomass sugars.
The translated advanced bioprocess has the following unique features: it is
heterotrophic fermentation based and not land based, which provides exemplary
high yield, and high efficiency. Furthermore, it is weather independent,
environmentally friendly and will enable a low cost supply of fatty acids when
compared to the fatty acids production from palm and coconut plants. The project
accomplishes this goal by rapidly developing the microbial strain and bioprocess
resulting in scale-up in the near future. The partnership engages Technology
Holding to provide guidance in the process development and other aspects
including future financing, commercialization trajectory and market strategy as
they pertain to the potential to translate the advanced bioprocess technology
along a path that may result in a competitive commercial reality. The technology
has potential to have a significant impact on a $50 B consumer products market
in the next 7-10 years, which will contribute to the U.S. competitiveness in the
consumer products industry. The societal impact, long term, will be reduced
dependence on foreign countries, high-value jobs creation by creating a new
domestic industry, access to cheaper products and environmental sustainability.