* 1343363
* EARS: A TV Whitespace Communication System for Connected Vehicles
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2018
* Suman Banerjee, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Monisha Ghosh
* 12/31/2018
* USD 963,247.00

The project is focused on designing a holistic communication stack that
leverages TV whitespaces for enabling "connected vehicles" and their many
advantages in ushering smarter and safer transportation services. The
combination of low cost of the unlicensed TV whitespace spectrum and its longer
communication ranges matches the needs of vehicular connectivity quite well. Yet
realizing TV whitespace communications faces unique constraints and challenges
including, e.g., protecting primary incumbents, scanning through many channel
configurations subject to spatial-temporal variations, dealing with asymmetric
uplink/downlink transmit power constraints due to FCC regulations concerning
mobile and static nodes. The proposed research addresses these challenges
through a range of techniques. It augments spectrum sensing techniques from
sensors distributed across moving vehicles to enhance the accuracy of spectrum
databases. It employs innovative PHY and MAC layer techniques including variable
spreading codes, MIMO and directional antennas, complemented with
network/transport layer protocols that adapt to uplink/downlink asymmetry. These
research tasks integrate machine learning techniques to explore the predictable
mobility and other unique advantages of the vehicular whitespace network.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is developing a new communication technology
for improved and robust wide-area connectivity for vehicles. All developed
techniques are expected to be deployed in a practical setting on a realistic
vehicular testbed in Madison, WI. The research work engages collaboration with
many industry partners and is expected to influence regulatory and
standardization bodies. The researchers are also making educational impact
through public lectures, developing new curriculum, and motivating women and
minorities in future STEM careers through appropriate PI engagement at high
school and undergraduate levels.