* 1343072
* Collaborative Research:   CEDAR--Study of Storm-time Large Scale Structures in the Subauroral Ionosphere with Coupled First-principles Model and Multi-instrument Observations
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Stanislav Sazykin, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Tai-Yin Huang
* 08/31/2018
* USD 356,672.00

This project will combine theoretical and empirical modeling efforts to develop
a comprehensive model of the ionosphere, plasmasphere, and inner magnetosphere
system. This will be accomplished by coupling the Naval Research Laboratory
ionosphere model, SAMI3, with the Rice University inner magnetosphere code, RCM.
Model-data comparisons will be an integral part of the model development, using
multi-instrument observational data from MIT Haystack Observatory. A graduate
student will work closely with the modelers in the coupling of SAMI3 and RCM and
also with experimentalists to gain proficiency in multi-instrument data analysis
techniques. The student will receive a comprehensive education in the system
science approach of the ionosphere-thermosphere-magnetosphere system.
Additionally, undergraduate students will be involved in this research through
the research experience for undergraduates (REU) program run at the MIT Haystack
Observatory. The key physics issues to be addressed are the dynamics and spatial
distribution (specifically longitudinal variations) of the sub-auroral
polarization stream (SAPS) flow channels and the storm enhanced density (SED)
ionospheric density features during geomagnetic storms. Correct first-principles
modeling of the SAPS/SED development will provide a better understanding of the
connectivities and causal relationships involving the ionosphere-thermosphere-
magnetosphere (ITM) components of the Sun-Earth system. There is a crucial need
for improved knowledge of the spatial/temporal structure of electric fields in
the inner magnetosphere and subauroral ionosphere.