* 1343056
* Collaborative Research:  CEDAR:  Understanding the High-to-Mid Latitude Ionospheric Response to Stratospheric Warmings
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2019
* Larisa Goncharenko, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Alan Liu
* 06/30/2019
* USD 258,395.00

This effort seeks to develop a better understanding of how the high-to-mid
latitude ionosphere is coupled to both the underlying middle atmosphere and to
solar and geomagnetic drivers. Goals of the project are: (1) To specify solar,
magnetospheric, and geomagnetic drivers during a recent period of low to
moderate solar activity and to investigate how the wintertime high and mid-
latitude ionosphere responds to these drivers; (2) To specify spatio-temporal
variations in middle atmospheric drivers, including polar vortex disturbances
and planetary waves throughout the stratosphere, mesosphere, and lower
thermosphere over the life cycle of sudden stratospheric warmings; (3) To
investigate how the combination of forcing from above (goal 1) and forcing from
below (goal 2) controls the high to mid-latitude ionosphere during the periods
of sudden stratospheric warmings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A main objective of the
project is to understand the impact of lower atmospheric forcing on the high and
mid-latitude ionosphere under conditions when wave fluxes from the lower
atmosphere are at the maximum, and solar and magnetospheric fluxes are at the
minimum. High-amplitude stratospheric planetary waves that lead to minor and
major stratospheric warmings will be investigated, and their impact on the
middle and high-latitude ionosphere examined. The focus on large dynamical
events with strong vertical coupling holds a promise of discovering new sources
and mechanisms of quiet-time ionospheric variability. These goals will be
achieved through collaborative analysis of NASA MERRA reanalysis data, MLS and
TIMED SABER satellite data, incoherent scatter radars data, and WACCM-X/TIMEGCM
modeling efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will foster a partnership
between MIT and the University of Colorado, and also between disciplines.
Undergraduate students will participate in the research at both institutions.
The MIT Haystack Observatory REU program aims to attract minority students
through integration with the Puerto Rican university system.