* 1343387
* AIR Option 1: Technology Translation:  Control of Ion Energy Distributions in Plasma Processing
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2015
* Demetre Economou, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Barbara H. Kenny
* 09/30/2015
* USD 151,668.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating basic
studies of ion energy distribution control in low temperature plasmas to fill a
gap in the ability of the semiconductor industry to meet future needs in the
manufacturing of silicon integrated circuits with higher circuit density. The
translated method for ion energy distribution control in plasma processing has
the unique feature of single, selectable energy ion bombardment, that, combined
with a self-limiting charge neutralization step, provides exemplary performance
advantages in patterning insulating and conducting layers in silicon integrated
circuit fabrication, including higher selectivities in etching one material
relative to another, and in dimension control leading to improved yields, when
compared to the leading competing technology of radio frequency bias in this
market space. In addition, the simplicity and efficiency of power delivery,
compared to the competing tailored waveform bias gives it an additional
advantage. The project accomplishes this goal by using pulsed DC bias to an
electrode and the substrate stage to obtain energetic ion bombardment, then
electron flux to neutralize charge, resulting in a mono-energetic ion flux with
no charge-up issues on insulating materials. The project will produce a
prototype that will consist of a substrate stage and a boundary electrode that
can be immersed in a pulsed plasma. Positive DC voltage on the boundary
electrode during the afterglow produces energetic ion bombardment, while
positive DC spikes to the substrate stage temporarily bringing the surface to
near plasma potential, allowing electron flow to neutralize positive surface
charge. The project will deliver a proof-of-concept, the specifications for this
hardware, and a path to scale-up. The partnership engages Tokyo Electron America
and GlobalFoundaries to provide guidance in the semiconductor plasma etching
market space and other aspects, including supplying test samples that would
increase credibility in the market space, and potential future investments that
could accelerate the translation of this technology along a path that may result
in a competitive commercial reality. The potential economic impact is expected
to be hundreds of millions in tool sales in the next decade, which will
contribute to the U.S. competitiveness in the plasma etching equipment market
space. The societal impact, long term, will be a continuation of Moore?s Law,
which predicts the steady improvement in the performance of integrated circuits.
This will lead in turn to the continued improvement in computers and portable
electronic devices, as well as innovations leading to new consumer electronics
products, medical equipment, and other yet to be conceived of advanced products.