* 1343069
* EAGER:  Nanoelectromechanical system for in situ measurement of cell surface charge
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2015
* Cagri Savran, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Mona Zaghloul
* 06/30/2015
* USD 150,000.00

Objective: The objective of this proposal is to develop a system that can
perform in situ and on demand detection of surface charge of single cells. To
achieve this objective we will fabricate a nanomechanical system with a
controlled amount of charge at its tip. Upon an electrostatic interaction with a
cell, the structure will deflect in a manner that is proportional to the surface
charge of the cell. Since the interaction could potentially have other
constituents such as Van der Waals and hydration forces, these effects will be
deconvoluted by varying the amount of charge on the cantilever, and hence only
measuring the electrostatic interactions. The PI will investigate the extent of
surface charge density on a number of cancer cell lines and compare the results
with normal cells. He will also weigh the individual cells using the same
electromechanical system and investigate the correlation between surface charge
and mass density. Intellectual Merit: Investigation of electrical properties of
cells has been important for a long time. Recent studies show that cancer
researchers are increasingly interested in correlating phenotype with electrical
properties. Here the PI proposes a system that can interrogate a particular cell
identified by the user on demand under the microscope. In addition, the system
can be used to hover above a group of cells immobilized on a surface or
interrogate a section of a larger tissue sample. The versatility of the system
also allows it to serve as a mass sensor. Hence, the cells interrogated for
their electrical properties can be grabbed by a micro-tweezer and placed on the
tip of the electromechanical system for on demand weighing, allowing correlation
of electrical properties with mass density. Broader Impacts: Cells have an
enormous amount of information packed within their intracellular organelles that
code for the gene products expressed on the cell surface membrane and the
structures in the cell periphery. Membranes and membrane surfaces have attracted
the attention of many scientists for centuries. The cell surface membrane is
involved in a wide variety of interactions of the cell with its environment,
which are of considerable interest in health and disease. The system proposed
here can be extremely useful not only in studying electrical surface properties
of a wide variety of cells but also performing these studies under a wide range
of conditions. If successful, the project could make a broad impact in cancer
research by in situ electrical analysis of particular cells. The PI will choose
his PhD student from a minority student body. Prof. Savran teaches courses
related to systems and measurements to engineering students. He frequently
integrates interdisciplinary examples into an otherwise traditional curriculum.
The findings of this study will also be shared with undergraduate students and
used as examples in class, in homework and projects.

