* 1343749
* NUE: Collaborative Virtual Experience for Nanotechnology Education
* ENG,EEC
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2018
* Hyoung Jin Cho, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 12/31/2018
* USD 200,000.00

This NUE in Engineering program entitled, "NUE: Experience for Nanotechnology
Education", at the University of Central Florida (UCF) is under the direction of
Dr. Jayan Thomas. The goal of this proposal is to develop a new discussion-based
interactive learning strategy for undergraduate nanotechnology education. The
Collaborative Networked Virtual Experiences for Nanotechnology
&lt;br/&gt;Education (CONVENE) module will transform traditional lecture-
intensive teaching methods to more interesting interactive learning. The
rationale behind this approach is that, in a nanotechnology class, discussions
based on virtual experiments using nano devices help students better understand
the principles of nanotechnology. The CONVENE module addresses the challenges of
explaining critical concepts and the working of nanosystems and devices to
students in the classroom setting (and beyond) in a highly dynamic and
interactive manner. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major challenge of current
undergraduate nanotechnology education is the lack of an efficient method for
teaching and learning nanoscience that requires student participation and
collaboration. With the PIs expertise in nanoscale device design and
fabrication, human interface design and education, the program will develop
several interactive visual tools that can be used effectively in the CONVENE
module to provide a collaborative virtual experience for undergraduate
education. The transformative aspect of the program is the use of virtual
experiments to stimulate interaction and discussion in a nanotechnology class
which will provide an in-depth knowledge of nanotechnology and enrich students'
learning experience. In a lecture class environment, students will be able to
learn principles and experiments in nanotechnology by virtually manipulating
nanosystems and nanodevices. Moreover, the CONVENE module is designed so that
students and instructors can continue discussion beyond their regular class at
anytime and anywhere using a shared display in any portable device. It will
provide students the sense of involvement and transform a less inspiring class
into a highly dynamic and interesting one.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mass application
of nanotechnology in product and device development is expected by 2020. As the
scale and scope of nanotechnology advances to new heights, there is an
imperative to educate future generation of qualified scientists and engineers in
this highly challenging field. The proposed module is tailored to the interests
of the students and the topics covered&lt;br/&gt;are relevant to the state-of-
the-art nanotechnology device and system developments in accordance with
industry and research requirements. This approach will generate systematically
educated undergraduates with considerable nanotechnology device development
skills. Annually, at least 250 students will be directly benefitted and about
350 undergraduate students will be indirectly benefitted by the CONVENE module
in UCF. In addition, annually, CONVENE related virtual experiments will be
beneficial to about 300 undergraduate students in various science and
engineering classes in Valencia State College. This module will broaden the
participation of underrepresented groups at both institutions. In addition, in
order to educate high school students and the general public, portable display
equipment will be developed which is capable of providing physical involvement
for the user while performing simple virtual nanotechnology experiments.