* 1343456
* AIR Option 2: Research Alliance - Development of key technology for next generation projection lithography of integrated circuits at 6.X nm wavelength
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2016
* Jorge Rocca, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Barbara H. Kenny
* 09/30/2016
* USD 422,000.00

This PFI: AIR Research Alliance project focuses on the translation and transfer
of extreme ultraviolet (EUV) source technologies at 6.Xnm wavelength to fill
technology gaps in advanced lithography for future generations of integrated
circuits. These technologies serve the semiconductor industry, with a world
market valued of $298 Billion, that manufactures the semiconductor chips used in
virtually all industrial, automotive, telecommunications, computing, military,
medical, and consumer products. The next-generation 6.X nm wavelength
lithography will extend Moore?s law and the growth of the semiconductor industry
into the next decade. This project will address both the development of plasma-
based light sources at 6.X nm to print integrated circuits, as well as the
development of compact light sources to address challenges associated with nano-
metrology. This project will also accelerate technology transfer by enabling the
realization of new light sources to print and characterize integrated circuit
features of smaller dimension, resulting in the creation of new jobs in the
semiconductor and laser industry, and in high value semiconductor manufacturing
equipment products. The partnership engaged to accelerate the transfer of the
technologies to the market domain includes the NSF Center for Extreme
Ultraviolet Science and Technology, the University of California at San Diego
with extensive expertise in EUV technology, and Cymer Inc., a leader in light
sources for lithography, that plans to commercialize the 6.X nm wavelength
integrated circuit printing technology. The potential economic impact of
extending lithography to smaller dimensions is enormous. The semiconductor
industry is a key driver of the U.S. economy. The lithography process is the
single most critical and capital intensive part of the semiconductor
manufacturing process and as such will significantly contribute to the U.S.
competitiveness in the semiconductor equipment market. Lithographic processing
and metrology equipment accounts for ~50% of capital equipment cost in U.S. and
foreign semiconductor facilities. The societal impact includes jobs in the high
technology sector and contributions to an increased standard of living and
lifespan world-wide. The proposed academic/industry ecosystem will also allow
for the creation of a unique environment to educate and train the workforce
necessary to maintain the US competitiveness in this area critical to the
nation?s economy.