* 1343811
* EarthCube Building Blocks:  Earth System Bridge:  Spanning Scientific Communities with Interoperable Modeling Frameworks
* GEO,RISE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Richard Hooper, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2017
* USD 1,699,997.00

This EarthCube project possesses deep, disciplinary and interdisciplinary
expertise in the development, implementation and support of geoscientific
modeling architectures and in the promotion and utilization of community
standards in model development and in data management. Combined, this team will
integrate existing model architectures, model coupling standards and data
standards into a set of open source Earth System Bridge building blocks that
will transform the process of Earth system model coupling and bridge the present
technological gap. In collaboration with the community of framework developers,
the team will create a Framework Definition Language (FDL) which characterizes
Earth system coupling technologies in terms of their metadata usage,
architecture, protocols for interaction, and implementation, and use this as a
basis for understanding potential framework inter-connections. They will use the
FDL to develop a set of ?bridges? that connect leading software frameworks from
the federal modeling enterprise and from the academic geoscientific modeling
enterprise, for the sake of creating seamless environmental and impacts
prediction tools, and develop new services to improve the integration of inter-
agency, four-dimensional databases with more heterogeneous academic databases
for use in earth system models and by modeling groups. Demonstration of the new
modeling and data integration architecture will be in two case studies: the
first, prediction of the local impacts of the Hurricane Sandy landfall; and the
second, the integration of deep Earth process with surface dynamics. These
problems span disciplines, agencies, and research and operational communities,
and require addressing scientific, technical, and cultural
issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal is to bridge this present
technological gap in Earth System modeling, thereby illustrating how a common
cyberinfrastructure can be used in different Earth science disciplines and
communities, and how improved cyberinfrastructure can directly address pressing
cross-disciplinary science questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The tools developed
by the Earth System Bridge have the potential to serve many different
disciplinary communities. A more interconnected and capable modeling community
will significantly increase the speed at which knowledge is currently
transferred between the research and operational communities, Connecting the
academic and operational infrastructure will reduce inefficiencies and gaps that
exists in the system today. The technology developed will place increased
capabilities in the hands of a broader set of geoscientists, lowering the
barriers to more scientists participating in multi-disciplinary research that is
needed to address today?s policy issues and increase our national resilience to
a wide variety of natural hazards.