* 1343962
* Programs at the Fields Institute for Research in Mathematical Sciences
* MPS,DMS
* 04/15/2014,03/31/2018
* Huaxiong Huang, University of Toronto
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 03/31/2018
* USD 690,000.00

The Fields Institute, located in Toronto, Canada, is among the top international
research institutes in the mathematical sciences. Its programs cover a broad
spectrum of areas in pure and applied mathematics and statistics, as well as
many related areas of computer sciences, physics, and theoretical biological
sciences. The Institute provides a venue that facilitates interactions and
communication among researchers. Its programs serve to train and inspire early
career scientists and promote collaborations between university-based
researchers and scientists working in industry, on topics that touch many
aspects of mathematics, the physical and biological sciences, and society. The
international reputation of the Fields Institute, the high level of its
participants, and the broad scientific range of its programs provide numerous
opportunities for researchers to pursue their own work, to learn about and to
contribute to scientific advances, and to train advanced graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Approximately 4000 researchers from around the
world participate in Fields Institute programs each year. On average 620 are
U.S.-based researchers, about half of whom are offered support by the Institute.
Also about one half of these U.S.-based researchers are junior faculty,
postdoctoral researchers, or graduate students. Their time spent at the
Institute as participants and speakers in conferences, workshops, advanced
courses, and other events provides the opportunity for them to work with and
learn from some of the top international researchers in their areas of
specialization. This NSF grant award provides resources to support some of these
U.S.-based researchers for their participation at the Fields Institute. The
impact of this funding will be to provide travel and local support for
approximately 92 US-based participants per year, for the most part early career
mathematicians, including junior faculty, students, and postdoctoral fellows.