* 1343568
* Development of Nanotechnology Minor Focused on Nano Biomedicine and Sustainable Energy
* ENG,EEC
* 12/01/2013,11/30/2016
* Jay Kim, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 11/30/2016
* USD 199,998.00

This NUE in Engineering Program, entitled "Development of Nanotechnology Minor
Focused on Nano Biomedicine and Sustainable Energy", at the University of
Cincinnati (UC), under the direction of Dr. Donglu Shi, has as its primary
objective the development of a curriculum for a new Nanotechnology Minor degree
in the College of Engineering and Applied Science (CEAS). A sequence of new
advanced courses in nano science and technology will be developed to
significantly enhance undergraduate engineering education for both traditional
and high-tech industries, particularly in biomedical and energy areas. The
sequence will include three new courses to be developed: 1. Fundamentals of
Nanomaterials; 2. Nanoscience in Biomedicine; and, 3. Nano Devices in Energy
Technologies. Along with these courses, three existing courses developed as part
of two previous NUE programs will be incorporated in the sequence, which are
well stablished and currently offered at UC:20-ENFD 3009,Environmental Aspects
of Nanotechnology, (NUE: Integration of Nanoscale Devices and Environmental
Aspects of Nanotechnology into Undergraduate Engineering and Science Curricula,
NSF award 0939320); 20-ENFD-3008, Introduction to Nanoscale Science and
Technology; 20-ENFD-3010L, Experimental Nanoscale Science and Technology, (NUE:
Integration of Nanoscale Science and Engineering into undergraduate Curricula,
NSF award 0532495). These six courses cover a wide range of critical topics in
nano science and technology and compose the proposed curriculum for the
Nanotechnology Minor degree.

The broader impact of the project includes developing one of the few
Nanotechnology Minor engineering programs in the nation; addressing the national
needs in nano-technology education; establishing sustainable collaborations
between universities and industry in education and research; facilitating
sharing of resources and ideas among interested groups to leverage technical
outcomes in this area; developing a course with advanced energy technology labs
as a model for other energy programs in the nation; increasing the number of
science and engineering graduates and retaining them in the energy industry;
making the experimental modules available to all universities participating in
the outreach program; and disseminating our results through publications in
peer-reviewed journals, presentations at national and local meetings. The
outreach efforts within the Cincinnati school district will increase the UC
enrollment in engineering.