* 1343123
* INSPIRE Track 2: Computational Modeling of Grievances and Political Instability through Global Media
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Gary LaFree, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2019
* USD 2,594,533.00

This INSPIRE award brings together research areas typically supported by the
Political Science Program of the Social and Economic Sciences Division of the
Social, Behavioral, and Economic Sciences (SBE) Directorate; the Division of
Information and Intelligent Systems and Office of Cyberinfrastructure of the
Computer and Information Science and Engineering (CISE) Directorate; and the
Division of Mathematical Sciences of the Mathematical and Physical Sciences
(MPS) Directorate. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although the relationship between
grievances and political instability has concerned and fascinated policymakers
and scientists for more than a century, prior research has been limited to
comparative analysis of countries and a limited number of social surveys
conducted within select countries. These traditional methods are expensive,
labor intensive, and slow. A stark example of the weakness of traditional
approaches are the events of the so-called "Arab Spring" which resulted in the
outbreak of mass protests across North Africa and the Middle East; led to the
overthrow of regimes in Egypt, Tunisia, and Libya; fomented a brutal and
prolonged civil war in Syria; and triggered severe crack-downs in Bahrain. The
Arab Spring caught both policymakers and academics by surprise, even though
these events appear to have developed in large part out of grievances that built
over decades of autocratic rule, widespread corruption and economic stagnation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main purpose of this research is to exploit the recent
availability of worldwide, individual-level data from social media outlets such
as Twitter and from the massive availability of worldwide news outlets to assess
the possibility of measuring perceptions of grievances at the micro-level in
real time for purposes of forecasting instability. It brings together
researchers in computer science, mathematics, and the social sciences to
generate theoretical and empirical advances. Hundreds of millions of people
around the world are now using social media to communicate, making this
technology-enabled forum a major de facto platform for political participation,
expression, advocacy, and mobilization. In addition, the widespread availability
of online news reports now offers the ability to collect content from newspapers
and other print media worldwide and code for perceived grievances. By
triangulating measures across social media, the news online, and traditional
databases, the project evaluates their relative strength in terms of
ascertaining and measuring grievances to forecast political instability. The
overarching purpose of this research is to assist policymakers in developing
improved methods for identifying and anticipating hot zones of instability and
conflict. This has important implications for research but also for national
policy, in terms of strategic thinking about defense, diplomacy, and
humanitarian assistance, as well as in developing potential interventions and
assessing their effectiveness once implemented.