* 1343402
* AIR Option 1: Technology Translation:  Automated Targeted Destination Recognition for the Blind with Motion Deblurring
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2013,02/28/2017
* YingLi Tian, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Barbara H. Kenny
* 02/28/2017
* USD 161,997.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating the research
advances in computer vision technologies to fill the gap between research and
the real needs in assistive technology for blind people. The goal of this
project is to explore solutions for the challenges of designing wearable camera-
based wayfinding assistants for blind persons from fundamental research to
produce a portable proof-of-concept prototype to help blind users recognize
targeted destinations from complex environments. The project accomplishes this
goal by 1) developing robust motion deblurring methods to handle the irregular
motions of blind users who are wearing the camera and 2) recognizing targeted
destinations based on the requests of blind users for wayfinding and navigation.
The proof-of-concept prototype system will be developed with visual information
captured via a wearable camera on sunglasses/hat and a portable computer (mini
laptop or cell phone) for data analysis, while the speech/sound outputs will be
provided to a blind user via a Bluetooth earpiece. The performance of the newly
developed algorithms and the proof-of-concept prototype will be evaluated by
blind subjects. The partnership engages different areas of expertise including
university research, industry real system design and development, and blind user
study from organizations for the blind and visually handicapped to provide
solutions for the most challenging problems (motion blur and query-based
targeted destination recognition) in the design of wearable camera-based
wayfinding and navigation aids for blind users. The interdisciplinary areas of
expertise pertain to the potential to translate the computer vision based
assistive technology along a path that may result in a competitive commercial
reality. This will lead to new revolutionary design concepts of cost-effective
and portable camera-based assistive devices to help visually impaired people in
achieving functional mobility comparable to people with normal vision. The
potential economic impact is expected to be $120 million in the next 10 years,
which will contribute to the U.S. competitiveness in developing technology for
blind wayfinding and navigation. This research has a direct impact to benefit
the visually impaired, improve their inclusion and integration into society, and
enhance their future employment opportunities, success in the workplace,
independent living, and economic and social self-sufficiency.