* 1343969
* SCH: EXP: Collaborative Research: Smart Asthma Management: Statistical modeling, prognostics, and intervention decision making
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2017
* Shiyu Zhou, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 12/31/2017
* USD 475,264.00

Asthma is a common lung disease with acute and chronic manifestations that
impacts more than 22.2 million Americans or 7.9% of the population, including
over 6.7 million children younger than 18 years of age. The cost of asthma is
significant both for individuals and for the society as a whole. It is highly
desirable to establish transformative technologies to improve the patient
quality of life and reduce the cost of asthma management. The recent development
in sensor and mobile computing technology provide great opportunities to
establish Smart Asthma Management (SAM) systems and achieve a quantum leap in
asthma management. Leveraging on the fast development of information
infrastructure, patients can create a detailed temporal log recording their
symptoms, medicine usage, and possibly vital physiological signals through an
easy access to a website or their smart phones in SAM systems. This
unprecedented continuous stream of patient-generated data in SAM systems
provides us significant opportunities to better estimate patient condition and
make clinical intervention decisions. However, since the information
infrastructure of SAM has not become available until recently, very limited work
is available for SAM systems. Against this background, this collaborative
project aims to develop a suite of statistical modeling, monitoring, prognosis,
and clinical intervention decision making methodologies based on a flexible yet
rigorous multistate model to describe the evolving of patient conditions. The
true underlying state of the patient is assumed unknown; however, there is
reason to expect that it could be inferred from patient generated data such as
the frequency of the rescue inhaler usage (the time and frequency of the rescue
inhaler use is an important indicator of asthma control).

Some anticipated advances include: (i) Multistate model with event intensity
function as observations. The proposed methodology brings the mixed effect model
and the multistate model into a unified framework to integrate the population
information embedded in the historical records of multiple patients and the
individual information collected in real-time in a quantitative way. (ii)
Stochastic filtering approach for individual patient condition modeling and
updating. The novel state space formulation enables efficient stochastic
filtering algorithms to estimate and update the states and parameters in the
multistate model. (iii) Clinical intervention decision support for patients and
clinicians. The salient features of the proposed policy are that it is based on
a condition-based policy and incorporates uncertainties in the patient condition
model through a Partially Observable Markov Decision Process (POMDP) framework
which has been widely used and proven to be very effective in the management of
industrial systems. Plans are in place to evaluate the effectiveness of the
resulting technologies in collaboration with clinical experts.

The project is likely to contribute predictive technologies that could help
reduce the cost and improve the quality of healthcare in the US, especially as
it relates to effective management of chronic illnessess. Additional broader
impacts of the project include enhanced research-based training opportunities
for graduate and undergraduate students (including members of under-represented
minorities) in healthcare engineering, statistics, and operation research;
enrichment of the curricula in health systems in industrial engineering and
operations research at the University of Wisconsin-Madison and the University of
Iowa.