* 1343309
* EARS: Compact Adaptive MIMO Receivers
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2013,03/31/2019
* Brian Hughes, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 03/31/2019
* USD 1,080,000.00

EARS: Compact Adaptive MIMO Receivers&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Brian A. Floyd, Jacob
J. Adams, and Brian L. Hughes&lt;br/&gt;Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering&lt;br/&gt;North Carolina State
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Research on multi-input
multi-output (MIMO) communications has shown that using multiple antennas at
both the transmitter and receiver can dramatically improve the capacity of
wireless multipath channels. Since many wireless devices are limited in size,
using multiple antennas requires close spacing which leads to strong, frequency-
dependent coupling between antennas. Coupling can profoundly reduce received
power, diversity and capacity. Prior work suggests that impedance matching at
the receiver can reclaim most of the lost system capacity; however, these
matching networks can be complex and difficult to implement, and they must adapt
to changing channel and antenna conditions. Finally, existing antennas for MIMO
systems are designed in an ad hoc manner, with no consideration given to finding
methods to fully capture all available degrees of freedom and maximize the
capacity of the aperture. The goal of this project is to combine information
theory, antenna engineering, and radio-frequency (RF) circuit design to enable
new approaches to realize compact broadband multi-antenna receivers. The overall
approach is to develop multi-mode antennas, reconfigurable receivers, and
communication algorithms that act in concert to maximize capacity of the
underlying channel. Specifically, a systematic method will be developed to
design MIMO antennas based on information-theoretic metrics, such as capacity,
by controlling and shaping mutual coupling of the eigenmodes. Novel MIMO
receivers will also be developed that employ reconfigurable baseband impedance
matching networks which are frequency translated to RF using passive mixer-first
architectures. Finally, communication and signal processing algorithms will be
developed that can efficiently sense and adjust the matching networks in
response to changing channel conditions. To evaluate these new technologies, a
hardware test-bed will be constructed consisting of a two-port adaptive MIMO
receiver, two-port compact antenna, and a digital interface for control and
signal processing. Ultimately, the scaling of performance and complexity will be
explored as the techniques are extended to larger multi-port
systems.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This multi-disciplinary project provides a
holistic view of MIMO receiver design and develops new models, antenna design
methods, communications algorithms and matching techniques which could
significantly increase the capacity and performance of future cellular and
wireless local area networks. If successful, this project would enable MIMO
techniques to be employed even in physically small receivers with strong antenna
mutual coupling, allowing increased data rates, larger range, and/or longer
battery lives. The combination of theory and experiment will provide
opportunities for student participation at all levels.