* 1343713
* EAGER: SeaCat: An SDN End-to-End Application Containment ArchitecTure to Enable Secure Role Based Network Access in Healthcare
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Jacobus VAN DER MERWE, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* John Brassil
* 08/31/2016
* USD 298,717.00

Healthcare is being transformed by information technology. However, with the
promises of the technology have come concerns about the privacy, confidentiality
and operational integrity of healthcare information and systems. Physicians and
other healthcare professionals increasingly rely on networked applications for
tasks as diverse as accessing patient records, remote diagnoses and
consultations, in-home patient monitoring, healthcare related analytics and even
remote surgical procedures. In addition to these domain specific applications,
healthcare professionals use all the other more typical vocational applications,
often from the same device. This diversity of applications and in particular the
fact that the same individual, possibly using the same device, might be
concurrently using these different applications, presents a particular challenge
to healthcare information technology (IT) operations. Ideally, the role an
individual is playing by using a specific networked application, should
determine both the security and the performance context associated with that
role. This project develops, integrates, and tests a prototype system for end-
to-end isolation and containment of healthcare data and applications based on
Software Defined Networking (SDN) technology. Health care applications are
generally trusted, but need to operate securely and protect the data they
access, in a host and network environment that might contain untrusted
applications and entities. The project addresses these concerns by developing
and prototyping an SDN End-to-end Application Containment ArchitecTure (SeaCat),
and demonstrating its utility with electronic health record (EHR) and medical
imaging applications. The project will combine software defined networking (SDN)
primitives with application containment mechanisms to realize end-to-end
application containment in a health care IT environment. After a EHR application
user has authenticated with SeaCat, an EHR specific context is dynamically
created from the EHR Server, through the network and extending into the
endpoint. The EHR application and any temporary local data it is using are
contained within this context and protected from data leakage and malicious
actors in both the network and the endpoint. Once the user application ends, the
complete end-to-end context, including any data temporarily stored within the
endpoint or network devices, is removed and the environment reverts to a clean
state.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The importance of safeguarding healthcare data is
well known. The HIPAA privacy and security rules reflect legislated mandates for
such safeguards. Yet at the same time healthcare IT applications are being
extended over a larger geographic region beyond healthcare campuses, and
applications are making use of high-bandwidth, low-latency networks linking to
the new locations, often with smartphones and tablets. The application
containment architecture in this project will support isolation and privacy
concerns for healthcare and facilitate the deployment of future gigabit
healthcare applications.