* 1343372
* EARS: Enhancing Spectrum Efficiency of Autonomous and Agile Hybrid FSO/RF Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2016
* Jing Li, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 09/30/2016
* USD 150,000.00

The objective of this project is to develop a highly&lt;br/&gt;bandwidth-
efficient and autonomous hybrid free-space optical/radio&lt;br/&gt;frequency
(FSO/RF) system based on several innovative and agile&lt;br/&gt;technologies in
forward error correction (FEC) coding, modulation,
and&lt;br/&gt;switching.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The
intellectual merit lies in the development of&lt;br/&gt;a solid construction for
super fast, highly practical, and highly&lt;br/&gt;spectrum efficient dual-pulse
pulse position modulation (D-PPM); the&lt;br/&gt;proposition of a novel
iterative decoding/demodulation method that can&lt;br/&gt;effectively explore
D-PPM with powerful rate-compatible FEC codes to&lt;br/&gt;achieve adaptive
coding and modulation; and the design of autonomous&lt;br/&gt;and agile
monitoring and switching technologies. The research entails&lt;br/&gt;theoretic,
algorithmic, and simulation activities, that will combine&lt;br/&gt;the various
aspects of information and communication, signal&lt;br/&gt;processing,
networking, and optics into a cohesive framework of&lt;br/&gt;autonomous and
agile FSO/RF systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: RF spectrum is a
precious commodity that is rapidly&lt;br/&gt;becoming scarce, and FSO presents
an effective alternative to the&lt;br/&gt;overcrowding RF spectrum. FSO offers
many unique advantages including&lt;br/&gt;unlicensed access to high bandwidth,
interference-free and&lt;br/&gt;electromagnetic pollution-free, high data rates,
high security, and&lt;br/&gt;easiness to set-up, tear-down and re-configure.
With the backup RF to&lt;br/&gt;provide a carrier grade availability, and with
effective&lt;br/&gt;communication, signal-processing and optical technologies to
further&lt;br/&gt;enhance its bandwidth-/power-efficiency and robustness, hybrid
FSO/RF&lt;br/&gt;has the potential to provide applications in a wide range of
vertical&lt;br/&gt;markets, from finance to healthcare, government, military,
education,&lt;br/&gt;and enterprise connectivity.