* 1343133
* EarthCube End-User Domain Workshop for Rock Deformation and Mineral Physics Research
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2013,05/31/2015
* Jay Bass, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 05/31/2015
* USD 99,999.00

This workshop is to bring together the Rock Mechanics and COMPRESS Mineral
Physics communities to gather requirements for the NSF-funded EarthCube
initiative whose goal is to design and implement a new data and knowledge
management system for the geosciences. The workshop will assemble a group of
about 70 experts in rock deformation and high-pressure mineral physics to
discuss their cyberinfrastructure needs in terms of data, modeling, and
visualization. Goals will be to surface cyberinfrastructure needs that are
presently holding these communities back and to enable their ability to address
fault-slip behaviors, brittle-ductile transitions in lithologic materials,
scientific drilling, deformation processes in subduction zones, and the
physical, chemical, and electronic properties of geologic materials in the deep
Earth. The two and a half day workshop will be held in Alexandria, Virginia in
early November of 2013. A catalyzing issue of the workshop concerns the nature
and reporting of experimental and observational data. Addressing these
cyberinfrastructure needs represents a fundamental challenge to digital
representation/integration and allowance of broad public access to data from
this field that can be aided by involvement with EarthCube. This project is
important for both the scientific and cyberinfrastructure development of the
geosciences. Future progress of the geosciences will be based on the integration
of rich and diverse datasets. This workshop will identify the needs of one of
the most important and societally relevant groups in Earth Science. There will
be a vast array of intellectually challenging tasks in describing and
integrating data across a spectrum of scales as well as granularity that will be
addressed at the workshop. Broader impacts of the work include provisions for
improving public access to data from these fields, especially for those
interested in studying earthquakes or assessing and manageing their impacts. it
also builds infrastructure for science in terms of helping create more effective
and interoperable data and modeling frameworks. The workshop will also emphasize
the inclusion of early career researchers, thus ensuring the needs are met of
the next generation of rock deformation professionals.