* 1343772
* NUE: Cross-disciplinary Education in Social &amp; Ethical Aspects of Nanotechnology
* ENG,EEC
* 11/01/2013,10/31/2017
* Mark Hannah, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 10/31/2017
* USD 223,759.00

This Nanotechnology Undergraduate Education (NUE) in Engineering program
entitled, "NUE: Cross-disciplinary Education in Social &amp; Ethical Aspects of
Nanotechnology", at Arizona State University, under the direction of Dr. Thomas
P. Seager, will develop a unique four weeks long workshop experience for
undergraduate students that will explore the social and ethical issues raised by
nanotechnology, build cross-disciplinary communicative competence, and enhance
engineering leadership and teamwork skills. Three objectives will be achieved by
adapting learning activities originally developed by the LEGO Group called Lego
Serious Play (LSP, www.seriousplay.com), an open source, facilitated workshop
method that allows for material deliberation. Participants in LSP workshops
explore challenges related to an ongoing project, task, or strategy by building
symbolic and metaphorical models of their insights in LEGO bricks and presenting
them to each other. This workshop will address the difficult aspect of cross
disciplinary communication in an interactive setting that plans to bring
together science/engineering and social science
majors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NUE program will directly provide training to
a diverse cohort of faculty and undergraduate students, and a PhD student in the
Herberger Institute of Design with expertise in LSP. It will advance the
understanding of the processes by which students can acquire communicative
competence outside their primary field of practice and enhance teamwork,
leadership, and understanding of social issues in engineering students, while
improving nanotechnology literacy in non-engineering students. The program will
specially reach out to underrepresented groups within engineering. Lastly, the
project will leverage technical work and products from a prior NUE award at ASU,
produce and disseminate a series of two-minute videos that document the workshop
experience from the undergraduate student experience, and produce a longer
"Faculty Cross Talk" under the auspices of the ASU Office of Institutional
Inclusion that documents the faculty experience, and provides source materials
to other Universities seeking to replicate the successful aspects of the
program's approach.