* 1343649
* Cryptic Hydrology of the McMurdo Dry Valleys: Water Track Contributions to Water and Geochemical Budgets in Taylor Valley, Antarctica
* GEO,OPP
* 04/01/2013,08/31/2015
* Joseph Levy, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* thomas wilch
* 08/31/2015
* USD 327,965.00

Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;The PIs propose to quantify the hillslope water,
solute, and carbon budgets for Taylor Valley in the McMurdo Dry Valleys, using
water tracks to investigate near-surface geological processes and challenge the
paradigm that shallow groundwater is minimal or non-exixtant. Water tracks are
linear zones of high soil moisture that route shallow groundwater downslope in
permafrost dominated soils. Four hypotheses will be tested: 1) water tracks are
important pathways for water and solute transport; 2) water tracks transport
more dissolved silica than streams in Taylor Valley indicating they are the
primary site of chemical weathering for cold desert soils and bedrock; 3) water
tracks that drain highland terrains are dominated by humidity-separated brines
while water tracks that drain lowland terrains are dominated by marine aerosols;
4) water tracks are the sites of the highest terrestrial soil carbon
concentrations and the strongest CO2 fluxes in Taylor Valley and their carbon
content increases with soil age, while carbon flux decreases with age. To test
these hypotheses the PIs will carry out a suite of field measurements supported
by modeling and remote sensing. They will install shallow permafrost wells in
water tracks that span the range of geological, climatological, and topographic
conditions in Taylor Valley. Multifrequency electromagnetic induction sounding
of the upper ~1 m of the permafrost will create the first comprehensive map of
soil moisture in Taylor Valley, and will permit direct quantification of water
track discharge across the valley. The carbon contents of water track soils will
be measured and linked to global carbon dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts: &lt;br/&gt;Non-science majors at Oregon State University will be
integrated into the proposed research through a new Global Environmental Change
course focusing on the scientific method in Antarctica. Three undergraduate
students, members of underrepresented minorities, will be entrained in the
research, will contribute to all aspects of field and laboratory science, and
will present results at national meetings.