* 1343474
* AIR Option 1: Technology Translation -  Buckled Stiff Thin Films on Soft Substrates for High-Resolution Strain Sensing
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2015
* Hongbin Yu, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Barbara H. Kenny
* 09/30/2015
* USD 165,986.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating the science
of buckled stiff thin films on soft substrates as strain sensors to fill the
technology gap in the strain measurement area to simultaneously realize both
high spatial resolution and high sensitivity strain mapping. The translated
science has the following unique features: well-defined nanoscale periodicity as
a function of mechanical strain and material properties, easiness of
fabrication, and tunability of 1D and 2D patterns that provides exemplary
science to improve the performance of strain sensors and reduce the cost of
fabrication when compared to the leading competing technologies, such as digital
image correlation (DIC), micro-Moir√©, and scanning electron microscope DIC
techniques in this market space. The project accomplishes this goal by further
optimizing the buckling patterns, achieving large scan area with a fast scan
rate, and automated sample scanning and data acquisition resulting in a working
prototype. The partnership engages Intel Corporation to provide guidance in the
definition of industrial needs from the perspectives of microelectronic
packaging, as well as through other forms, such as partial financial support and
project mentoring as they pertain to the potential to translate the science
along a path that may result in a competitive commercial reality. The potential
economic impact is expected to be $85M in the next 10 years of
commercialization, which will contribute to the U.S. competitiveness in the
strain measurement area that have been heavily used in structural testing and
electronic packaging applications. The societal impact, long term, will be the
development of an innovative strain sensor as a new member in the family of
strain measurement, which routinely impacts many different fields, ranging from
structures, electronics, and health. The PIs will also integrate education,
particularly professional development and entrepreneurship for students for the
next-generation leaders in technical transfer.