* 1343479
* AIR Option 2: Research Alliance - Ecosystem for Biophotonic Innovation (EBI) Building Sustainability
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2013,03/31/2016
* Dennis Matthews, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Barbara H. Kenny
* 03/31/2016
* USD 990,573.00

This PFI: AIR Research Alliance project focuses on building a sustainable
innovation ecosystem in biophotonics, on educating the next generation of
entrepreneurs and on accelerating the translation and transfer of key biomedical
technologies developed by an NSF Science and Technology Center (STC), the Center
for Biophotonics Science and Technology (CBST). The technologies proposed for
commercialization in collaboration with our partners will fill technology gaps
in the following areas: 1) super-resolution cellular imaging for biology and
medicine, 2) novel non-photobleaching labels for imaging of cell dynamics, 3)
monitoring cellular response to cancer drugs, and 4) automated blood pathology
for disease detection and monitoring. These technologies have the following
market-valued features: 1) outstanding image quality at resolutions that are at
least 8 times higher (volume-wise) than the diffraction limit, that provide
exemplary performance at lower, and thus more forgiving, illumination
intensities when compared to leading optical microscopy technologies; 2) provide
the ability to use non-photobleaching SERS (surface enhanced Raman scattering)
labels for cellular imaging of cell dynamics, for monitoring unique biomarkers
that cannot yet be monitored with other techniques; 3) capability to monitor
cellular responses to cancer drugs in almost real-time by using Raman cytometry
and in a more efficient manner compared with other experimental strategies; and
4) automated, real-time, point-of-care blood testing systems that provide
enormous cost savings when compared to impedance-based, large, skilled labor-
intensive and expensive commercially-available blood pathology systems. The
Ecosystem for Biophotonics Innovation accomplishes this transfer to the market
either by working in collaboration with research partners and transferring
technologies to them, or via spinoffs, resulting in creation of new jobs
(Entrepreneurial Fellows in academia, scientists collaborators in industry, and
scientists in startup companies), commercial products for biology and medicine,
with the potential to advance research and help patients while also training
entrepreneurial scientists and generating licensing and royalty revenues. The
partnerships engaged to transfer the technologies to the market domain include:
1) Applied Precision Inc, a GE Healthcare Company - will commercialize software
algorithms for next generation super-resolution microscopes; 2) BD Biosciences -
will commercialize novel SERS labels for studying cell dynamics; 3) Keaton
Raphael Memorial foundation - will invest financial resources to advance
technologies for diagnosis and treatment of pediatric cancers and to launch a
startup company to commercialize the most promising technologies; 4) SARTA -
will provide links to entrepreneurs in the region and educational opportunities;
and 5) Tahoe Institute for Rural Health Research - will commercialize the
automatic blood pathology system. The potential economic impact is expected to
be realized through: 1) employing highly skilled and productive entrepreneurial
fellows, faculty, as well as the scientists at our partnering organizations; 2)
employing highly skilled scientists in spinoff companies; 3) licensing of
technologies; and 4) through product sales (e.g., next generation super-
resolution optical microscopes, labels and assays for cellular imaging, assays
for monitoring cellular response to cancer drugs, and automated pathology
systems), in the next one-to-five years. All these activities will ultimately
contribute to the U.S. competitiveness in the biomedical technology market space
through ensuring that cutting-edge technologies are commercialized in the U.S.
instead of by scientists and companies from other countries and through
providing excellent professional development opportunities to talented
entrepreneurial fellows who we expect will have innovative and resourceful
careers beyond their tenure with EBI. In the short term, the societal impact
includes the movement of advanced technologies closer to commercialization, as
well as hands-on training and learning for the next generation of scientists and
entrepreneurs regardless of whether entrepreneurial fellows pursue careers in
academia or in the private sector. In the long term, the societal impact
includes enhancement of scientific discovery enabled by cutting-edge
instruments, medical devices, techniques and assays, better understanding of
biophysical phenomena, and ultimately improved patient care. EBI will also
benefit society by strengthening an infrastructure to promote innovation and to
educate would-be entrepreneurs, while also enabling universities to more
productively partner with private industry.