* 1343920
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: RAPID: Using river restoration to test the ecological and evolutionary effects of secondary contact
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2013,02/29/2016
* David Post, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 02/29/2016
* USD 143,700.00

In many aquatic ecosystems, dams have isolated fish populations for decades to
centuries and the isolated populations have diverged both morphologically and
genetically. Secondary contact between previously isolated populations will
occur as these dams are removed or restoration efforts restore spatial
connectivity. This RAPID project will examine the ecological and evolutionary
consequences of the initial stages of secondary contact; restoration of river
connectivity will soon allow secondary contact between anadromous alewife
populations and landlocked populations in Rogers Lake, Connecticut. Divergence
in morphology, foraging behavior, and migration has altered the ecological role
of these two alewife life history forms over the past 250-350 years. Research
will examine the inbreeding between anadromous and landlocked alewife using
genetic markers to track introgression. It will document changes in food web
structure, nutrient loading, and habitat and resource use by alewife at the
initiation of secondary contact. By documenting these important direct and
indirect effects of initial contact between anadromous and landlocked
populations, the project will significantly advance our understanding of a
process that is fundamental to the origin and maintenance of
biodiversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although anadromous alewives are a critical
resource in freshwater and marine habitats and a federally listed species of
conservation concern, landlocked alewives are invasive across their range. The
investigators will continue work with local lake associations, land trusts and
the regional conservation and management community to aid anadromous alewife
restoration efforts by contributing results from this study. They will take
advantage of an NIH-funded Yale program to recruit under-represented minority
undergraduate students to the project, and will train them in the broader
scientific context of the research, research methods, data analysis, and written
and oral project reports. Outreach talks to the general public, education
programs targeting underrepresented minority groups, interactive displays, and
digital outreach via internet and social media are also planned.