* 1343902
* EAGER: GaP-diamond photonic-spin devices for scalable quantum information processing
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2015
* Kai-Mei Fu, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 08/31/2015
* USD 160,000.00

Overview: The objective of this EAGER proposal is to determine the feasibility
of a scalable quantum optical network based on NV-centers in diamond coupled to
gallium phosphide (GaP) photonic devices. Two critical components necessary for
scalability will be fabricated and implemented: (1) large-area GaP-diamond
integration and device fabrication and (2) independent electrical tuning of
quantum device frequencies on the same chip. If successful, this research will
pave the way toward a large-scale quantum information processor (QIP) that could
be utilized for secure communication, quantum algorithms, and quantum
simulation.

Intellectual Merit: This research proposal identifies the GaP-diamond hybrid
material system as an extremely promising system to realize a scalable
measurement-based quantum information network. In the hybrid system, the GaP
provides the photonic device layer while the diamond nitrogen-vacancy (NV)
center provides the photon-coupled spin qubit. The proposed work addresses the
major challenges in diamond-GaP integration. The first specific goal of this
project is the deterministic transfer and bonding of a GaP membrane to a diamond
chip with an area capable of supporting one hundred integrated devices. In
addition to QIP applications, the technique developed is expected to have
applications in classical photonics due to GaP's wide bandgap and electro-optic
properties. The second goal is the electric tuning of near-surface NV centers
onto resonance with on-chip GaP cavities in three or more devices on the same
chip. If realized, this will be the first demonstration of device specific
electrical tuning of a quantum emitter onto an optical cavity resonance and will
be an important milestone for all photonic-spin solid-state qubit systems.

Broader Impacts: The development of NV centers integrated into on-chip optical
devices is expected to lead to scalable quantum information processing (QIP).
Scalable QIP will enable long-distance secure communication, factoring of
products of large-prime numbers in polynomial time, and the efficient simulation
of many-body quantum systems critical for engineering new materials.
Historically, scalability has proven to be a challenge in quantum information
processing because typically quantum bits with good quantum properties have not
been realized in a solid-state system, prohibiting device fabrication and
integration. Broader impacts of the proposed research process include developing
public software to implement finite-difference-time-domain (FDTD)
electromagnetic simulations on a virtual computer cluster on the Amazon cloud
and training both graduate and undergraduate students.