* 1343759
* Earth Cube Conceptual Design:  Developing a Data-Oriented Human-centric Enterprise Architecture for EarthCube
* GEO,ICER
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Chaowei Yang, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2016
* USD 288,272.00

This EarthCube enterprise conceptual architecture approach looks to develop a
data-driven and human-centric EarthCube enterprise architecture for achieving
the goal of EarthCube as a community-driven activity to transform the conduct of
geoscience research and education. The proposed EarthCube enterprise
architecture will have geoscientists and domain experts at its center and
facilitate them to communicate and collaborate through data sharing, and
ultimately bring geosciences forward in a holistic fashion. This project seeks
to design a conceptual architecture that can bring geoscientists, computing
scientists, and social scientists together to collaborate on networks of data,
technology, applications, business models, and stakeholders. The design approach
is guided by the following principles. It designs a new architecture as well as
operational procedures for achieving the architecture based on comprehensive
review and assessment of current enterprise architectures. Second, it suggests
several important mechanisms to cross the disciplinary chasms, as EarthCube
seeking to harmonize the geosciences communities? diverse approaches. Third, it
proposes methods for forming collaborative networks of data, tools, standards
and people as supported by geoscience cyberinfrastructure technology. Finally,
the proposed project incorporates the concept of collaborative networks for
maturing the conceptual design of the EarthCube enterprise architecture by
including academia, agencies, industry, and other organizations as autonomous
participants that continuously seek common ground for collectively improving
geosciences.

The proposed EarthCube enterprise conceptual design will be validated through
the EarthCube workshops, research coordination networks, building blocks, and
other venues. The Federation of Earth Science Information Partners (ESIP) will
provide validation from many NSF and non-NSF funded projects. The project will
be sustained and make a long standing impact in geoscience communities as well
as the geoscience cyberinfrastructure communities with a scalable,
interoperable, sustainable, and evolvable conceptual architecture