* 1343973
* SCH: EXP: From Critique to Collaboration: A Fundamental Rethinking of Computerized Clinical Alerts
* CSE,IIS
* 11/01/2013,10/31/2018
* Jon Duke, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 10/31/2018
* USD 605,572.00

To prescribe safe medications, physicians use computerized physician order entry
(CPOE) that routinely relies on drug-drug interaction (DDI) alerts. Despite the
current attempts to reduce frequency and complexity of alerts, the effectiveness
of such alerts remains extremely low, with up to 96% of warnings being ignored
by physicians on a daily basis. The primary cause for this is alert fatigue, a
state in which physicians, bombarded by numerous warnings, become desensitized.
The goal of this project is to transform drug safety alerts from oft-ignored
warnings to trusted tools that advise physicians in daily decision making. To
accomplish this, the investigators are aiming beyond incremental improvement
establishing novel principles for alert design that are based on what physicians
consider important when taking advice from peers in their daily clinical work.
The project is addressing this problem with a three prong approach: (1)
determining principles that accompany trusted physician-to-physician advice
regarding appropriate medication prescribing; formative studies will be
conducted in a variety of clinical settings to identify key factors in sharing
trusted advice among doctors and residents; (2) generating novel designs for
drug safety guidance that elicit physician trust and maximize compliance and (3)
evaluating the impact of novel designs on physician compliance to DDI
warnings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;By investigating
the question of why physicians trust each other, the project is leveraging a
fundamental behavioral dynamics reconsidering the role of clinical alerts, and
thus generating new principles to design effective computerized guidance that
elicits similar notions of trust. A very important contribution of this research
is a more complete understanding of what makes physician-to-physician advice
trustworthy in the ecosystem of daily clinical activities provides a solid,
long-term intellectual basis for the creation of substantially better alerts for
a broad variety of CPOE systems. Key innovative aspect of this work is the
departure from the mere optimization of alerts to focus rather on complex yet
crucial dynamics by which trusted advice is shared among physicians. There are
potentially transformative aspects of the proposed work, which if successful,
could unleash a new generation of drug-drug interaction warnings that will
substantially advance the level of adherence in daily medication
prescribing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;The outcomes from
this project will potentially affect the over 600,000 physicians in the United
States who spend the majority of their time in direct patient care, and who are
exposed to dozens of DDI alerts on a daily basis. By reframing current alerting
strategies, the project results are expected to substantially increase safe drug
prescription in day-to-day clinical setting. The investigators are disseminating
the project results through large-scale real-world CPOE deployments and live
experimental evaluations available to hundreds of physicians. The team is also
reaching out to CPOE vendors, to promote the incorporation of the ideas
generated in the project in the current and next generation of products.
Ultimately, this basic research in physician communication and human-computer
interaction is providing the research basis to catalyze a change in industry
practice, also facilitated by the PI's leadership of the EMR Innovations Summit,
an annual meeting of national EMR vendors hosted by the Regenstrief Institute.