* 1343156
* Collaborative Research: EARS: Large-Scale Statistical Learning based Spectrum Sensing and Cognitive Networking
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2014,10/31/2016
* Tao Shu, Oakland University
* Standard Grant
* Wenjing Lou
* 10/31/2016
* USD 262,347.00

As cognitive radio (CR) research advances to multihop and complex systems over
large geographic regions, the spectrum utilization enhancement should be
generalized to fully exploit the spectrum usage diversity in three dimensions
(3D): time, frequency, and space, with new emphasis on the under-explored
spatial dimension. Accordingly, this project focuses on the following three
research objectives. The first one is to utilize the recent advancements in
statistical learning over big data to develop efficient 3D spectrum sensing
schemes, where a hierarchical approach is taken in developing novel finite-bit
and single-bit learning techniques to efficiently explore the correlation
structure across the three dimensions, with an advanced distributed approach
also developed. The second one is to develop two key building blocks in large-
scale CR networking based on the 3D spectrum sensing: 1) a novel multi-scale
routing scheme to enhance the overall spectrum utilization, with a focus on
exploiting the layered spectrum usage correlation structure in the spatial
dimension; and 2) a reliable hierarchical common control channel identification
scheme. The last research objective is to validate some key aspects in the
proposed sensing and networking schemes via both intensive simulations and a
concept-proving testbed. Throughout the project, an interdisciplinary approach
is taken to combine the methods of statistical learning, signal processing, and
wireless networking, with the core built upon the hierarchical treatment of both
spectrum usage statistics and CR networking methodologies. The project provides
both theories and algorithms for large-scale spectrum sensing and cognitive
networking. Through a coherent education plan, the research findings will be
incorporated into courses, and disseminated to the community via journal papers
and conference presentations.