* 1343548
* Neuro-Marker Discovery for Accurate Localization of the Sub-Thalamic Nucleus for Deep Brain Stimulation
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/2013,06/30/2015
* Nuri Ince, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Carol Lucas
* 06/30/2015
* USD 210,674.00

1067488&lt;br/&gt;Ince&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Deep brain stimulation (DBS) has
become the most common surgical treatment in the U.S. for patients with
Parkinson?s disease (PD), and involves the stereotactic implantation of a DBS
electrode within the subthalamic nucleus (STN) of the brain. The clinical
efficacy of DBS depends critically on accurate localization of the STN.
Currently, the initial surgical trajectory to STN is determined by preoperative
stereotactic magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain. The ultimate
location of the DBS electrode is then modified during surgery by data obtained
from electrophysiological recordings--in the form of single-unit neuronal
activity (SUA), derived from multiple microelectrode recording
tracks.&lt;br/&gt;However, optimal placement of DBS electrodes within STN
remains challenging due to current limitations of stereotactic imaging, poor
isolation of SUA during microelectrode recordings, and anatomical differences in
the location of deep brain structures between human subjects. Consequently, new
techniques are required which can automatically localize or provide additional
evidence to the neurosurgeon about STN localization. Microelectrodes can also be
used to record local field potentials (LFPs) which, in contrast to SUA
recordings, represent aggregate activity from populations of neurons surrounding
the electrode tip. However, to be clinically useful, patterns in LFP data need
to be translated into another modality so that they can be interpreted by the
clinician.&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project resides in testing
the hypothesis that LFP data recorded intraoperatively can be used to identify
STN location. Specifically, this project will record LFPs from both micro- and
macro-electrodes at consecutive depths, as these electrodes are advanced to STN.
Recorded neural data will be processed offline, using state-of-the-art signal
processing and machine learning methods to identify novel neuro-markers which
will be used for the optimization of electrode placement in STN. &lt;br/&gt;This
research project will identify and validate the use of specific LFP-derived data
that correspond to optimal electrode positioning. The results of this
interdisciplinary project will enable the development of a new technology for
fusing microelectrode recordings with computational intelligence to localize STN
during DBS surgery. The proposed research tools will provide valuable data for
designing a new DBS surgery system that could be implemented by surgeons around
the world. Such a system is expected to reduce the duration of the surgical
procedure by enhancing STN localization, reduce the procedural hemorrhage rate
by decreasing the number of microelectrode recording passes needed, and
significantly decrease the rate of sub-optimal DBS electrode positioning, hence
improving efficacy of stimulation. Moreover, the proposed efforts aim to address
the nation?s current talent shortage in science and engineering majors in the
field of neurotechnology. The interdisciplinary nature of the project offers a
great environment for the education of graduate students with a concentration in
instrumentation for use in the healthcare industry and the burgeoning field of
neuromodulation.