* 1343070
* NSF Workshop on US- Japan Frontiers in Novel Photonic-Magnetic Devices. To be Held in Nara, Japan, September, 20-23, 2013.
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2013,01/31/2015
* Volkmar Dierolf, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Mahmoud Fallahi
* 01/31/2015
* USD 50,378.00

Intellectual Merit: An NSF Workshop on novel photonic-magnetic devices is to be
organized. It will be held in Nara, Japan during September 20-23, 2013. The
Workshop will bring together leading American and Japanese scientists and
engineers who are at the frontiers of photonic-magnetic device research and
development. Leading experts from the US and Japan will present the state of the
art in the field of doped magnetic semiconductors and their application in
photonics and spintronics. The specific goal of the Workshop is to identify
critical open questions facing these fields and on establishing international
collaborations to jointly work on their solutions. Workshop topics include:
dilute magnetic semiconductors; rare earth and transition metal doping of
semiconductors; theoretical modeling of ion incorporation and RT-ferromagnetism;
characterization of magneto-optical properties; and potential photonic-magnetic
device demonstration.

Broader Impacts: This workshop will provide a forum for leading experts from the
US and Japan to present recent breakthroughs concerning doped magnetic
semiconductors and potential applications in photonics and spintronics. The
cross-pollination of scientific ideas will impact science and society in both
the US and the Japan. Junior researchers and doctoral students from the US will
receive travel support to present their research areas. This meeting will
enhance graduate student education and career development of young scientists by
facilitating interactions with international experts from diverse areas of
materials science, electric engineering, optical science, and solid state
physics. A summary report will be made available via the Workshop website to the
research community and the general public.

This award is designated as a Global Venture Fund Award and is being co-funded
by NSF's Office of International Science and Engineering.