* 1343145
* 2013 Biomedical Engineering Society Annual Meeting on September 25-28, 2013, in Seattle, WA
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2014
* Gilda Barabino, Biomedical Engineering Society
* Standard Grant
* Athanassios Sambanis
* 08/31/2014
* USD 30,000.00

1343145&lt;br/&gt;Barabino&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Biomedical Engineering
Society (BMES) is devoted to developing and using engineering and technology to
advance human health and well-being and to building the next generation of
biomedical engineers to realize that vision. BMES is uniquely positioned as a
professional society to play an active role in leading the discipline and
shaping the future of biomedical engineering. Beyond research and educational
presentations, through the BMES Annual Meeting, BMES provides opportunities for
strategic network building, career development and advancement, sharing ideas,
recognizing and promoting talent, developing and promoting professional
excellence and broadening the participation of underserved and underrepresented
groups. Through this conference proposal BMES seeks funding from the National
Science Foundation (NSF) to support travel awards for students, postdoctoral
fellows, early career faculty and professionals, inclusive of underrepresented
groups, for the 2013 Biomedical Engineering Society Annual Meeting. The travel
awards will afford the opportunity for these groups to attend the Annual Meeting
and participate in programs and special sessions focused on mentoring, health
disparities and promoting and sustaining innovative research in biomedical
engineering. The requested funding will also help support the development of
mentor training materials for the BMES Scholars Program and assist in bringing
in distinguished speakers for the Health Disparities
Session.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;The BMES Annual
Meeting is highly interdisciplinary and is the premiere conference for the BME
field. It brings together different BME communities in academics, translation
and industry, and is co-sponsored by several prestigious BME-related societies.
The intellectual content of the meeting will provide important cross-
fertilization of ideas, concepts, tools, and approaches, and will highlight the
importance of BME as the intersection of Biology, Medicine, and Engineering.
Through the integration of scientific, educational and career development
programming, the meeting is a vehicle for educating and promoting excellence in
the discipline and among the additional students, postdoctoral fellows, early
career faculty and professionals, and underrepresented groups who will be able
to participate in the Annual Meeting as a result of this funding. The proposed
funds requested for travel awards will support the Students Research and Design
Awards and the Student Travel Awards, which will enable undergraduate and
graduate students to actively participate in the Annual Meeting and be
recognized for their outstanding contributions to biomedical engineering. The
award funds will also support the Biomedical Innovation and Talent Development
Travel Awards to provide broad participation of aspiring faculty at a BMES
special session that promotes and sustains innovative research in BME.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;The BMES Annual Meeting serves
as a primary vehicle for scientific sharing and dissemination among the BME
community, and as a facilitator of important cross-fertilizations between the
life sciences and engineering technologies that fosters a multi-disciplinary
approach in the practice of BME. By targeting and actively engaging
undergraduate and graduate students, postdoctoral trainees, junior faculty,
persons with disabilities and other underserved communities in meeting
activities, to include tailored workshops and sessions, the BMES Annual Meeting
will help ensure broader participation in the discipline and contribute to
building the future generation of biomedical engineers. It is expected that 60%
of the attendees will be students and they will have ample opportunity to
network, be mentored and continue their socialization into the BME profession
.The travel awards will enable those who might not otherwise be able to attend
the Annual Meeting the opportunity to engage in the Society, benefit from
conference programming, network and establish connections with the potential for
career long impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is expected that these activities
will be recurring on an annual basis and will contribute to a comprehensive
approach by BMES to ensure development of a diverse technically competent
biomedical engineering workforce. This specific aim heavily targets the
undergraduate and graduate students, postdoctoral fellows and junior faculty and
professionals for their essential role in the future advancement of the BME
sciences and practices.