* 1343359
* Policies for Cellular Television
* MPS,AST
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2018
* Pedro Ferreira, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Jon Williams
* 12/31/2018
* USD 493,500.00

There is growing demand for spectrum that cannot be met without new and more
efficient approaches to spectrum use. Professors Jon Peha and Pedro Ferreira of
Carnegie Mellon University are examining the technical, economic, and policy
issues of cellular television, an unconventional approach to the delivery of
over-the-air broadcast television that some believe could free up vast amounts
of spectrum for other purposes while fundamentally transforming the television
industry. Cellular television includes both single frequency networks (SFNs),
and networks using efficient multicast over cellular data services for delivery
of broadcast over-the-air television. This project is assessing the potential of
cellular television, and its implications for policymakers and regulators. Using
models that consider the propagation of wireless signals and realistic demand
distributions for video content, researchers are investigating the
infrastructure required to efficiently support cellular TV, and the
corresponding short and long-term engineering-economics of providing broadcast
services with this new approach. They are looking at how these architectures
could affect spectrum availability and performance of other wireless systems,
such as broadband cellular systems and TV white space devices. Researchers will
use data on actual user behavior derived through empirical observation of a
cable TV system to develop and assess algorithms that allow even greater
spectrum sharing and efficiency by considering the programs that users watch,
and how these vary in popularity over time and space. Researchers are also
examining a variety of laws and regulations that could affect or be affected by
the emergence of cellular TV.