* 1343816
* EarthCube Building Blocks: Community Inventory of EarthCube Resources for Geoscience Interoperability (CINERGI)
* GEO,RISE
* 09/15/2013,11/30/2017
* Ilya Zaslavsky, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 11/30/2017
* USD 900,000.00

EarthCube Building Blocks: Community Inventory of EarthCube Resources for
Geoscience Interoperability&lt;br/&gt;(CINERGI) Collaborating Institutions:
University of California San Diego, Arizona Geological&lt;br/&gt;Survey,
University of Chicago, Columbia University, The Open Geospatial Consortium This
building&lt;br/&gt;block project focuses on constructing a community inventory
and knowledgebase on geoscience&lt;br/&gt;information resources to extend work
on interoperability-readiness and meet the challenge of finding resources
across&lt;br/&gt;disciplines, assessing their fitness for use in specific
research scenarios, and providing&lt;br/&gt;tools for integrating and re-using
data from multiple domains. This capability is a key EarthCube&lt;br/&gt;mission
mentioned in reports of several EarthCube domain workshops and roadmaps. We
envision&lt;br/&gt;a comprehensive system linking geoscience resources, users,
publications, usage information,&lt;br/&gt;and cyberinfrastructure (CI)
components. It will supplement information included in existing&lt;br/&gt;data
discovery catalogs by integrating feedback from users on their experience with
resources,&lt;br/&gt;by providing characterization of resources in an
interoperability assessment framework, and&lt;br/&gt;by supporting registration
of mappings between information models and vocabularies to assist&lt;br/&gt;data
integration. To assess interoperability among components an open source
validation mechanism&lt;br/&gt;will be implemented. The system will enable
community input and access by geoscientists via&lt;br/&gt;online user
interfaces, and will provide documented web service APIs so that inventory
information&lt;br/&gt;can be easily browsed, analyzed, and integrated within the
emerging EarthCube CI. The project&lt;br/&gt;team will collaborate with related
EarthCube efforts, including Building Blocks, RCNs, domain&lt;br/&gt;workshop
and the Test Enterprise Governance. The PIs will work with researchers from
selected geoscience domains&lt;br/&gt;(stratigraphy, hydrology, critical zone
science) to validate and demonstrate advanced features&lt;br/&gt;of CINERGI in
specific research context.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CINERGI is a direct response to
the communitys need for easy discovery, assessment, and utilization&lt;br/&gt;of
CI resources, expressed by many EarthCube stakeholders. It is a fundamental
building block&lt;br/&gt;of an Earth Science CI and will serve geoscientists
across all domains to efficiently and&lt;br/&gt;in more informed manner use
existing and emerging resources for productive and
transformative&lt;br/&gt;research. It will also help CI experts and computer
scientists to align new developments better&lt;br/&gt;with existing resources
such as vocabularies, ontologies, data exchange protocols, or
metadata&lt;br/&gt;schemas.