* 1343524
* RAPID: Field Investigation of Shallow Ground Improvement Methods for Inhibiting Liquefaction Triggering; Christchurch, New Zealand
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/2013,05/31/2015
* Kenneth Stokoe, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 05/31/2015
* USD 197,996.00

In 2010-2011, the city of Christchurch, New Zealand was devastated by a series
of powerful earthquakes, including six significant events. The February 2011
Christchurch Earthquake (movement magnitude, Mw, 6.2) generated the largest
ground motions in the city, with horizontal peak ground accelerations between
0.37 and 0.52 g. The 2010-2011 earthquakes caused repeated liquefaction
throughout the suburbs of Christchurch. Some key observations and impacts are
that: (1) liquefaction was particularly extensive and damaging along the
meandering loops of the Avon River, now designated as part of the ?Red Zone?
(zone where structures will not be rebuilt), (2) more than 6,000 residential
properties are being abandoned in the ?Red Zone? because the damage is beyond
economic repair, (3) an estimated additional 15,000 properties were affected by
liquefaction, and (4) the total economic loss is estimated to be from 25 to 30
billion NZ dollars (or 15 to 18% of New Zealand?s GDP). One critical problem
facing Christchurch and the Canterbury region is rebuilding on land that remains
at risk of liquefaction in future earthquakes. This problem arises after nearly
all earthquakes and little information exists on ground improvement methods that
can be used to increase the resilience of residential structures and low-rise
buildings in future earthquakes. Facing this critical, time-sensitive problem,
the New Zealand authorities are contributing about $1M (NZ) to a project
involving full-scale field test trials of shallow ground improvement methods.
The goal is to determine if and which ground improvement methods achieve the
objectives of inhibiting liquefaction triggering in the improved ground and are
cost-effective measures. This new knowledge, which is applicable in the U.S. and
worldwide, is rapidly needed as part formulating the path forward in rebuilding
the infrastructure in Christchurch and the Canterbury region. The New Zealand
funds support all technical and logistical aspects of the project except the
liquefaction testing. The liquefaction testing will be conducted using the large
mobile shaker, called T-Rex, that is operated by NEES@UTexas. T-Rex will be used
to simulate a wide range of controlled earthquake shaking levels. This unique
opportunity exists because T-Rex is already in Christchurch as a result of an
earlier NEESR project involving deep seismic profiling. This work includes the
collection and interpretation of a one-of-a-kind dataset that can be used in the
design of shallow ground improvement methods to inhibit liquefaction triggering
of saturated soils. This knowledge does not exist but has numerous applications
in earthquake-prone areas in the U.S. and worldwide for residential structures
and low-rise commercial buildings. Additionally, pore water pressure generation
in nearly-saturated, liquefaction-prone soils will, for the first time, be
collected in the field. This new knowledge will help develop a more
comprehensive understanding of this risk and ways to mitigate it.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this research are extensive. The study will
impact the future Christchurch society at large through development of more
robust seismic designs of residential structures for more than 15,000 homes.
Furthermore, new knowledge will be developed for designing ground improvements
to inhibit liquefaction triggering that will transfer directly to U.S. cities
such as Seattle, WA, Los Angeles, CA, Memphis, TN, and Charleston, SC. The new
knowledge will also transfer to earthquake-prone countries worldwide such as
China, Chile, Haiti, Japan, Taiwan and Turkey. The work will strengthen
international research collaborations and will provide U.S. graduate students
with rewarding international travel experiences that will balance their
technical education and e expose them to the globally-connected problems that
still exist in earthquake engineering