* 1343896
* SCH: EXP: Integrated Real-Time Clinical Deterioration Prediction for Hospitalized Patients and Outpatients
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Thomas Bailey, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2017
* USD 718,042.00

Unexpected deaths of hospitalized patients continue to be common despite
evidence that patients who are at risk often show signs of clinical
deterioration hours in advance. Existing early warning systems have significant
shortcomings because of their poor reliability and the need for monitoring by
overburdened clinical staff. Almost 1 out of 5 patients are readmitted within 30
days of hospital discharge with an annual cost to tax payers of $15-17 Billion.
Hence, there is an urgent need for automated early warning systems that can
provide timely and accurate information. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project seeks
to integrate and mine patient data from multiple sources, including routine
clinical processes, bedside monitoring, at-home sensing, and existing electronic
data sources to facilitate optimized patient-centered decision making.
Specifically, the project aims to develop techniques and systems to provide
early warning of clinical deterioration and hospital readmission of discharged
patients using a novel two-tier system. Tier 1 uses data mining algorithms on
existing hospital data records to identify patients who are most at risk of
clinical deterioration and readmission. Tier 2 combines clinical data with
sensor data to improve the accuracy of predictions on patients who are
identified as being at risk by Tier 1. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Key innovative
aspects of the project include: (1) new data mining algorithms for predicting
clinical deterioration and readmission from heterogeneous, multi-scale, and
high-dimensional data streams; (2) an alert explanation system to identify the
most relevant prognostic factors and suggests possible intervention based on
novel feature ranking algorithms; (3) a novel scheme based on cost-sensitive
learning to dynamically reconfigure the sensors for achieving good tradeoff
between monitoring cost and effectiveness. The resulting advances in healthcare
practices that are currently employed in general wards offer several key
benefits including (1) reduced workload on clinical staff; (2) capability for
continuous monitoring of ward patients that can be used to triage nursing
efforts in order to optimize the desired clinical outcomes; (3) capability to
extend hospital monitoring to patients at high-risk for hospital readmission
with the attendant benefits of reducing readmissions by targeting early
preemptive therapeutic interventions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plans for
transitioning the technology to clinical practice include rigorous evaluation of
the technology in real-world settings and broad dissemination of the algorithms
and their open-source implementations. Some potential broader impacts of the
project include improved clinical outcomes, reduced patient mortality rates and
healthcare costs, and enhanced opportunities for research-based
interdisciplinary training of graduate students in health informatics.
Additional information about the project can be found at:
http://www.cse.wustl.edu/~wenlinchen/project/clinical/