* 1343916
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: RAPID: Using river restoration to test the ecological and evolutionary effects of secondary contact
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2013,10/31/2016
* Eric Palkovacs, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 10/31/2016
* USD 6,300.00

In many aquatic ecosystems, dams have isolated fish populations for decades to
centuries and the isolated populations have diverged both morphologically and
genetically. Secondary contact between previously isolated populations will
occur as these dams are removed or restoration efforts restore spatial
connectivity. This RAPID project will examine the ecological and evolutionary
consequences of the initial stages of secondary contact; restoration of river
connectivity will soon allow secondary contact between anadromous alewife
populations and landlocked populations in Rogers Lake, Connecticut. Divergence
in morphology, foraging behavior, and migration has altered the ecological role
of these two alewife life history forms over the past 250-350 years. Research
will examine the inbreeding between anadromous and landlocked alewife using
genetic markers to track introgression. It will document changes in food web
structure, nutrient loading, and habitat and resource use by alewife at the
initiation of secondary contact. By documenting these important direct and
indirect effects of initial contact between anadromous and landlocked
populations, the project will significantly advance our understanding of a
process that is fundamental to the origin and maintenance of biodiversity.

Although anadromous alewives are a critical resource in freshwater and marine
habitats and a federally listed species of conservation concern, landlocked
alewives are invasive across their range. The investigators will continue work
with local lake associations, land trusts and the regional conservation and
management community to aid anadromous alewife restoration efforts by
contributing results from this study. They will take advantage of an NIH-funded
Yale program to recruit under-represented minority undergraduate students to the
project, and will train them in the broader scientific context of the research,
research methods, data analysis, and written and oral project reports. Outreach
talks to the general public, education programs targeting underrepresented
minority groups, interactive displays, and digital outreach via internet and
social media are also planned.