* 1343049
* Student Poster Symposium at the ASME International Mechanical Engineering Congress and Exposition (ASME-IMECE); San Diego California; November 15-21, 2013
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2014
* Ronggui Yang, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 07/31/2014
* USD 45,992.00

The purpose of this award is to provide partial travel support for 58 graduate
and undergraduate students to attend the American Society of Mechanical
Engineers International Mechanical Engineering Congress and Exposition in San
Diego, California, from November 15-21, 2013. The student will participate in a
poster symposium to present their research projects to the broader Mechanical
Engineering community. The students will be selected on the basis of an
application including a brief resume, a one-page statement of why they want to
attend the conference, and a statement of support from their faculty advisor.
Consideration in the selection process will be given to inclusion of members of
underrepresented groups and diversity of institutions that the students
represent.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This participation support is expected to
benefit students' professional, scientific and technical development. Attendance
at the conference will give the students a broader view of the engineering
profession and of state-of-the-art research in their fields via access to
approximately 2000 technical and professional development talks by domestic and
international speakers. Students will enhance their communication skills via
lively discussions of their work with the top researchers in their fields during
the Society-wide Poster Symposium and the Micro and Nano Forum. This interactive
experience will significantly broaden their education, increase their enthusiasm
for their research topic, acquaint them with expectations for scientific
careers, and expose them to new avenues for innovative research. This award will
benefit the nation through the education of a skilled and diverse engineering
workforce better prepared to provide transformative solutions the challenges of
their chosen fields.