* 1343439
* Air Option 1: AIR Technology Translation -  Lithium Ion Battery Recycling: From Laboratory Research to Industrial Commercialization
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2013,03/31/2016
* Diran Apelian, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Barbara H. Kenny
* 03/31/2016
* USD 166,550.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating a
fundamental recycling technology to address gaps in the existing Li-ion battery
recycling processes. The translated recycling technology demonstrates lower cost
and higher efficiency when compared to existing hydrometallurgical or
pyrometallurgical recycling techniques in this market space. The project
accomplishes its objectives by recovering cathode materials from spent Li-ion
batteries and producing new cathode materials regardless of the Li-ion battery
cathode chemistry. In addition, the project will recover copper current
collectors using a sensor-based sorting technology that, combined with the
proposed hydrometallurgical recovery process, will result in a closed-loop
industrial recycling process for Li-ion batteries with varying chemistries. The
partnership engages wTe Corporation to provide guidance in sensing technologies
to extract copper-bearing materials. wTe will also assist with addressing
marketing, financing, and commercialization issues in order to translate the
proposed Li-ion battery recycling process to a competitive commercial reality.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With increasing consumer demand for hybrid cars,
electrical cars, portable electronics, and grid systems, the usage of Li-ion
batteries is increasing and is only projected to rise in the future. Since the
largest Li reserves exist in politically unstable or uncooperative countries,
demand for these critical resources are a matter of national strategic
importance. Additionally, from an environmental perspective, the electrolyte in
Li-ion batteries is flammable. If Li-ion batteries are burned, toxic HF could be
released into the environment. Existing recycling techiques aimed at Li-ion
batteries are either cost-prohibitive or unable to accommodate the ever-changing
Li-ion battery chemistries. Employing a combination of improved Li-ion
extractive metallurgy and sensor-based sorting technologies, the proposed
collaboration between WPI and wTe will enable the development and
commercialization of a novel recycling process that will address these
limitations, the growing demand for critical materials, help mitigate
environmental risks, and secure strategic national interests.