* 1343001
* EAGER: Unifying Abstractions for OpenCloud -- Supporting a Diverse User Community.
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2015
* Larry Peterson, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 07/31/2015
* USD 300,000.00

Abstract: This project will design a "Cloud Management System (CMS)" that
provides a uniform way to acquire and control a wide range of resources from
compute to storage to network, and from the data center to the network edge but
do so at multiple levels of abstraction. The project will create a data model (a
set of abstract objects, operations on those objects, and relationships among
objects) that collectively defines how users interact with the underlying
research cloud. The CMS unifies the underlying cloud resource substrate and
presents widely different classes of users with customized projections and
extensions of those resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will demonstrate
the feasibility of the CMS by addressing the biggest risk to its success:
defining a set of abstractions-in the form of an operational data model-that
both (a) unifies the research cloud?s diverse hardware resources, and (b)
supports widely different usage models. These abstractions form the heart of the
CMS, but they must satisfy two competing objectives. On the one hand, the CMS
provides a unified interface to a widely diverse set of compute and network
resources, spanning many autonomous hosting sites, each with their own
operational policies. On the other hand, thousands of users want to access the
system in significantly different ways, ranging from traditional cloud users
that just want a set of VM instances, to cloud researchers that want to create
new cloud architectures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cloud Computing is rapidly
changing the face of computing infrastructure and is a major economic driver in
the technology sector. This project will benefit the cloud computing industry by
informing the design of future cloud computing infrastructure and contributing
prototype implementations to the Openstack community.