* 1343756
* NUE: Nanotechnology LINK: An integrated approach for nanotechnology education: End-of-life management of nanomaterial-containing wastes
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Yeomin Yoon, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 08/31/2016
* USD 197,943.00

This NUE in Engineering program entitled, "NUE: Nanotechnology LINK: An
integrated approach for nanotechnology education: End of life management of
nanomaterial-containing wastes", at the University of South Carolina (USC),
under the direction of Dr. Nicole Berge, has as its goal to develop an
integrated undergraduate nanotechnology theme within the currently existing
Civil and Environmental Engineering (CEE) curriculum at USC that focuses on the
environmental implications associated with the end-of-life management of
nanomaterial-containing products, materials, and nanomaterial manufacturing
waste streams to produce a more informed and competitive CEE
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To accomplish this goal, the project team plans
to develop nanotechnology problem-based hands-on modules following a pedagogical
approach referred to as Environments for Fostering Effective Critical Thinking
(EFFECTs). EFFECTs use student-centered learning strategies to promote deep
learning, enhance conceptual understanding, and stimulate growth in critical
thinking skills. The EFFECTs approach has become institutionalized within the
USC CEE curriculum. However, even though EFFECTs have been developed and
implemented in a significant number of courses, these EFFECTs are independent
and unrelated. Dr. Berge and her team propose to create an EFFECT LINK (Learning
Integration of New Knowledge) for teaching and learning of nanotechnology
content across the curriculum, which is referred to as the Nanotechnology LINK.
As part of this integrated approach, students will assemble nanotechnology-
themed electronic portfolios, building content knowledge as they advance through
a sequence of courses. In addition, students will have the option of
participating in an undergraduate nanotechnology-based research experience and
graduate with a Leadership Distinction in Research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
development and implementation of the proposed Nanotechnology LINK framework
will result in the generation and refinement of a transformative educational
approach of linking student learning across a curriculum to enhance student
learning of other techniques/concepts. In addition, knowledge associated with
the environmental implications associated with the end-of-life management of
nanomaterial-containing wastes will be advanced. To date, there has been little
research in this area. This work will also result in better-prepared civil and
environmental engineers.