* 1343877
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel Technologies to Enable High Volume EUV Manufacturing of Integrated Circuits
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,06/30/2014
* Supriya Jaiswal, Astrileux Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 06/30/2014
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to evaluate
the feasibility of customized next generation nanoscale technology which enables
high volume manufacture of integrated circuits, leading to faster computing
power and performance. Current progress in reaching next generation performance
is limited by significant technical challenges in meeting high volume
manufacturing requirements driving up the cost of electronics. These problems
have plagued the industry for over 10 years. The research activity here
considers alternative approaches in addressing the production rate issues which
ultimately reduce cost to chipmakers and reduce energy consumption in the
semiconductor industry, thereby providing greener high performance electronics
at lower cost.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project are firstly to
accelerate the arrival of next generation computing technology creating faster,
smaller more powerful mobile devices and providing evolutionary advances in
quality of life for a globally-social electronic community, and secondly to
develop electronics which meet the world?s demand at reasonable cost and without
substantial adverse impact on the environment, and thirdly to maintain the
competitiveness in global supply and accessibility of next generation
electronics.