* 1343716
* INTERDISCIPLINARY UNDERGRADUATE PROGRAM IN NANOTECHNOLOGY AT NJIT: Linking K-12 through Graduate Education via Nanotechnology
* ENG,EEC
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2017
* Haim Grebel, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 12/31/2017
* USD 212,500.00

This NUE in Engineering program entitled, "INTERDISCIPLINARY UNDERGRADUATE
PROGRAM IN NANOTECHNOLOGY AT NJIT: Linking K-12 through Graduate Education via
Nanotechnology", under the direction of Dr. Raquel Perez-Castillejos, aims to
achieve the following goals: 1) Develop a new 15-week course that will introduce
undergraduate students to basic concepts of nano-technology through a series of
lectures and hands-on sessions; 2) Develop a nanotechnology-oriented summer
research program for undergraduate students at NJIT, which will offer 5 students
per year the chance to further pursue their interest in nanotechnology through
career development activities, poster and abstract preparation workshops, and
presenting their project results at regional or national conferences. 3) Develop
a program that will train graduate researchers in educational strategies for
effectively teaching and mentoring in nanotechnology. 4) Develop a multi-
platform nanotechnology education app-i.e., an app that will be able to run on
tablets, computers, and smartphones that will familiarize high school students
with nano-scale dimensions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The four goals of this program
aim at taking nanotechnology from the research labs at NJIT into multiple
educational settings: from high schools to undergraduate and graduate schools.
Implementation of the goals of this proposal will bring together resources and
support from all levels of NJIT as well as from local industry in order to
provide students with a holistic access to the field of nanotechnology. This
proposal has been designed to have the most impact on underrepresented
groups...minorities and women. The nanoApp will be distributed among local high
schools, especially focusing on Newark, New Jersey, which has large African-
American and Hispanic communities. Because NJIT has an undergraduate student
population of 33% underrepresented minorities and 25% women it is anticipated
that this program will have a remarkable impact on introducing these groups to
nanotechnology.