* 1343436
* Air Option 1: Technology Translation -  Compiler Technology for Modern Manycore Architectures
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2013,02/29/2016
* Aviral Shrivastava, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Barbara H. Kenny
* 02/29/2016
* USD 162,000.00

This AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating manycore compiler
technology to fill the designer productivity and manycore usage efficiency
gap.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is a wide consensus among computer architects
that existing multicore processor designs do not scale due to the complexity of
memory hierarchy. As a result memory hierarchies in manycore architectures are
expected to be simpler ? with the onus of memory management now in software.
However, doing that is extremely complicated for the programmer. The proposed
manycore compiler technology alleviates this programmer difficulty. It
automatically inserts data management instructions in the application and
enables their efficient execution on manycore
processors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The translated technology has the following
unique features: push-button compilation and automatic yet efficient data
management that provides exemplary improvements in software development time and
cost for near future manycore processors. In addition, it will also result in
improved performance, and lower power consumption of the application executing
on the manycore processor.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project accomplishes this
goal by developing a LLVM based compiler that will analyze the application and
insert data management instructions in the program, so that the applications
execute correctly and efficiently, resulting in a prototype compiler that will
enable the execution of existing applications on manycore processors. While
there are compiler techniques that solve a part of the problem, but our compiler
not only outperforms them [see the results in our recent publications], but
provides a holistic solution to the manycore programming
challenge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The partnership engages Intel (a manycore
processor development company) and Raytheon Missile Systems (a manycore software
development company) to provide guidance in the manycore processor and software
marketplace and other aspects, including financing and commercialization as they
pertain to the potential to translate the technology along a path that may
result in a competitive commercial reality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential
economic impact of our manycore compiler technology is expected to be very
significant, as this compiler technology will be needed by companies that want
to use manycore processing for high performance and low power. For example, 3D
tomography, high capacity 3D printers, ultra high definition 3D TVs, automatic
target recognition and collision avoidance at supersonic speeds, etc., all need
highest levels of performance, under strict power constraints. The power and
performance needs of these applications can only be met by manycore processors,
but manycore processors are not expected to have the support for memory
management in hardware. Therefore existing applications will not execute on
them. Our compiler will enable the execution of these applications, and
therefore utilize the power and performance of latest manycore processors. This
edge can greatly contribute to the U.S. competitiveness in information
technology, defense systems, and consumer electronic market
space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The societal impact, in the long term, will be that
the end user will receive high performance, yet power-efficient computing
products at reasonable costs. This improves affordability of computing products
that we need for everyday living, defense, services, healthcare etc., and
elevates standard of living, especially for the economically disadvantaged.