* 1343450
* AIR Option 1: Technology Translation -  Transition of Replicated Laser Micro-textured Surface Technology Through Scalable Process and Reliability Testing
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Mool Gupta, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 09/30/2017
* USD 187,695.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating water
repellency properties of low cost replicated microtextured surface technology to
fill the anti-icing and corrosion resistance technology gap. The water
repellency technology has the following unique features: long-term durability,
high bonding strength and extremely high water repellency characteristics that
provides exemplary low cost manufacturing to generate cost savings and added
safety when compared to the leading competing technology of specialty
nanoparticles in this market space. The project accomplishes this goal by low
cost replication of laser generated microtextured patterns resulting in
prototype samples for industrial evaluation and examination of commercial
feasibility. The partnership engages aircraft manufacturers, renewable energy
generators and dish antenna producers to provide guidance in the aerospace,
energy and RF communications market and other aspects including entrepreneurship
and technology commercialization as they pertain to the potential to translate
the technology along a path that may result in a competitive commercial reality.
The potential economic impact is expected to be in billions of dollars in the
next ten years, which will contribute to the U.S. competitiveness in the
aerospace, communications, energy and transportation market places. The societal
impact, long term, will be improvements in aerospace safety, long-term operation
of structural components and lowering fuel consumption.