* 1343063
* Early Career: Upgrade of an X-ray Diffractometer with Capillary &amp; Humidity-Temperature Stages for Suspension &amp; Hydrated Powder Measurements, and Outreach for Geochemistry R
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2014,12/31/2016
* Ludmilla Aristilde, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 12/31/2016
* USD 133,640.00

Clay minerals play an important role in biological, chemical and physical
processes in soils and influence the physical and biological availability of
contaminants, macromolecules, and organic matter. This award funds equipment
that will enable the researchers to examine the interactions of organic
molecules with certain clay minerals. The research enabled by this equipment has
important relevance to the formation of porous soil aggregates, the dynamics of
water movement through soils, sequestration and biogeochemical cycling of soil
organic matter, and the fate and transport of contaminants in soils. Thus, it is
expected that the research findings will be of interest to scientists across
various disciplines. The principal investigator is also developing new curricula
to engage undergraduates in using nanoscale techniques in aqueous geochemistry
research and is active in recruiting undergraduates from underrepresented groups
as active participants in her research team. This award will provide funding for
additional undergraduate researchers to gain hands-on experience in state-of-
the-art techniques provided by the instrumentation to be
purchased.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this award funds the purchase of
two accessories to upgrade an X-ray diffraction system with the capabilities to
conduct liquid-state suspension and temperature- and humidity-
dependent&lt;br/&gt;X-ray diffraction measurements. Additional support will be
provided for outreach activities to engage underrepresented undergraduates in
this research. The response of the structural dynamics within clay minerals to
interactions with organic guest molecules can be probed by monitoring changes in
the clay structures via X-ray diffraction techniques. Traditional powder X-ray
diffraction measurements provide no information about the organic-clay mineral
interaction in suspension or as a function of moisture content and temperature.
The accessory stages to be purchased will enable the researchers to conduct such
experiments to obtain such information. Using a combination of computational
techniques and these experimental X-ray diffraction and other spectroscopic
techniques, the researchers will investigate the structural dynamics responsible
for the binding interactions and mechanisms of sequestration of organic
contaminants and natural organic molecules within hydrated smectite-type clay
particles at different temperatures. These structural insights will contribute
to elucidating the influence of clay minerals on the storage and stability of
organic carbon in soils, which have important implications for understanding how
the global carbon cycle will respond to projected climate change.