* 1343588
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: ABI Innovation: A novel database and ontology for interdisciplinary analyses of mammalian feeding
* BIO,DBI
* 02/28/2013,06/30/2017
* Rebecca German, Northeast Ohio Medical University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 06/30/2017
* USD 45,870.00

This award was made to transform the current prototype of the Feeding
Experiments End-user Database (FEED) into a data-rich, publicly-available source
of physiological data on feeding in mammals that incorporates a novel ontology
module. An important innovation is the development of five non-overlapping
ontologies related to feeding behavior, function, and structure that will
provide the constrained definitions of terms necessary to permit computational
comparisons in analyses of phenotypic diversity. Ontology construction begins
with an ontology workshop. Ontology and database development will be driven by a
set of six use cases that comprise synthetic, phylogenetically-informed analyses
aimed at understanding the integrated roles of physiology and morphology during
a variety of feeding behaviors in mammals. The research will to initiate new
collaborations involving FEED as a primary data source by engaging three
scientific communities (reptile feeding physiologists, bioengineers, and
developmental biologists) in a series of interdisciplinary use case development
workshops. During the workshops, the project team will design and commence work
on new use cases that will guide efforts to extend the infrastructure of FEED
and permit synthetic studies that cut across traditional knowledge domains. This
project is innovative because it generates a proof-of-concept database to
facilitate understanding of the complexity and connectivity between behaviors,
physiological mechanisms, and structures involved in mammalian feeding across
multiple scales of organization, and because it includes work to insure that
FEED is a tool that is extensible to other scientific
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts include development and public
release of novel bioinformatic research infrastructure for physiology, a field
that has traditionally been on the periphery of bioinformatics. This project
promotes interdisciplinary collaborations among scientists across four knowledge
domains. Training of undergraduate and graduate students in research on
morphological and physiological analysis as well as database and ontology
construction is an important focus. FEED will also be utilized as a teaching
tool in bioinformatics courses aimed at undergraduate and graduate education in
informatics. Dissemination of project outcomes and public access to the FEED
database will be available at www.feedexp.org.