* 1343760
* EarthCube Building Blocks:  A Cognitive Computer Infrastructure for Geoscience
* GEO,RISE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2018
* Christopher Re, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2018
* USD 1,497,798.00

This is an era when access to information and data is often less of a problem
than the ability&lt;br/&gt;to efficiently process and use it. In some cases,
these problems are caused by massive, monolithic&lt;br/&gt;datasets that are
difficult to store, transfer, and/or analyze. In other cases, the first-
order&lt;br/&gt;problem is discovering and then aggregating relevant data that
are widely disseminated in&lt;br/&gt;many different locations and formats, such
as in the tables, text, and figures of published&lt;br/&gt;papers, government
agency reports, spreadsheets, and websites. Geosciences currently
lacks&lt;br/&gt;a cyberinfrastructure that can efficiently, cheaply, and with
high precision and accuracy&lt;br/&gt;find, extract, and organize many different
types of data that are critical to advancing science&lt;br/&gt;and leveraging
current and past investments in data acquisition. Instead, there are
dozens&lt;br/&gt;of isolated, sometimes redundant, geosciences data mining
efforts that use humans as the primary&lt;br/&gt;mechanism for finding data and
then keystroking them into structured databases. This mode&lt;br/&gt;of
operation is not only costly and slow, but it is also an inefficient use of
human resources&lt;br/&gt;and scientific expertise. This project develops a
geoscience-oriented trained computing&lt;br/&gt;system that can serve as a
cross-disciplinary tool for rapidly finding, extracting, and
organizing&lt;br/&gt;geosciences data. Unlike traditional data processing
systems, trained systems use statistical, or machine learning, techniques to
provide rich answers to complex queries of data that are much less structured.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The longer-term vision is to establish an EarthCube
trained computing system that can aid in finding, extracting, and aggregating
data, as well as in processing, summarizing, and synthesizing them in a way that
helps geoscientists to tackle new problems&lt;br/&gt;and better understand and
model Earth systems. This project brings together a unique interdisciplinary
team that is committed to building, testing, and operating an EarthCube Building
Block that will bring the power of trained computing
systems&lt;br/&gt;technologies to the broader geoscience community. Trained
computing systems offer an entirely new breed of tools for data processing.