* 1343802
* EarthCube Building Blocks:  A Broker Framework for Next Generation Geoscience (BCube)
* GEO,ICER
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Siri Jodha Khalsa, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2016
* USD 1,529,918.00

The grand challenges of geoscience require working across traditional
disciplinary boundaries. Scientists are being called upon to find, access, and
use diverse and voluminous data types that are described with semantics. The
BCube project has put together a strong team of geoscientists,
cyberinfrastructure experts and social scientists to address these
interoperability challenges using a maturing Brokering Framework for discovery,
access, semantics, web crawling, workflows and enhanced user services. The first
three have been explored for geoscience and are mature enough to provide near
term engagement of geoscientists in a test bed environment. Crawling, workflow
and services will be developed during the project. The geoscientists, (including
early career scientists) from the domains of hydrology, oceans, polar, weather,
will compile community needs and assess broker capabilities in an increasing
complex series of user scenarios. To address the cultural barriers, BCube
includes social science and education in the project team. BCube engages five
major repositories (DataOne, OOI, USGS, NCAR/RAL, NSIDC) to test and demonstrate
interconnections with the Broker Framework, with extension to international
repositories in the second year.

The broker discovery and access modules have two important and unique
characteristics: a design that builds interoperability without putting a burden
upon either users or providers and an interfaced web crawling capability to find
new data, models and services. New capabilities also come as the Broker
translates cyberinfrastructure research in areas such as semantics and workflow
into a user-oriented capability for cross-discipline geoscience research. An
agile development process will support rapid adaptations to changing user needs.
Since not all needs can be anticipated, the Broker will also have APIs for
scientists to write modules for their own applications. BCube will look at the
cultural issues in cross-discipline research to improve acceptance and use of
the broker. Both the technical and cultural broker attributes will be exercised
through user scenarios that start with individual geoscience research issues and
move to more complex cross-discipline research studies. This will develop
reference cases for metrics, monitoring and validating progress as the Broker
Framework evolves and matures.

To address the grand challenges facing society, geoscientists need a sustainable
and evolvable cyberinfrastructure supporting cross-discipline research with
powerful interoperability. Success in addressing the project?s six diverse
domains will demonstrate this and engender advancements in the broader
geosciences. The Broker module for web 2.0 will support use of crowd sourcing
and citizen science. BCube?s education analyses and early career scientists will
consider the best way to reach a new generation. Expansion to international data
access will be demonstrated through collaboration with the BCube?s international
repository partners and a special interest group of the international Research
Data Alliance.