* 1344298
* INSPIRE Track 1: Protocells as a Platform for Bottom-up Synthetic Biology
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2018
* Yingxiao Wang, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 08/31/2018
* USD 1,000,000.00

1344298&lt;br/&gt;Wang&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This INSPIRE award is partially
funded by the Biotechnology,Biochemical and Biomass Engineering Program in the
CBET Division in the Directorate for Engineering, the Synthetic and Systems
Biology Program in the Division of MCB in the Directorate for Biological
Sciences, the Biomaterials Program in the Division of DMR in the Directorate for
Mathematics and Physical Sciences, and by the Office of International and
Integrative Activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project artificial cells
will be engineered with defined building blocks that may be as small as
individual genes, proteins, and RNA. The platform that enables this approach is
the protocell, a nanoengineered construct built by directed self-assembly that
provides for independent definition of the cell interior and the surface
membrane. In this bottom-up approach it is exactly known what is in the cell,
and, therefore, uncontrolled variables are minimized. Initially a proof-of-
concept will be developed in which a signaling pathway including both membrane
and intracellular components is assembled, leading to greater complexity as more
components are added. Ultimately a minimal living cell with basic functions will
be engineered and studied. Accordingly, three major goals of the proposal are:
(1) to create a general synthetic biology platform to study signal transduction
and protein synthesis with controlled parameters; (2) to build mechanistic
models governing the signal transduction and protein synthesis inside the
synthesized cell; (3) to bridge the gap between in vitro and in cell
experiments. These goals will be achieved by employing successive versions of
protocells designed and fabricated with increasing levels of
complexity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By integrating nanoscience, molecular
biosensors, imaging, and biochemistry in the context of systems biology and
synthetic biology, a highly interdisciplinary platform to reconstitute and model
cellular complexity will be established providing a general and systematic
approach to understand the design principles of molecular networks in a cellular
environment. This work will have fundamental implications for understanding
information flow in biomolecular networks and directed self-assembly at the
nanoscale. As such, the success of this project will have transformative impact
on bionanotechnology and biomimetic devices. In addition, the research will be
integrated with educational efforts to ensure that undergraduate and high school
students and particularly underrepresented groups have the opportunity and
encouragement to work in cutting-edge interdisciplinary research.