* 1344602
* Collaborative Research:  Understanding the role of hyporheic processes on nitrous oxide emissions at the stream network scale
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2017
* Daniele Tonina, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 04/30/2017
* USD 265,276.00

Collaborative Research: Understanding the role of hyporheic processes on nitrous
oxide emissions at the stream network scale &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Field evidence
confirms that stream processing of reactive nitrogen (Nr), primarily ammonium
and nitrate, is a potentially important source of the potent greenhouse gas
nitrous oxide (N2O). Stream emissions may account for up to 10% of global
anthropogenic N2O production and N2O has 310 times more warming potential per
unit weight than carbon dioxide. In streams, the production of N2O occurs
primarily in streambed sediments, and the mass transport of reactive species,
i.e., dissolved oxygen, Nr, and organic carbon, via hyporheic flow strongly
influences reaction rates, residence times, and subsequent N2O emissions.
Previous research has shown a strong interaction between hydraulics in the
hyporheic zone (HZ) and streambed morphology. The project couples a novel
Lagrangian modeling approach based on residence time distributions
differentiated for channel reach types and local hyporheic components of the
stream network with seasonal synoptic sampling in two watersheds with
contrasting land use. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Improved understanding of watershed
and network scale controls on potent greenhouse gas emissions will be
societally-relevant to policy makers addressing elevated Nr concentrations in
surface waters. Research results will be applicable to land use management, non-
point source pollution, and river restoration projects. The products from this
research will provide a model for estimating the fate of Nr at the stream
network scale, offer a new understanding of the role of HZ at the stream network
scale, and clarify the effect of stream network structure and stream morphology
on HZ processes. Results from this research can be extended to study transport
of other solutes and pathogens along streams. With the advance in remote sensing
and GIS tools, data for this approach will be more readily available and thus
applicable to provide predictions when minimal field survey data are available.
The broader impacts also involve the outreach to high school students, and the
work with the McCall Outdoor Science School in regards to communication of the
work in a climate change context.