* 1344333
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Regime Development in the Lake Patzcuaro Basin
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/2014,12/31/2015
* Peter Lape, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2015
* USD 23,310.00

The fundamental goal of the project is to determine the mechanisms which, in
small scale societies, serve to create integrated social groups. It will provide
insight into how control is established and maintained, and this issue has
contemporary relevance since many societies at similar levels of complexity
exist in the world today. Under the guidance of Dr. Peter Lape, Anna Cohen will
assess differences in ceramic production and consumption from private and public
contexts to examine changes in Purépecha (Tarascan) regime development within
the ancient city of Angamuco, Mexico. This project will test assumptions central
to Purépecha development models by examining whether residents living in the
Pátzcuaro Basin imperial core region were integrated through agent-led
sociopolitical practices or through top-down processes of control. These
hypotheses will be tested through (1) excavation of domestic and public
architectural features at the newly documented site of Angamuco, and (2) the
morphological, stylistic, and geochemical analysis of ceramic artifacts
recovered from excavation. This research will produce a local chronology using
ceramic typologies and radiocarbon dating, which will contribute to the temporal
sequence for the wider region. Inter- and intra-phase variation in production
will be compared to changes in household and public consumption activities.

The study of ancient political growth and consolidation provides insight into
understanding of how political regimes develop and maintain power, which are
important topics throughout the social sciences and of particular importance to
the general public where processes of regime change, revolution, and resistance
are ongoing in several parts of the world. This project emphasizes that
archaeologists must evaluate the micropolitics of regime-subject relations
before making broad statements about regime behavior. For western Mexico, this
study of Purépecha regime development will substantially alter the existing
prehistory of the region and contribute to a more refined chronology of
occupation and social complexity. Although the Purépecha defeated the better-
known Aztecs in battle and their descendants currently live in western Mexico,
the empire remains poorly understood. By focusing on local ceramic production
and consumption processes at Angamuco - one of the largest and most complex
sites uncovered in the imperial core region - this research will test some of
the basic assumptions concerning Purépecha development models including how
political economic control and ideological changes occurred on the ground.
Detailed study of ceramics that can be carefully dated using architecture,
stratigraphy, and radiocarbon data will contribute to the chronology for the
Pátzcuaro Basin. This is vital for future research in western Mexico and useful
for scholars working in nearby regions including the Basin of Mexico.

The broader impacts of this project include educational and outreach activities
in communities located in the Lake Pátzcuaro Basin and in the U.S. This project
will continue to work with the Fontezuelas ejido community for advice and to
present ongoing research at the local primary school. Site tours will be given
to community members on the weekends and the Co-PI will help to create teaching
materials for local schoolchildren based on project research which will add to
the conservation efforts at the heritage council community center in
Tzintzuntzan.

This research will aid in the training of young scientists from many different
backgrounds, and will foster international relationships between several
institutions. Working with the Legacies of Resilience Project (LORE-LPB), Cohen
will continue to collaborate with students from Mexico, France, and the United
States. Results from these collaborations have already been presented at
national meetings, such as a 2011 Society for American Archaeology conference
session co-organized by the Co-PI, and at workshops in Colorado and France.
Updates from ongoing fieldwork will be posted on the LORE-LPB blog and the
results will be used in undergraduate teaching material at the University of
Washington.