* 1344267
* INSPIRE Track 1: Multifunctional Interfaces for Responsive Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2018
* Miriam Rafailovich, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 09/30/2018
* USD 1,091,701.00

This INSPIRE award by the Biomaterials program in the Division of Materials
Research to the State University of New York Stony Brook is in developing novel
materials transport systems, and a general method for creating (and tuning the
properties of) aqueous nanocluster dispersions of interest for technologies that
range from drug delivery to biofuel production, as well as a theoretical
understanding of the mechanism for cluster formation and stability. This award
is cofunded by the Biomaterials and the Polymer programs in the Division of
Materials Research and International Science and Engineering program in the
Office of International and Integrative Activities. In addition, the following
programs in the Engineering Directorate - Biomedical Engineering, Particulate
and Multiphase Processes and Interfacial Processes and Thermodynamics - all in
the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport Systems
are also cofunding this award. The primary focus of this project is fundamental
science approaches in developing a synthetic structure that has all the
properties of its biological counterpart that can respond in a controlled manner
to an external stimulus, by using synthetic polymer-peptide constructs on a
patterned surface, manipulated by electric fields to achieve spatial control of
cell migration and differentiation. These responsive surfaces would have a clear
impact for the development of surfaces that can template biomineralization and
scaffolds that direct the outcome of embryogenesis. This project would lead to a
new interdisciplinary and potentially transformative research at the interface
of colloid and interface science, multiscale modeling and statistical mechanics,
biophysical characterization, materials sciences, drug delivery, interfacial
processes, molecular engineering, multiphase processing and nanotechnology.
Using an iterative process, theoretical models will be continuously probed and
refined, and this would enable obtaining the optimal structures in designing the
cell experiments using stem cells, human epithelial and endothelial cells.
Significant advances could be expected as the result of this investment in
inter- and multi-disciplinary research at the intersection of the engineering
and material sciences, and synthetic biology that focus on advancing the
fundamental experimental and theoretical answers to important fundamental
questions about the possibility of forming aqueous dispersions of equilibrium
nanoclusters with tunable size, shape and dissociation
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader technological impact of this
project is in developing a model fundamental process of organ development,
tissue organization, stem cell differentiation, and designing and synthesizing
novel polymeric and dynamic surfaces with tailored properties that could have
many industrial applications, if the project is successful. With respect to
educational and outreach activities, the project is for the seamless integration
of research and education, with a robust mentoring program, where contact with
the students is often maintained throughout their educational and professional
development. With the proposed model system, students learn by doing, observing,
and participating fully in the research efforts from concepts through
publications, and are evaluated by metrics for standard research proposals, i.e.
innovation, impact, and publication. The planned high school program includes
structured activities, which provide the students with the basic skill required
for independent research, including statistics modules, data mining, proper
reference notation, skills in keeping laboratory notebooks, awareness of
intellectual property issues, filing for patents, ethics in education and
sciences, and working within a group on environmental questions and awareness,
and providing safety training courses in handling and disposal of hazardous
chemicals and biological wastes. As part of the International activity, the
project plans to initiate collaborations with University of Dortmund, Germany,
where the education and outreach models practiced at the SUNY campus will be
replicated. In addition, the project plans to expand these outreach activities
in Europe and Asia by collaborating with Universities and High Schools in these
areas.