* 1344552
* Collaborative Research:   Hillslope hydrology under glass: Controlled experimental testing of hillslope-scale hydrologic transport theories at Biosphere2
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2014,02/28/2018
* Peter Troch, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 02/28/2018
* USD 315,809.00

The transport of solutes through hillslopes and watersheds is difficult to
predict due to the complexity of the landscape and the processes controlling
flow and transport. The current approaches use process descriptions derived from
observations at small scales to make predictions at much larger scales, using
effective values of the scale dependent parameters. However, this paradigm is
known to be flawed, as in many cases the parameters cannot be measured or
predicted easily. Increasingly frequent calls have been made for new theories
that better link large-scale predictions to observable properties of the
landscape. A new theoretical framework has recently been developed to represent
solute transport at hillslope and watershed scales. However the framework is
incomplete as a key element, the "age functions", is not specified from theory
and must be investigated empirically. These functions characterize how the water
leaving the system is selected from the distribution of water of different ages
within the system. If these age functions could be parameterized from available
landscape data, this framework would provide a rigorous alternative for modeling
transport at hillslope and watershed scales that circumvents some of the scale-
related challenges other methods face. This project will use the new Landscape
Evolution Observatory (LEO) research facility at Biosphere2 to directly observe
the shape of these age functions at a hillslope scale using a novel set of
tracer experiments. This facility can be used to create precisely controlled and
replicated flow and transport phenomena in three 330 m2 artificial hillslopes,
and observe them with an unprecedented spatial and temporal resolution with over
1,500 sensors and 500 soil water samplers. A carefully designed sequence of
experiments using stable water isotope tracers will be used to directly measure
these age functions and relate their properties to the structure of flow paths
using a novel experimental procedure entitled PERTH (PERiodic Tracer Hierarchy),
developed specifically for this purpose. This project has four goals: 1) to make
direct measurements of the age function in the LEO; 2) to use an integrated
modeling approach to understand the relationship between the age function and
underlying hillslope structure, and generalize the empirical findings to a
broader class of landscape units 3) to test a series of hypotheses about the
controls on the age function that pave the way towards an operational theory;
and 4) to propose and test functional forms of the age functions that can be
encoded in operational models of watershed-scale transport.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientists, managers and policy-makers need tools to
predict the movement of solutes through the landscape at large spatial scales,
such as the movement of nitrogen from fertilizer distributed across agricultural
watersheds into streams. Current state-of-the-art models are not able to capture
many of the features of this transport, because the parameters they rely on
cannot be measured at sufficiently fine detail in the landscape. This project
will advance a new approach to modeling transport that does not rely on these
fine-scale parameters, but instead makes predictions directly at the scale of
hillslopes. This theory is more general than the models typically used for
large-scale predictions, which rely on restrictive assumptions about the
transport processes, or do not adequately account for the effect on transport of
changes in flow through the landscape across storms, seasons and under climate
change. This project will train two PhD students and several undergraduate
students in new methods for hydrologic experimentation and environmental
modeling. Furthermore, Biosphere2 is a hub of science education with 100,000
people visiting the facility each year, and this work will form part of the
facility?s educational program.