* 1344618
* SNM: Continuous Vapor-Phase Processes for Nano-Functional  Fibrous Materials Manufacturing
* ENG,CBET
* 12/01/2013,11/30/2017
* Gregory Parsons, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 11/30/2017
* USD 999,809.00

CBET 1334618&lt;br/&gt;PI: Parsons &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Scalable
Nanomanufacturing project will develop new fundamental understanding and
manufacturing science needed to transition vapor-phase fiber surface
modification technology from small-batch scale to a fully continuous
manufacturing prototype. Textiles, nonwovens and other natural and synthetic
fiber-based materials are manufactured world-wide and impact the lives of
billions of people every day. While common textiles can be very low cost, the
field of high-performance and "smart" nonwovens and textiles is evolving
rapidly. For example, new electrospun nanofibers and engineered nonwovens are
used for battery separators, highly durable aerosol filtration, bio-medical
implants, cell growth scaffolds and geosynthetics. For most of these
applications, the nano-scale surface structure is critical to achieve the
targeted function and capability. Therefore, new manufacturing processes that
modify, adjust and control the surface chemistry of fibrous materials at the
nanometer scale will have tremendous impact in many emerging product areas. Lab-
scale demonstrations show that vapor-phase atomic layer deposition (ALD) and
related molecular layer deposition (MLD) provide new and highly promising nano-
scale capability to coat and modify complex fibers with high precision,
conformality and uniformity, with potential for significant new products.
Continuous ALD process needs for pervious substrate materials (where gases can
pass through the item being coated) are distinct from those for ALD on solid or
other impermeable surfaces. The project will design, evaluate and iteratively
improve a continuous roll-to-roll flow-through ALD tool for fibrous substrate
materials. Successful outcome will include new research result in ALD reactor
design, utilization and surface reaction analysis. The intellectual merit of
this project includes contributing to the demand for new understanding in
extending nanoscale materials and fabrication techniques to dimensions and
magnitude needed to realize low-cost functional products. Work will also yield
lab-scale process demonstrations that could attract interest for process
scaling, to create new products for improved health, safety and clean energy
generation. Additional broader impacts include the education of PhD students in
nanoscale materials, materials processing and reaction scaling. The project will
also expand outreach to K-12 students and teachers, and it will seek to provide
opportunities for underrepresented groups to participate in research and
dissemination activity.