* 1344219
* INSPIRE Track 1: Nanotechnology for Adaptive Optics
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2016
* Edward Boyden, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 09/30/2016
* USD 999,999.00

ABSTRACT This INSPIRE award is partially funded by the Biophotonics (7236)and
Biomedical Engineering (5345) programs in the CBET Division in the Directorate
for Engineering; the Robust Intelligence (7495) program in the Division of
Information and Intelligent Systems in the Directorate for Computer and
Information Science and Engineering; and the the Organization (7712) program in
the Division of Integrative Organismal Systems in the Directorate for Biology
and the Instrumentation and Instrument Development (1108) program in the
Division of Biological Infrastructure, also in the Directorate for Biology.
Emerging Frontiers (7275) money was provided for the Organization and
Instrumentation and Instrument Development programs by the Directorate for
Biology.

The ability to optically image real-time physiological processes in living
systems is of central importance for understanding how biological systems
compute and function. In order to enable the imaging of deep, arbitrary-scale
tissues, the PI proposes to address one of the fundamental limitations in live
tissue imaging: the scattering of light by live tissues. Much work has been
devoted to adaptive optics using conventional off-the-shelf spatial light
modulators, interferometers, cameras, and other hardware. Here the PI proposes
to create new technologies for adaptive optics based instead upon
nanotechnology, which can help correct optical imaging for the scattering
properties of living tissues. The project goal is nothing less than that of
making real-time physiological processes visible throughout live tissues and
organs, important for understanding how biological computations occur. The
impact will be large for any field where understanding complex 3-D systems is
key - for the study of live organs such as heart and brain, for the immune
system, for the study of metabolism, for the study of development and aging, and
for cancer biology. They will distribute all tools as freely as possible, and
pursue distribution mechanisms to maximize the availability of tools, at cost
whenever possible. The proposed innovations will also benefit the field of
optogenetic control of complex systems. These innovations will also greatly help
with teaching of biology and medicine at all levels of education, since the
ability to visualize things is powerful in education; we will incorporate these
tools into teaching both at MIT and elsewhere, engaging scientists-in-training,
as well as the public. Through both direct impact of tool usage, as well as via
teaching, they anticipate that these proposed technologies will result in a more
scientifically literate workforce. they also anticipate commercial impact, in
the creation of new methods of diagnostics and medicine. The ability to hunt
down better disease mechanisms, or mechanisms of disease treatment, may
accelerate the development of new drugs and therapies. Some of the technologies
here proposed could also lead to new companies, or new products, thus
contributing to economic development, as well as helping with dissemination of
the tools.