* 1344877
* Interfacial Controls on Dynamics and Equilibration in Porous Media
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2019
* Dorthe Wildenschild, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Ingrid Padilla
* 04/30/2019
* USD 387,744.00

Interfacial Controls on Dynamics and Equilibration in Porous Media

Most current macroscopic theories of multi-phase flow are based on the combined
equations of Darcy's Law and an empirical relationship between capillary
pressure and saturation. In recent years, a number of studies have shown that
this state of affairs is not necessarily optimal. However, in a given porous
medium, saturation and interfacial areas are independent variables, i.e., many
different configurations resulting in a range of interfacial areas are possible
for a single saturation. Awareness of this effect of interfacial forces on
multi-phase flow has led to the development of alternative theories based on
fundamental thermodynamic considerations in which interfacial areas are
introduced as separate thermodynamic entities. Thus capillary pressure becomes a
function of both saturation and specific fluid-fluid interfacial area and it has
been suggested that the system will be uniquely described by this functional
dependence. Recent work has indicated that a single unique surface cannot
indisputably describe two-phase flow under nonequilibrium conditions, suggesting
that there may be something else missing from the theory. The goal of the
proposed work is to improve on a paucity of delicate measurements and generate
highly unique data sets from which strategic advances can be made on a number of
fronts with respect to the fundamental dynamics of multi-phase flow in porous
media. The data generated will consist of dynamic drainage and imbibition
experiments during which x-ray tomographic images will be captured such that the
fluid phases can be tracked in unprecedented detail in three dimensions. This
will allow for measurement of developing interfacial areas, curvatures, and
trapping behavior of the fluid phases. This novel data set can be used in a
combined effort to validate findings based on multi-phase theories and for a
broader exploration of interfacial dynamics, in particular the formation of
interfacial area and curvature evolution.

Improved understanding of the physics of multi-phase flow in porous media has
societal impacts through applications in various fields such as groundwater
management and remediation, soil and agricultural science, petroleum
engineering, and geologic sequestration of CO2. This project aims to generate
new data set that will not only first and foremost support progress in
understanding the role of interfaces, and their dynamic behavior, on porous
media flow and transport, but also improve on existing theories describing these
processes. The generated high-resolution imagery will be made available to the
broader scientific community through digital archiving. Ultimately, this will
allow for improved management of natural resources and ability to reliably
engineer porous systems leading to improvements in water usage and energy
development.