* 1344562
* SNM: Scalable Production and Processing of High-Quality Metal Sulfide Nanoparticles into Energy Storage and Capture Devices
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2019
* Tobias Hanrath, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2019
* USD 1,493,398.00

Rapid advances in nanotechnology have generated enormous expectations for
applications. There is growing recognition that the rapid progress towards
nanotechnologies risks stagnation unless challenges concerning scalable
manufacturing and device integration are resolved. To address these challenges,
this project aims to resolve roadblocks impeding progress in the field of
nanoparticle technologies by developing the first large-scale, solution-phase
synthesis of high-quality nanoparticles, and demonstrate their integration into
devices. This work will represent a step-change in the approach to realize
nanoparticle-based technologies by manufacturable approaches. The key is the use
of a reactive precursor that had previously only been available for aqueous-
phase synthesis. The PIs will first demonstrate this technique through
production of metal sulfides. The method is applicable for a large variety of
monodisperse metal sulfide nanoparticles, such as Cu2S, CdS, SnS, ZnS, MnS,
Ag2S, Bi2S3, and CuInS2, and will be extended into other material systems (e.g.,
phosphides). This will benefit the application of semiconductor and semi-metal
colloidal nanocrystals in high-tech devices. The Intellectual Merits of the
project include: 1) The method is a low temperature, air-stable synthesis, with
high conversion yields, enabling low production cost and integration into
temperature-sensitive processes; 2) Development of kilogram-quantity batch
production of high-quality nanoparticles with narrow distribution in size and
composition, without the need for downstream refining processes; 3) Development
of continuous synthesis of nanoparticles with &lt;5% dispersion in size; 4)
Scalable integration of nanoparticles into Li-ion battery and solar photovoltaic
devices; 5).Establishment of principles for a novel nanomanufacturing process
for devices by integrating electrophoretic deposition methods pioneered by the
PIs, into continuous flow reactors; 6) Integration of nanoparticle synthesis
with continuous surface treatments to passivate electronic traps critical for
high-performance nanoparticle photovoltaics; and 7) Produce nanoparticle-coated
large area, non-planar substrates, through assembly-line nanoparticle
deposition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will demonstrate a nanomanufacturing
process with high potential to scale to economically and industrially relevant
production levels. The inexpensive reactants used enable industrial scale,
economic production. Scalable nanomanufacturing of metal sulfides will be
impactful for batteries, solar cells, thermoelectrics, and catalysis.
Additionally, metal sulfide nanoparticles provide a non-toxic alternative to
popular metal chalcogenide systems. The Project's research will be closely
integrated with an outreach and education program aimed to enhance a widespread
understanding of nanoscience and nanotechnology. The outreach and education
activities leverage the existing NSF-sponsored GK-12 program to work with high
school teachers during the summer. The PIs have designed a workshop for the
teachers that involves an initial survey about their perception of the
opportunities, risk and hypes related to emerging nanotechnologies, a hands-on
experience in the laboratory in creating nanotechnology prototypes, and a follow
up assessment. Teachers will refine educational models about nanoscience for
their classroom curriculum.