* 1344683
* Bayes 250 Conference
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2014
* James Berger, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2014
* USD 20,000.00

A five-day conference is being held at Duke University during December 15-19,
2013. The conference consists of three workshops. The Objective Bayes 2013
Workshop, from December 15-19, consists of three days of scientific sessions,
one day of tutorials for graduate students and new researchers, and a poster
session, all centering on major recent developments in objective Bayesian
methodology. The EFaB@Bayes 250 Workshop, from December 15-16, promotes research
and education on Bayesian methods in economics, finance and business, and
academic-industry interactions and outreach across these areas. Bayes 250 Day on
December 17, celebrates the 250th anniversary of the presentation of Thomas
Bayes' paper, with lectures showing the transformative impact of Bayesian
analysis on a number of scientific disciplines. The scientific topics considered
include foundations of objective Bayesian analysis; objective priors,
unification of statistics; spatial and temporal methods; model uncertainty with
huge model spaces; nonparametric analysis; massive multiple testing and subgroup
analysis; computational issues, especially with massive data; uncertainty
quantification; the interface of statistics and computational modeling of
processes; and objective Bayesian methods in high energy physics and
astrophysics.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The Bayes 250 Conference, a five day
conference at Duke University during December 15-19, 2013, brings together
leading researchers in Bayesian analysis from around the world. The last decade
has seen an explosion of interest in Bayesian statistical methodology across
engineering, medicine and science, and this meeting provides a timely forum for
the exchange of recent research developments, provides opportunities for new
researchers and underrepresented groups, and establishes new collaborations that
will channel efforts into pending problems and open new directions for
investigation. The conference is timed to coincide with the 250th anniversary of
the publication of the famous paper by Thomas Bayes. The organization of the
meeting is designed to facilitate interactions, with at most 7 talks per day and
extensive discussion built in. Tutorials and an evening poster session enhance
the conference experience for graduate students and new researchers. Funding
primarily supports graduate students and new researchers.