* 1344993
* Earthquake nucleation on faults with rate- and  state-dependent friction: a dynamical system's approach to instability
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2014,01/31/2018
* Robert Viesca, Tufts University
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 01/31/2018
* USD 214,199.00

An outstanding problem in earthquake science is how fault slip transitions from
slow creep or a nearly locked state to an earthquake-generating dynamic rupture
of the fault. Fundamental questions are how an evolving fault friction allows
for and determines the development of a slip instability that ultimately
nucleates dynamic rupture; how conditions on the fault affect that development;
and what are the consequences for the seismic cycle and the discernment of
earthquakes at their earliest stages. There is societal and scientific interest
in understanding how earthquakes start. Without an understanding of how dynamic
fault rupture is initiated, it is unlikely we will reliably understand the
origin of the earliest seismic signals that are crucial for early warning
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through recent work, we have developed a
transformative understanding of slip instability formation on interfaces of
elastic bodies whose friction follows the prevalent slip rate- and state-
dependence indicated by laboratory friction experiments at low, interseismic
slip rates. Treating a slipping fault as a nonlinear dynamical system, we have
found the manner by which earthquake-nucleating slip instabilities develop on
such interfaces. In the dynamical system context, the development corresponds to
fixed-point attraction. Our novel approach has opened up new avenues to address,
in rigorous detail, several of the fundamental issues concerning nucleation:
whether preferential nucleation sites can exist and, if identified, how they may
be expressed in the seismic cycle and what they may imply about the distribution
of the local intensity of rate-weakening or rate-strengthening behavior; whether
the nucleation process may be a chaotic one, such that small changes in initial
conditions at the onset of a slip instability may result in large differences in
the moments immediately preceding dynamic rupture; and how spatial variations of
fault properties and conditions (such as fault gouge composition and thickness,
ambient temperatures and pore fluid pressures) control nucleation.