* 1344198
* INSPIRE Track 1: Interdisciplinary Approach to Discovery, Analyses  and Applications of Informative Ancient Biomolecules
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Marshall Bern, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Dena Smith
* 08/31/2018
* USD 999,481.00

Interdisciplinary Approach to Discovery, Analyses and Applications of
Informative Ancient Biomolecules&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mary
Schweitzer&lt;br/&gt;North Carolina State University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
INSPIRE award is partially funded by Sedimentary Geology and Paleobiology
Program and Surface Earth Processes Section of the Earth Science Division of the
Directorate for Geoscience, the Genetic Mechanisms Cluster of the Directorate
for Biosciences, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program of the Directorate for
Mathematical and Physical Sciences, the Cross-EF Activities Program, the Office
of Multidisciplinary Activities, and the INSPIRE program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Conventional wisdom states there is a short (&gt;1 million
years) ?life span? for original molecules. Recent recovery of both soft tissues
(blood vessels and their contents, cells, flexible matrix), and component
molecules indicates that under some conditions, tissues and the molecules
comprising them will persist longer than proposed. During the tenure of this
project, the researchers hope to demonstrate that biomolecules recovered from
ancient fossils can yield information on evolutionary relationships, as well as
other aspects of extinct organisms. More importantly perhaps, they will study
the chemical nature of modifications to these original molecules that contribute
to preservation, such as unusual cross links, or bonding to environmental
chemicals; and will study which environments are most likely to yield fossils
preserving this kind of information, which will benefit the field at large,
because a better understanding of process and environment will expand molecular
studies of fossils. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed time limit on molecular
preservation has limited testing of older fossils for molecular content and
hindered methods development. Molecules, especially DNA and proteins, yield
information on evolution, but also on the function of organisms, and perhaps on
how evolution and natural selection work at the molecular level. But, to
undertake this research requires an expansion of existing databases which are
used for comparison. Currently, the vast majority of genomic and proteomic data
are derived from humans, next from mammals. The researchers propose to generate
proteomic data from non-mammalian taxa as part of this project. Additionally,
existing databases do not account for modifications to molecules due to
preservational processes, and thus many search algorithms will fail to identify
modified molecules. The researchers will address this by conducting time-point
sampling of a single taxon, and by experiments designed to approximate the
natural processes that may result in molecular preservation.&lt;br/&gt;To
understand the evolution of life, scientists have relied on morphological
characters retained in fossilized elements, and both morphological and molecular
data derived from extant organisms. However, in some cases, molecular studies
give a different picture of evolutionary histories than do morphological
features, and when these conflict, relationships are not clear. This research
challenges the conventional wisdom of ~1Ma temporal limits of molecular
longevity, and has the potential to extend the record of molecular evolution
into deep time.