* 1344072
* SCH: EXP: Collaborative Research: Privacy-Preserving Framework for Publishing Electronic Healthcare Records
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2017
* Liam O'Neill, University of North Texas Health Science Center at Fort Worth
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 12/31/2017
* USD 198,000.00

This project builds a novel privacy-preserving framework with both new
algorithms and software tools to: 1) evaluate the effectiveness of current
identifier-suppression techniques for Electronic Healthcare Record (EHR) data;
2) de-identify and anonymize EHR data to protect personal information without
significantly reducing the utility of data for secondary data analysis. The
proposed techniques eliminate the violation of privacy through re-
identification, and facilitate the secondary usage, sharing, publishing and
exchange of healthcare data without the risk of breaching protected health
information (PHI). This new privacy-preserving framework injects the ICD-9-CM-
aware constraint-based privacy-preserving techniques into EHRs to eliminate the
threat of identifying an individual in the secondary use of research data. The
proposed technique and development can be readily adapted to other types of
healthcare databases in order to ensure privacy and prevent re-identification of
published data. The project produces groundbreaking algorithms and tools for
identifying privacy leakages and protecting personal privacy information in EHRs
to improve healthcare data publishing. New privacy-preserving techniques
developed in this project lead towards a new type of healthcare science for
EHRs. The project also delivers fundamental advancements to engineering by
showing how to integrate biomedical domain knowledge with a computationally
advanced quantitative framework for preserving the privacy of published EHRs.
HIPAA has established protocols and industry standards to protect the
confidentiality of PHI. However, our results demonstrate that, even with regard
to health data that meets HIPAA requirements, the risk of re-identification is
not completely eliminated. By identifying the security vulnerabilities inherent
in the HIPAA standards, our research develops a more rigorous security standard
that greatly improves privacy protections by applying state-of-the-art
algorithms.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The developed data privacy-preserving
framework has significant implications for the future of US healthcare data
publishing and related applications. Specifically, the transition from paper
records to EHRs has accelerated significantly since the passage of the HITECH
Act of 2009. The Act provides monetary incentives for the "meaningful use" of
EHRs. As a result, the quality and quantity of healthcare databases has risen
sharply, which has renewed the public's fear of a breach of privacy of their
medical information. This research work is innovative and crucial not only for
facilitating EHR data publishing, but also for enhancing the development and
promotion of EHRs. At the educational front, this project facilitates the
development of novel educational tools to construct entirely new courses and
laboratory classes for healthcare, data privacy, data mining, and a wide range
of applications. As a result, it enhances the current instructional methods for
teaching data privacy and data mining, and has compelling biomedical and
healthcare applications that can facilitate learning of computational
algorithms. This project involves both undergraduate and graduate students in
the three participating institutions. The PIs make a strong effort to engage
minority graduate and undergraduate students in research activities in order to
increase their exposure to cutting-edge research.