* 1344705
* NEESR Planning/Collaborative Research: Liquefaction Experiments and Analysis Projects (LEAP) for Validation
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Majid Manzari, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 09/30/2017
* USD 216,614.00

The main objective of this planning project is to lay the groundwork and to
conduct preliminary research and preparation activities for a subsequent NEESR2
proposal to produce a high quality experimental data, as well as validate and
develop confidence in the computational tools used for liquefaction analysis.
The ultimate goal of the project is to advance the current understanding and
computational predictive capabilities of the liquefaction phenomenon and its
consequences on civil infrastructure systems through integrated centrifuge
experiments and numerical simulations. The essential elements of this planning
project consist of: a) a planning workshop to identify a group of boundary value
problems and the material(s) of choice (e.g., type of sand) in the subsequent
centrifuge tests of the NEESR2 project, b) an extensive and careful review and
compilation of the experimental data available in the NEEShub and other relevant
databases, c) preliminary class-C numerical simulations to begin the process of
assessing the modeling capabilities currently available in the research
community and geotechnical practice, d) design of a series of centrifuge tests
that simulate a set of boundary value problems of interest to geotechnical
practice with an increasing order of complexity, e) a prediction exercise
symposium that leverages the results of the centrifuge tests that will be
conducted by our international collaborators in the UK, Japan, and China, and f)
development of validation metrics, tools, and protocols to assess the
reliability of computational models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This planning project
and the follow-on NEESR2 project will provide high quality validation data that
will reduce the need for certain routine experiments and hence allow more
resources to be used on experiments that explore new features of soil behavior.
In turn, validated numerical modeling techniques and high confidence in their
predictive capabilities will reduce the dependence of the profession on large
scale costly experiments. The project will provide a rare opportunity for
collaboration with the international community on a research topic that is of
critical value to the international geotechnical engineering community. Three
graduate students will participate in the project and will be trained in
physical and numerical modeling of liquefiable soils. The three institutions
will continue and build on their current outreach efforts to attract members of
under-represented groups to participate in the project as graduate students. The
project will establish an experimental dataset and a formal protocol for
validation of our simulation tools to fully elucidate their capabilities and
limitations. These capabilities and limitations are essential for intelligent
management and maintenance of our infrastructure. Data from this project will be
archived and made available to the public through the NEES data repository. This
award is part of the National Earthquake Hazards Reduction Program (NEHRP).