* 1344241
* INSPIRE Track 1:  Microbial Sulfur Metabolism and its Potential for Transforming the Growth of Epitaxial Solar Cell Absorbers
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* David Clarke, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* David Garrison
* 08/31/2018
* USD 796,131.00

Abstract

This INSPIRE award is partially funded by Biological Oceanography Program in
Division of Ocean Sciences, in the Directorate of Geosciences; the Electronic
and Photonic Materials Program in the Division of Materials Research,
Directorate of Mathematical and Physical Sciences.

A simple idea motivates this project: By characterizing the mechanisms
underlying pyrite film deposition by subsurface microbes living at hydrothermal
vents, can approaches be developed to controllably grow high-purity pyrite films
that could be used to produce low-cost photovoltaic solar cells? Recent in situ
studies at hydrothermal vents have found "subsurface" microbes associated with
the deposition of large crystalline metal sulfides (up to 1.1 millimeters),
including iron pyrite. In laboratory incubations, vent microbes specifically
deposited pyrite (FeS2), devoid of Zn, Cu and other metals that were abundant in
the liquid media. Abiotic incubations did not exhibit this specificity. The
investigators hypothesize that, in situ, microbes deposit pyrite via a number of
potential processes, including a physiological process called extracellular
electron transfer (EET), wherein microbes shuttle electrons to/from minerals. In
situ, EET-enabled microbes may use conductive minerals to electrically access
oxidants, and deposit pyrite on these surfaces. Vents are thus natural
bioelectrochemical cells, which grow metal sulfides via microbial and abiotic
electrochemical processes, though the details and mechanisms remain to be
determined. This project is aimed at elucidating the mechanisms underlying
microbial FeS2 pyrite bio-deposition, and assessing how microbes might be used
to deposit epitaxial films for solar cells absorbers. FeS2 pyrite has been
identified as prospective low cost solar absorbers because of their abundance,
suitable band-gap (~0.95 eV) and high optical absorbance. Microbial pyrite film
deposition at lower temperatures (<100 C) might offer a radically new, low cost
approach to creating large area PV solar cells. Nothing is currently known about
the mechanisms underlying microbial pyrite growth, though the large crystal
sizes suggest epitaxial deposition is favored over re-nucleation implying that,
once nucleated, epitaxial growth can occur. A series of experiments using
natural vent microbial communities and isolates will be conducted to determine:
A) environmental factors that influence bio-deposition; B) potential molecular
mechanisms; C) the microstructural and electrical properties of these films; and
D) whether bio-deposition by single species or consortia yields films of highest
purity, size and homogeneity.

Intellectual Merit: The project is both highly-integrated and transformative. It
is relevant to our understanding of microbial sulfur cycling, as little is known
about how microbes mediate crystalline pyrite formation and the degree to which
this influences sulfur isotope geochemistry. Molecular studies will be used to
interrogate relevant microbial metabolic processes and constrain the possible
mechanisms of pyrite film growth, which is critical to advancing our ability to
grow FeS2 films for device applications. Understanding the effects of substrate
crystallography and electrical conductivity on the growth morphology will
further inform our knowledge of microbial pyrite deposition. Notably, this
research differ from existing biomimetic approaches. The studies are not focused
on crystal growth via tethered peptides or synthetic extracellular matrices.
Rather, they aim to advance our understanding of natural biodeposition, use the
insights gained to grow pyrite materials and devices.

Broader Impacts: Apart from the exciting and possibly transformative impact on
creating alternative photovoltaic solar cells, this activity offers an unusual
opportunity to perform research across current intellectual boundaries of
microbial sciences and electronic / engineering materials. Graduate students
will be thoroughly engaged in both these areas, with extensive mentoring from
the PIs and the postdoc. Via numerous Harvard and NSF programs, the
investigators will engage undergraduates in the research. Moreover, Professors
Girguis and Clarke will use this project to teach a new course to freshman,
focused on understanding and communicating interdisciplinary science. In this
course, and in collaboration with the Harvard Museum of Natural History,
students would design a public exhibit on how microbes make minerals and
electricity, which would be evaluated by the museum staff and the some of the
~200,000 annual visitors on its efficacy, thus enabling the Harvard students to
learn firsthand about communicating science, and informing the public about the
relationships between science and engineering.