* 1344595
* Collaborative Research:  Unraveling Orographic Precipitation Patterns by Combined Hydrologic and Atmospheric Analysis
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2014,02/28/2018
* Jessica Lundquist, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 02/28/2018
* USD 246,403.00

Focusing on the Southern Sierra Nevada, California, we will use distributed snow
and streamflow measurements (which date back to the 1920s) to assess what
precipitation must have been for each basin on annual and storm-by-storm time-
scales. Using iterative hydrologic simulations across a range of model
structures in a Bayesian framework, we will determine which precipitation
amounts and gradients (and with what uncertainty) best fit available
measurements of streamflow and snow accumulation. This methodology will provide
a ground-based estimate of high-elevation precipitation for times and locations
where no high-altitude rain gauges are available and will allow us to assess
long-term change. We will then use these new hydrologic-based precipitation
datasets as a benchmark for atmospheric model performance, and will compare
these with an ensemble of 14-year regional atmospheric model (WRF) simulations
generated using different boundary conditions and microphysics schemes. This
will allow us to assess sources of model uncertainty in annual patterns of
orographic precipitation.



Accurate precipitation inputs, both total amounts and changes with elevation,
are critical to model streamflow in mountainous regions. However, in general
these regions are grossly under-sampled in terms of precipitation measurements,
and those gauges that do exist are notoriously unreliable. Atmospheric models
can predict precipitation rates and distributions. However, development and
improvement of these atmospheric models has been hindered by the lack of direct
precipitation measurements that caused hydrologists problems in the first place.

Our most reliable measurements from these high-altitude areas (distributed
streamflow and snow water equivalent) are useful clues for estimating historic
spatial and temporal distributions of precipitation. Our research approach
integrates both meteorology and hydrology, using hydrology as a tool to better
understand meteorology, and providing a long-term benchmark that can be used to
improve our forecasts and advance science in both fields. This work will improve
understanding of mountain precipitation for both individual storms and how those
storms aggregate over an entire season. This knowledge is crucial for
forecasting short-term floods, seasonal water resources, and long-term climate
sensitivity. Efforts will focus on the Southern Sierra Nevada, California, where
short-term and long-term forecasts have historically had lower accuracy than
other regions, but where those same forecasts are critical for the San Joaquin
Valley agriculture industry, valued at over $30 billion. The research results
will also contribute to atmospheric model development, such that these models
can be used more successfully to predict mountain precipitation worldwide.