* 1344288
* INSPIRE Track 1: What is Normal Milk? Sociocultural, Evolutionary, Environmental, and Microbial Aspects of Human Milk Composition
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2013,04/30/2019
* James Foster, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* Purnima Bhanot
* 04/30/2019
* USD 950,000.00

This INSPIRE award is partially funded by the following programs (a) the
Symbiosis, Defense &amp; Self-Recognition Program (Division of Integrative
Organismal Systems, Biology Directorate) (b) the Emerging Frontiers Office (
Biology Directorate) (c) the Information Integration and Informatics and Special
Projects programs of the Division of Information and Intelligent Systems
(Directorate for Computer &amp; Information Science &amp; Engineering) (d) The
Africa/Middle East/South Asia cluster (Kenya, Ghana) and Americas (Latin
America, SDC) Cluster of the Office of International Science and Engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;It is well-known that breastfeeding protects infants from illness,
especially in the poorest regions of the world. The full nature of this
protective effect, however, is less well understood. A major barrier to
understanding is the fact that almost nothing is known about the factors that
influence the considerable variation in milk composition around the globe, or
about the effects of this variation on infant health. This INSPIRE project
represents the first comprehensive investigation of the global differences in
human milk composition along with the various microbial, evolutionary,
environmental, and sociocultural factors that might influence both milk
composition and infant health. An international, interdisciplinary collaboration
of physiologists, nutritional scientists, anthropologists, microbiologists, and
mathematicians will collect biological data from breastfeeding women and their
infants, in concert with extensive anthropologic and ecological data, in both
developed (US, Spain, Sweden) and developing countries (Central African
Republic, Gambia, Ghana, Peru, and Kenya). To test the possibility of a
correlation between milk oligosaccharide composition, milk microbiota, and the
gastrointestinal microbiome of infants, milk samples and infant fecal samples
will be analyzed using state-of-the-art biochemical and genomic techniques. This
study will allow important cross-cultural comparisons of milk composition and
infant feeding practices; it also will utilize sophisticated computational
methods to integrate the extensive, diverse body of combined biological and
anthropological data to elucidate the relationships among sociocultural factors,
evolutionary history, environmental exposures, microbial constituents and milk
composition. The researchers predict that what is considered "normal" milk
composition in one population may not support optimal health in another. This
information is crucial to the humanitarian quest to understand how infant
nutrition and overall health can be improved around the world. In addition, this
project will provide extensive research training opportunities for
undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral scientists.