* 1344437
* Student Travel Fellowships: 2013 Web Reasoning and Rule Systems Conference
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2014
* Alessandra Mileo, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2014
* USD 9,000.00

Semantic technologies, Linked Open Data, and knowledge representation formalisms
such as OWL are beginning to play increasingly important roles across a broad
range of applications.Ontology modeling languages, e.g., RDF, OWL, and RIF,
enable the inference of implicit knowledge from knowledge that is explicitly
encoded in the knowledge base. Web Reasoning and allied fields focus on the
design, analysis, and development of ontology languages, study of their
theoretical properties, and the design and implementation of effective inference
algorithms. There is an urgent need for advanced training graduate students to
conduct research in this area and prepare for academic or industrial careers.
Participation in premier research conferences in the area is an essential
element of such training. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Web Reasoning and Rule
Systems conference series, established in 2007, attracts the leading researchers
in the field of Web Reasoning, and offers a venue for presentation of the latest
advances in the field. The co-location of the conference with the Reasoning Web
Summer School makes it also an excellent venue for training graduate students.
This project provides travel grants for U.S. based graduate students to attend
the 2013 Web Reasoning and Rule Systems Conference scheduled to take place
during July 27-29, in Mannheim, Germany. The conference is co-located with the
2013 Reasoning Web Summer School, and also with the 26th International Workshop
on Description Logics. In addition to attending the invited and contributed
talks at the conference, and the Summer School, the students will benefit from
individualized mentoring by established researchers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of the project include the training of a
new generation of researchers and technologists in the emerging area of Web
Reasoning which is currently seeing substantial industrial interest and uptake,
and enhanced opportunties for broadening the participation of groups that are
currently under-represented in Computer Science in general, and Semantic
Technologies, Web Reasoning, and related areas in particular.