* 1344937
* NEESR Planning/Collaborative Research: Toward Experimental Verification of Controllable Damping Strategies for Base Isolated Buildings
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2018
* Erik Johnson, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 09/30/2018
* USD 215,124.00

Smart base isolation is a promising seismic mitigation technique that
supplements a building's conventional base isolation layer with controllable
energy dissipation devices that allow for seismic protection over a range of
different earthquakes. This mitigation technique is now ready for full-scale
experimental verification and validation: Japanese collaborators at the National
Research Institute for Earth Science and Disaster Prevention (NIED) E-Defense
shake table facility in Miki, Japan, are planning experiments in 2015 of a full-
scale, base isolated building with controllable dampers in the isolation layer
to mitigate damage and injury, particularly for strong impulsive and long-period
excitation. The goals of this research are: (a) to leverage the results from
these 2015 Japanese tests to allow for large-scale experimental verification of
smart base isolation for U.S. structures, isolators and controllable dampers,
and subjected to U.S. ground motions, thereby demonstrating the robust
performance provided by controllable dampers in a wide array of ground motions
with diverse magnitudes and spectra, as well as with damaged structures; such
adaptability is impossible with conventional passive isolation devices; (b) to
accelerate innovations in real-time hybrid simulation (RTHS) experimental
techniques, which combine physical testing of the critical components linked
with physics-based computational model simulations of the remaining structure,
and that can serve to reduce future reliance on large-scale earthquake
engineering experiments; and (c) to engage a community of researchers to study
controlled base isolation through international collaboration, a benchmark
study, and a project workshop. To achieve these goals, this research has five
phases: (1) design, build and test baseline numerical and small-scale
experimental models of the isolated structure to be tested on the NIED E-Defense
shake table; (2) derive analytical and numerical approaches to guarantee the
conditions of stability of RTHS, as well as fully develop the computational
techniques that exploit the localized nature of the physical components in RTHS
for highly efficient simulation of large-scale numerical models for RTHS; (3)
participate in E-Defense's 2015 controllable damping base isolation experiment,
working with Japanese collaborators to develop suitable control strategies and
assist with the challenging aspects of their experiment; (4) use the models and
tools already developed, and the experience and data from the full-scale
E-Defense tests, in RTHS at the University of Connecticut to demonstrate the
advances in RTHS capabilities; and (5) engage the research community by
designing and releasing a benchmark study in controlled isolation based on the
E-Defense and U.S.-designed structures, and by a workshop to solicit community
feedback about the tools and future directions of RTHS studies. Full-scale
dynamic earthquake engineering experiments, while vital for advancing seismic
protection, are limited by the few facilities with the capacity to conduct the
experiments and by the associated high cost of testing. These large-scale
earthquake engineering experiments can be leveraged with a wider array of RTHS.
RTHS must be calibrated to the full-scale results to ensure accuracy (and
credibility), must be capable of accommodating, in real-time, the large-scale
computational models vital to precise response computation for complex
structures, and must be guaranteed stable and robust.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
research will enable new technologies for seismic hazard mitigation and hybrid
computational/experimental tools that complement, and broaden the applicability
of, large-scale testing. Building technology will be advanced by demonstrating,
in full-scale physical and mixed physical/virtual experiments, that controllable
damping devices can provide significant reductions in building motion and damage
during earthquakes - and doing so by capitalizing on experiments already planned
by Japanese collaborators. Further, the project will enable the computational
tools to support these cyber-physical experiments for realistic large-scale
building models and ensure that the results are accurate. Beyond the
collaboration with Japanese researchers, the development of a controllable base
isolation benchmark study using models calibrated to full-scale experimental
results will engage a world-wide community of researchers to multiply the reach
of this project through numerous alternate control strategies. The research
results will be incorporated into graduate and undergraduate classes at the
University of Southern California and the University of Connecticut. An industry
advisory panel will be assembled to ensure that the knowledge of practicing
engineers informs the research. A workshop will ensure the transfer of the
resulting tools to the hybrid simulation community so that others can take full
advantage of the research results from this project. Data from this project will
be archived and made available to the public through the NEES data repository.
This award is part of the National Earthquake Hazards Reduction Program (NEHRP).