* 1344250
* INSPIRE Track 1:   Collaborative Research:   Transforming Remotely-conducted Research through Ethnography, Education and Rapidly-Evolving Technologies
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2013,02/28/2017
* Chris German, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Brian Midson
* 02/28/2017
* USD 800,000.00

This INSPIRE award is partially funded by the Oceanographic Centers and
Facilities Program in the Division of Ocean Sciences in the Directorate for
Geosciences, the Transforming Undergraduate Education in STEM Program in the
Division of Undergraduate Education in the Directorate for Education and Human
Resources, and the Robust Intelligence Program in the Division of Information
and Intelligent Systems in the Directorate for Computer and Information Science
and Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is aimed at expanding the
ways scientists conduct field work from oceanographic research platforms. To do
so, the team will assemble a cohort of 12 undergraduate students who will be
involved in a telepresence-based research cruise, whose mission is to
investigate greenhouse gas exhalation from the seafloor. The students will be
active in all phases of the planning, execution and conclusion of the project.
The students will be mentored by the PIs as well as a group of early-career
scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to the ocean science objectives,
the PIs will conduct an evaluation of the effectiveness of the activity for
recruiting and entraining undergraduate students in STEM. They will also assess
the impact the experience has on the learning experience of the students. They
will also improve the capability of researchers to utilize increasingly advanced
robotic systems for this activity, and in the future.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Another important aspect of the project is integrating an
ethnography component, defined as the study of the practices through which a
community makes meaning. The PIs will compare ship-based versus telepresence
interactions, paying attention to where conflicts arise and how they are
resolved. They will evaluate the cultural processes involved in human-machine
interactions for this activity. They will assist in developing the best
practices for this approach to science and help communicate the outcomes
broadly.