* 1344768
* SCH: INT: Collaborative Research: FITTLE+: Theory and Models for Smartphone Ecological Momentary Intervention
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Robert Kraut, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2017
* USD 846,572.00

Many health conditions are caused by unhealthy lifestyles and can be improved by
behavior change. Traditional behavior-change methods (e.g., weight-loss clinics;
personal trainers) have bottlenecks in providing expert personalized day-to-day
support to large populations for long periods. There is a pressing need to
extend the reach and intensity of existing successful health behavior change
approaches in areas such as diet and fitness. Smartphone platforms provide an
excellent opportunity for projecting maximally effective interventions for
behavior change into everyday life at great economies of scale. Smartphones also
provide an excellent opportunity for collecting rich, fine-grained data
necessary for understanding and predicting behavior-change dynamics in people
going about their everyday lives. The challenge posed by these opportunities for
detailed measurement and intervention is that current theory is not equally
fine-grained and predictive. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This interdisciplinary
project investigates theory and methods to support fine-grained behavior-change
modeling and intervention integrated via smartphone into the daily lives of
individuals and groups. Fittle+ develops a new and transformative form of
smartphone-delivered Ecological Momentary Intervention (EMI) for improving diet
and physical activity. This approach will provide social support and
autonomously planned and personalized coaching that builds on methods from
mobile sensing, cognitive tutoring, and evidence-based social design. The
foundation for this new approach will require new predictive computational
theories of health behavior change. Current coarse-grained conceptual theories
of individual health behavior change will be refined into fine-grained
predictive computational models. These computational models will be capable of
tracking moment-by-moment human context, activity, and social patterns based on
mobile sensing and interaction data. Using these monitoring capabilities,
Fittle+'s computational models will support assessment of, and predictions
about, individual users and groups based on underlying motivational, cognitive,
and social mechanisms. These predictive models will also be used to plan and
optimize coaching actions including detailed diagnostics, individualized goals,
and contextually and personally adapted interventions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
collaborative team of researchers works with weight-loss interventionists at one
of nation's largest health organization's facility in Hawaii. The team includes
expertise in mobile sensing, artificial intelligence, computational cognition,
social psychology, human computer interaction, computer tutoring, and
measurement theory.