* 1344418
* Integration of Strategies that Support Undergraduate Education in STEM (ISSUES)
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2015
* David Bressoud, Mathematical Association of America
* Standard Grant
* Lee Zia
* 07/31/2015
* USD 29,889.00

This workshop project is bringing together professionals directly responsible
for undergraduate education initiatives at approximately fifteen disciplinary
societies in STEM fields. The workshop's intellectual merit lies in its
fostering of communication and collaboration among society representatives for
the purpose of sharing existing knowledge of Discipline-Based Education Research
(DBER) and practice across disciplines. Furthermore this effort is highlighting
the latest insights into effective translation of theoretical knowledge into
actual practice and propagation of evidence-based instructional strategies and
programs. Workshop outcomes include: 1) publishing a joint document clarifying
the support of the disciplinary societies for the adoption of discipline-based
education research (DBER) and detailing the strategies employed by the societies
to promote active learning across the STEM disciplines; 2) identifying exemplars
of successful strategies for fostering adoption of evidence-based active
learning strategies from the participating professional societies and
documenting them on a public website; and 3) determining whether or not a
longer-term initiative designed to instigate wide-scale, long-term improvement
in undergraduate teaching practices is feasible and what such an initiative
would entail. The broader impacts of the workshop are felt through its
engagement of major STEM disciplinary professional societies that collectively
represent the full range of the STEM disciplines: physical sciences (including
chemistry, physics, and geoscience), biological sciences, engineering, and the
mathematical and statistical sciences. These disciplinary societies play a
critical role in disseminating information about DBER through their publications
and online resources. Individually, they have already established a number of
different models for faculty development and created a variety of mechanisms to
support continuing faculty growth, and the cooperation and collaboration
fostered through this workshop multiplies that influence.