* 1344335
* Planning Meeting on Indicators of Doctoral Education
* SBE,SMA
* 08/01/2013,12/31/2014
* Constance Citro, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Maryann Feldman
* 12/31/2014
* USD 50,000.00

The National Research Council (NRC) of the National Academy of Sciences will
hold a planning meeting to discuss the creation of a program to collect and
disseminate information about research doctoral education. Participants will
include representatives of graduate research programs, higher education
associations, organizations that provide comparative information on doctoral
programs, and others with relevant knowledge and expertise. This meeting will
consider the range of data currently available about doctoral education and the
potential uses of additional data that could be obtained with a regular program
of data collection. The meeting will also consider several practical aspects of
such a program, including the willingness of universities to participate and the
possible role of the NRC. The goal of the planning meeting is to determine if
there is enough interest in and expected value from an ongoing indicators
program to warrant further development work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NRC has
conducted three prior studies of research doctorate programs that were carried
out on an ad hoc basis, with reports published in 1982, 1995, and 2010. The
planning meeting will consider the results of these prior studies for insights
about the types of data that might be included in an ongoing indicators program,
the technical challenges in constructing these different types of data, and the
potential value to the field of making such data available. In particular, the
planning meeting will consider the use of reputational rankings and the
production of program rankings, both of which were criticized in the prior NRC
studies. In addition the planning meeting will consider the implications for the
design of an ongoing program to provide information about research doctoral
education of new information sources that have recently become available,
including commercial efforts to provide comparative information on publication
and citation data across doctoral programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts. A set of doctoral indicators could potentially provide the graduate
education community with a number of benefits, including benchmarks for
institutional self-improvement, data for higher education research, and
comparative information for policymakers and prospective students. As a result,
an ongoing indicator program could help drive substantial increases in the
quality of research doctoral programs.