* 1344417
* Future Directions for NSF Advanced Computing Infrastructure to Support US Science in 2017-2020
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2018
* Jon Eisenberg, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Edward Walker
* 07/31/2018
* USD 723,001.00

This award to the National Academy of Sciences will result in the appointment of
a study committee to examine anticipated priorities and associated tradeoffs for
advanced computing in support of NSF-sponsored science and engineering research.
Advanced computing capabilities are used to tackle a rapidly growing range of
challenging science and engineering problems, many of which are compute-,
communications-, and data-intensive as well. The study committee will consider:
(1) The contribution of high end computing to U.S. leadership and competiveness
in basic science and engineering and the role that NSF should play in sustaining
this leadership; (2) Expected future national-scale computing needs: high end
requirements, those arising from the full range of basic science and engineering
research supported by NSF, as well as the computing infrastructure needed to
support advances in modeling, simulation and data analysis; (3)
Complementarities and tradeoffs that arise among investments in supporting
advanced computing ecosystems; software, data, communications; (4) The range of
operational models for delivering computational infrastructure, for basic
science and engineering research, and the role of NSF support in these various
models ; and (5) Expected technical challenges to affordably delivering the
capabilities needed for world-leading scientific and engineering
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An interim report, to be delivered within 12
months of the project start, will identify key issues and discuss potential
options. It may contain preliminary findings and early recommendations. A final
report, to be delivered within 24 months of the project start, will include a
framework for future decision-making about NSF's advanced computing strategy and
programs. The framework would address such issues as how to prioritize needs and
investments and how to balance competing demands for cyberinfrastructure
investments. The report will emphasize identifying issues, explicating options,
and articulating tradeoffs and general recommendations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advanced computing capabilities are central to many areas
of basic science and engineering, and are being used to tackle a rapidly growing
range of challenging problems. This activity will inform future strategy and
investments for delivering these capabilities. The committee reports will
address such issues as how to prioritize needs and investments and how to
balance competing demands for cyberinfrastructure investments. The results of
the study are intended to inform decision-making about future NSF investments in
advanced computing. The reports will also be a valuable resource for (1) science
and engineering researchers that use or might use advanced computing
capabilities (for whom the report would provide an useful overview of
opportunities, challenges, and future directions) and (2) those conducting
R&amp;D on future high-performance computing (for whom the report would provide
a useful view of emerging science and engineering requirements).