* 1344228
* Virtual Environment Interactions: Exploring Grounded Embodied Pedagogy in Support of Computational Thinking
* CSE,CNS
* 12/15/2013,10/31/2015
* Sabarish Babu, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Kamau Bobb
* 10/31/2015
* USD 579,673.00

This INSPIRE award is partially funded by the CE21 Program in the Division of
Computer &amp; Network Systems in the Directorate for Computer &amp; Information
Science &amp; engineering (CISE), the Cyberlearning Program in the Division of
Information &amp; Intelligent Systems in the CISE Directorate, and the Discovery
Research K-12 Program in the Division of Research on Learning in Formal and
Informal Settings (DRL) in the Directorate for Education &amp; Human Resources
(EHR). Clemson University will design, develop, and evaluate a virtual
environment and associated curriculum for blending movement and computer
programming as a novel and embodied way to engage 5th- and 6th-grade girls with
computational thinking. This research will test the hypothesis that girls
creating interactive movement for their virtual characters and using their
bodies to think through the actuation of the characters should bootstrap their
intuitive knowledge in order to learn computational concepts, utilize
computational practices, and develop computational perspectives.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project staff will 1) develop a desktop-based virtual
environment in which students must program a 3-dimensional character with which
they can later interact (this environment builds on previous successes of
similar programming environments, but will utilize grounded embodied pedagogical
strategies); 2) conduct iterative design experiments to answer a set of research
questions (how does an embodiment-centered curriculum support the development of
computational thinking? how does an embodiment-centered curriculum support
interest in STEM fields?); and 3) capitalize on the results of these experiments
to iteratively refine the virtual environment and curricular materials.