* 1344792
* SNM: Scalable and Sustainable Hydrothermal Manufacturing of Nano-array based Low Temperature Diesel Oxidation Catalysts
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2018
* Steven Suib, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 09/30/2018
* USD 1,458,199.00

CMMI-1344792&lt;br/&gt;Pu-Xian Gao, Tianfeng Lu, Zhuyin Ren, and Steven
Suib&lt;br/&gt;University of Connecticut &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hydrothermal
processing has emerged as a potentially economic method for nanomanufacturing,
due to energy saving, cost effectiveness, simplicity and low operation
temperature (LOT). However, the scientific nature of hydrothermal processing
remains elusive, particularly on the spatial distribution of nanostructure
nucleation and growth, patterning and self-assembly into device forms, which
directly impact the assembly (device) yield, growth rate, uniformity, and batch-
to-batch repeatability. The goal of this project is to design and validate an
external-energy-field assisted flow hydrothermal manufacturing technique for
continuous, scalable and sustainable syntheses of a new class of monolithic
catalysts, based on three-dimensional (3-D) nanostructure arrays (nano-array),
for low temperature catalytic diesel oxidation, and to understand the underlying
mass transport and growth reaction chemistry. With well-defined size, shape and
orientation, nano-arrays on monoliths will be synthesized based on selective
metal oxides, targeting from the lab-scale, large-scale, to industrially
relevant manufacturing stages. Both stirred batch and continuous flow reactor
techniques will be systematically studied in combination with production-rate-
acceleration external energies such as electrical fields, microwaves and
ultrasonic radiation. Computational fluid dynamics will be used to design and
optimize catalysts based on theoretical analyses and numerical modeling using.
Detailed flow field distributions, chemical kinetics, and experimental
validation will guide the design and control of the field-assisted growth
reactors. Various metal doping will be conducted on the nano-arrays to enable
LOT activity and selectivity for catalytic diesel oxidations. These structured
nanocatalysts will be tested and validated as low temperature diesel oxidation
catalysts (DOC) for hydrocarbon and nitrogen oxide
oxidations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide new insights on the
thermodynamic, transport and growth behavior of nanomaterial assemblies at a 3-D
monolithic device/system level, as accelerated by external energy field
implementation. The resulting structured nanocatalysts will provide a much
needed class of LOT DOCs for the automotive industry, and will directly impact
the fuel economy, energy and environmental sustainability. Such arrays will also
provide a unique device platform applicable in chemical, mechanical, and
biotechnology industries. The complementary experimental and modeling study for
hydrothermal manufacturing could be applied to other nanomanufacturing cases
involving solution or gas phases. This project emphasizes interdisciplinary
education and training involving materials science, chemical engineering,
chemistry, and mechanical engineering, as well as the strong industrial
partnerships with United Technologies Corporation, Umicore, VeruTEK, and ANSYS.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A summer workshop on "Advanced Nanomaterials:
Manufacturing and Processing" will be hosted every year by the PIs and
industrial partners, targeting community college students and high school
teachers, who will eventually influence a number of underrepresented minority
students, forming a potential workforce for nanomanufacturing industry of the
future. A summer lab course will be held for K-12 students in the Kids Are
Scientists Too Program. A ?Nano-Array Catalysts? theme website will be created
to disseminate information from this project with a separate access set up for
the general public. In the third year of the project an international conference
will be held on ?Catalytic Nanomaterials Manufacturing? at UCONN.