* 1344944
* SBIR Phase I:  Representation and Deep Learning for Free Text Applications
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Stephen Gallant, Textician, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 12/31/2014
* USD 165,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project seeks to validate
a new way to process textual material, so that computers can better learn
applications related to natural language. A goal is to enable computer learning
methods to take better account of parse structure in sentences, which is
currently difficult. Two experimental prototypes will be constructed. One will
focus upon automatically determining whether online posts about a company, brand
or institution are positive or negative (sentiment analysis). This is difficult
because sentence structure is important, and also because online posts can be
informal, contain slang, etc. The second prototype finds the most important
paragraph during a search, also taking sentence structure into account. Such
paragraph-level information retrieval helps when extracting factual information
from running text or web pages. The new method represents words simultaneously
with parse structure using a single high-dimensional vector (for example, a list
of 1,000 numbers). A successful SBIR project will ultimately improve machine
learning applications for a wide range of tasks, including document retrieval,
summarization, and automated translation. Moreover, the same techniques can be
applied to represent any structured collection prior to machine learning,
including images and genomic information. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project is to enhance capabilities for
automated processing of free text and other structured data. Motivation for this
approach comes from neural networks and, in turn, it has applications to neural
modeling and our understanding of how the brain processes information. In the
software industry, commercial innovation continues to revolve around automated
processing of web pages, which plays a key role in creating many new companies.
Therefore, the ability to handle free text is increasing in importance. A better
way to represent text for use with machine learning will open new capabilities
wherever the structure of sentences must be taken into account. This will lead
to new startups, and provide consumers with new products and services. A
successful project will validate new technology that can give a huge competitive
edge to companies that take advantage of it, provide new and better capabilities
for consumers, and advance those countries, such as our own, whose economies
benefit from new technological innovations.