* 1344383
* US Ignite Next Generation Applications Hub Design Workshop
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2013,11/30/2014
* Ben Moskowitz, Mozilla Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Lyles
* 11/30/2014
* USD 99,828.00

US Ignite was launched in 2012 to foster the development of next-generation apps
for public benefit. In the next 5 years, US Ignite efforts are targeting the
development of 60 next-generation applications, 200 community testbeds, and a
forum for collaboration between industry, academia, and gigabit communities.
Because US Ignite services a broad range of stakeholders in next-generation app
development, the activities of the partnership are not always clearly visible.
US Ignite, and the overall goals of the partnership, are better served by
transparent, shared communications infrastructure. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project addresses part of this need by convening a platform design workshop to
solicit feedback, ideas, and expertise from key stakeholders and drive the
development of a new web-based platform for the development of next generation
applications. The platform will serve as a hub for research and best practices
in software-defined networking, symmetric gigabit networks, local cloud
computing and other advanced networking applications. It will include an index
of a variety of advanced networking application projects and demonstrate how
these networks can be used. Additionally, by providing opportunities for
engagement and collaboration across diverse groups that do not naturally
interact, the platform provides possibilities for the discovery of new ideas and
potentially transformative applications. During this workshop the participants
will: identify and define key priorities of leadership and stakeholders; agree
on core user demographics and needs; define the site design (look and feel) and
requirements (functionality); identify existing content that can be leveraged to
bootstrap the site; and agree to development roadmap and schedule. The goal of
the workshop is to prepare fully the development team to operationalize this
platform and build a sustainable next-generation apps development community.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will result in a roadmap and core group to
produce a platform that will increase participation in the next-generation apps
community. It will provide a consolidated gateway to people, software, and
documentation. It will enable the small team at US Ignite to scale up this
ecosystem and reach a broader audience. It will also decrease the development
time from idea to usable application and propel applications out of the lab and
into [the] community.