* 1344207
* Collaborative Research:  ABI Development:  PathBubbles for Dynamic Visualization and Integration of Biological Information. Funding Program: NSF ABI Development
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2016
* Fiona McCarthy, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 06/30/2016
* USD 218,690.00

Many disciplines of modern biology have undergone a revolution in data
acquisition. With the advent of high throughput technologies, data is
accumulating at a pace that outstrips our ability to convert that data into
knowledge. Application of these technologies can provide terabyte amounts of
data relevant to a particular biological problem but interpreting that volume of
information remains a challenge. A variety of resources are available to help
researchers visualize, categorize and ultimately make sense out of their data.
Visualization tools such as those in KEGG or Reactome, place data in the context
of signaling and metabolic pathways. Many different ontologies, text mining and
enrichment analysis tools have been developed to help categorize individual data
points into groups. Both visualization and categorization reduce the complexity
of the problem and provide insight into the underlying biology. Ultimately,
however, people are still in need for the essential steps of integrating,
evaluating and, finally, converting these data to human knowledge. What is
needed a novel, dynamic approach to pathway visualization along with integrating
disparate ontologies and information found in text to improve the researcher?s
ability to convert high throughput data into understanding. This will be
achieved by developing PathBubbles, a dynamic, interactive pathway visualization
tool using the existing Vis- and Code Bubbles as a framework. In addition
additional information will be provided by integrating data found in specific
ontologies, text-mining tools and expression data to provide gene annotation for
use with PathBubbles. Finally, capturing functional information about post-
translationally modified proteins from literature and integrating this
information into PathBubbles, will assist users in developing testable
hypotheses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Humans are visual animals, relying on visual
input to sense and orient themselves to the environment. One consequence of this
is that humans are very able to recognize patterns in visually displayed
information. This work exploits this ability to help biologists analyze
thousands of pathway data points by developing a novel web based interface where
information is displayed as a graph. This graph will display data from gene
studies where each gene product is shown as a dot and the connections between
the genes are lines. The dots that represent gene products can be colored
depending on the activity of the gene in a particular biological condition. For
example, if the gene is expressed at a very high level in a cancer cell compared
to a normal cell, the dot will be displayed in red. In addition, the lines may
represent a variety of interactions such as binding between gene products or
sharing of a small molecule and the type of interaction can be indicated by
different line colors. The graphical interface is supported by an extensive
database of information about each gene product and each interaction. Users will
be able to access that information by simply clicking on the dot or line of
interest. A particularly novel aspect of this project is that users will be able
to add their own data by using an interface that allows them to create new dots
(gene products) and lines (interactions). They will then be able to provide
functional information about what happens, for instance, when their gene product
interacts with a pre-existing gene product already in the database. Based on
this new information, the system will then predict the effect of the user's new
gene product on the biological pathways. This will allow users to ask 'what if'
questions, using this interface to test hypotheses before doing actual
experiments. While the system is being developed in the context of biology, the
ability to graphically test different hypotheses will have application to a
variety of other disciplines including chemistry, engineering, physics and
computer sciences.