* 1344942
* Metastable transformations of pyroxenes in subducting slabs
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2014,02/28/2018
* Przemyslaw Dera, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 02/28/2018
* USD 515,019.00

Earth is a very complex and dynamic system in which global geologic phenomena
such as volcanism, earthquakes or plate tectonics have major impacts on human
civilization. Proper understanding of these global phenomena requires
microscopic models of chemical and physical processes in which rocks, minerals
and fluids are involved, as well as understanding of changes in the physical
properties of the Earth forming materials at high pressure and temperature.
Changes in the structure of materials (phase transitions) and chemical reactions
between the major stable mineral components of the Earth's interior have been
convincingly linked with observed seismic velocity changes (discontinuities). At
the same time, however, geophysicists gather more and more convincing evidence
that the Earth is heterogeneous in composition, temperature and density
throughout the Earth. Dynamic geologic environments, such as subduction zones
can also produce conditions that are quite far from the normal mantle. All these
facts fuel new motivation for exploring the lower-temperature metastable regime
in high pressure experiments in search for previously unknown metastable
transformations, which may impact our interpretation of observations from
seismology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Pyroxene minerals constitute a significant
portion of the Earth's crust and upper mantle. The general layout of the
pyroxene stable phase diagram has been well established, however, until
recently, the limitations of experimental techniques prevented systematic
investigations of the metastability effects at conditions corresponding to
depths higher than 300 km. Equipped with a novel experimental method,
synchrotron single-crystal micro-diffraction, the investigators recently
discovered a number of intriguing, previously unknown phase transformations in
the pyroxene family, occurring in the metastable regime. Based on these
preliminary results they hypothesize that metastable phase diagrams of pyroxenes
are far more complex than previously assumed, and that the previously unknown
polymorphic transformations may affect buoyancy of the subducting slab and could
be seismically detectable. In this project they propose to use a combination of
advanced experimental and computational methods, including synchrotron single-
crystal micro-diffraction, Raman spectroscopy, first principles quantum
mechanics calculations and thermokinetic modeling to conduct a systematic
investigation of the pyroxene system and covering range of pressures from
ambient to 60 GPa and temperature from ambient to 1200Â°C, representing estimated
conditions within a subduction zone. Crystallographic investigations, such as
synchrotron single-crystal micro-diffraction experiments provide fundamental
information about the structural parameters such as density, atom coordination
geometry, bond lengths, etc., which govern the physical and chemical properties
of minerals and are indispensible for building reliable geophysical and
geochemical models. Computational quantum mechanics models, on the other hand,
allow utilization of these crystallographic results to calculate thermodynamic
properties of minerals, which are difficult or impossible to measure
experimentally at high pressure and temperature. Thermokinetic modeling will
enable scientists to put the crystallographic and thermodynamic information in
the geophysical context and determine the implications of the newly discovered
transformations. The project is expected to contribute to improvement and
optimization of experimental methodology for synchrotron single-crystal micro-
diffraction experiments at the national synchrotron user facilities, create
unique research and education opportunities for graduate and undergraduate
students from the University of Hawaii to participate in state-of-the-art
experiments at these facilities, and to significantly improve in house
experimental infrastructure in Hawaii for student training and research.