* 1344891
* SNM: Scaling Directed Self-Assembly of Block Copolymers for Sub 10 nm Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Paul Nealey, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 08/31/2018
* USD 1,499,994.00

This grant provides funding to address fundamental and technological issues
essential for the widespread implementation of directed self-assembly (DSA) in
nanomanufacturing of device structures. Specifically, block copolymers, that
self-assemble to form densely packed features with highly uniform dimensions and
shapes in ordered arrays, will be directed to assemble on chemical pre-patterns
defined using traditional lithographic processes, such as 193 nm immersion or
electron beam lithography. Hence, the 20 to 40 nm resolution of traditional
lithography will be reduced down to the 5 to 10 nm range by DSA. The principal
activities of the proposed work include fabrication of ultrathin and high
resolution chemically nanopatterned substrates to enable DSA at 10 nm feature
size and below; development of strategies to deposit surface layers on top of
self-assembling block copolymer films as a means to enable high-resolution
assemblies; and all vapor-phase synthesis, deposition, and directed self-
assembly of block copolymers. Novel and scalable processes for chemical vapor
deposition of polymeric nanocoatings are a key to all activities, and the
proposed effort represents a truly concerted computational and experimental
approach, with design of materials and processes enabled by predictive molecular
simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research, which aims to establish a
proven pathway to realize sub 10 nm resolution, and provide scaling down to 5
nm, has the potential to revolutionize nanolithography and nanomanufacturing.
For the semiconductor industry, DSA may allow the manufacture of future
generations of faster computer chips following Moore?s law without having to
invest billions of dollars in new fabrication facilities (i.e. based on extreme
ultra violet lithography) that may or may not be able to meet the required
resolutions. For hard drives, block copolymer lithography is the only known
technology that is feasible to fabricate nanoimprint masters to manufacture bit
patterned media at the required storage densities (at least greater than 2
Terabit/inch2). The research will also substantially advance the state-of-the-
art in vapor-phase deposition of polymers with controlled compositions and
molecular architectures, and that of predictive and quantitative models for the
thermodynamics and dynamics of polymer films.