* 1344230
* INSPIRE Track 1: Origins-of-life and self-evolving polymeric materials
* BIO,MCB
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2018
* Ken Dill, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 08/31/2018
* USD 1,000,000.00

This INSPIRE award is partially funded by the Molecular Biophysics Cluster in
the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences in the Directorate for
Biological Sciences; the Physics of Living Systems Program in the Division of
Physics, and the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Division of
Chemistry in the Directorate of Mathematical and Physical
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this INSPIRE project is to
understand the earliest steps in prebiotic evolution. A longstanding grand-
challenge question is how living systems arose from physico-chemical
interactions. How did chemistry become biology? When did undirected chemical
reactions begin to capitalize on fitness, become self-serving, start competing
with others, and undergo Darwinian evolution? If successful, this project will
provide a plausible hypothesis for how random chain sequences could have led to
information-transmitting chains, as chemistry becomes biology and potentially to
new polymeric materials that are not just self-organizing, but are actually
self-evolving. An integrated approach of theory and experiment will be used to
carry out this challenging and risky project. This is a potentially
transformative project because very little is understood about how sequence-
specific polymers, such as proteins and peptoid foldamers, could arise through
stochastic processes from random monomer sequences. Questions of how life arose
from chemistry are among the most compelling and longstanding in science. Much
has been hypothesized about origins of life in the RNA world, membrane world, by
metabolism-first or code-first mechanisms, for example, but very little of this
discussion focuses on the central question of how Darwinian self-serving bio-
like behavior arose from non-Darwinian chemistry. This is a long-standing
fundamental question and this project is high-risk because it is in the nature
of the origins-of-life field that any particular mechanism proposed for the
origin of life from chemistry will be met with skepticism. The complexity of
identifying functional domains in polymer sequence space is so vast, both theory
and experiment must work very closely together to address this problem. The
tools to approach this problem experimentally have only just recently been
developed. Advances in polymer synthesis have reached an exciting point for the
first time: one can now synthesize non-natural polymers with exact control of
monomer sequence and length, and assemble these chains into protein-like
architectures. This capability allows one to test the most fundamental questions
about how information content in polymer chains impacts their structure and
function.