* 1344285
* INSPIRE Track 1: Crowd-sourcing neuroscience: Neural oscillations and human social dynamics
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2018
* David Poeppel, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 08/31/2018
* USD 1,617,987.00

This INSPIRE award is partially funded by the Perception, Action, and Cognition
Program, the Cognitive Neuroscience Program, and the Social Psychology Program
in the Division of Behavioral and Cognitive Sciences in the Directorate for
Social, Behavioral, and Economic Sciences, the Research and Evaluation on
Education in Science and Engineering Program in the Division of Research on
Learning in Formal and Informal Settings in the Directorate for Education and
Human Resources, and the Control Systems Program in the Division of Civil,
Mechanical, and Manufacturing Innovation in the Directorate for Engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to understand naturalistic
human social interaction, specifically in group contexts. While neuroscientists
are increasingly recording from two participants concurrently, the neural basis
of group dynamics remains uninvestigated. Capitalizing on the growing body of
knowledge about the role of brain rhythms, the project builds on the hypothesis
that one can characterize coupled neural oscillations between individuals as one
candidate mechanism that tracks successful social communication in a dynamic
context. This aim is pursued by using novel portable EEG technology to record
brain activity from a large number of participants concurrently (between 10-20)
in ecological situations, specifically a classroom. This will address the
significant hardware and software challenges associated with recording data sets
from groups. Moreover, the new type and amount of data will also require a novel
analytic toolbox, which will form the basis of modeling multiple brains engaged
in socially relevant situations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will impact
education and technology, and provide significant outreach opportunities. First,
the key experiments will be performed in a high school classroom, in
collaboration with the science teachers. As such, the project provides a new
type of platform to provide hands-on STEM training. Second, the successful
implementation of the wearable mobile brain EEG recording system will have
significant impact on future neuroscience research, providing a valuable tool
for research outside of the lab (e.g., in a crowd: theatres, schools), with
populations that are otherwise difficult to reach (e.g., children, patients, the
elderly). Finally, by comparing communication between people in the same room to
people at a distance (e.g., MOOCs), this project contributes to issues
surrounding the relevance of real-life behavioral cues to successful
communication and teaching.