* 1344745
* SNM: Integration of Organic Solar Cells with Engineered Nanostructures for Scalable Manufacturing of Energy Conversion and Storage Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2018
* Jeffrey Glass, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 08/31/2018
* USD 1,500,000.00

Objective: The objective of this program is to understand and develop scalable
nanomaterial-based wet-coating processes that enable high-throughput, cost-
effective roll-to-roll production of an organic solar cell integrated with a
composite supercapacitor that simultaneously harvests and stores solar energy.
The proposed device and processes have the potential to transform energy
applications by dramatically decreasing costs and increasing the adoption of
solar energy; lowering dependence on fossil fuels and minimizing climate
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: The intellectual merit is a
deeper understanding of producing high-performance polymer solar cells/nanowire
electrodes and supercapacitors with low-temperature, high-throughput, wet
coating processes. A systematic approach with interdisciplinary researchers from
the basic materials level to the manufacturing process level provides the
intellectual basis for the project. Barriers to high performance organic solar
cells, nanowire electrodes and composite supercapacitors are addressed to bring
these important components together in an integrated device. The materials and
processes involved in the devices are all optimized and/or developed to be
compatible with cost-effective roll-to-roll
production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The broader impacts are
related to both education and technology. The knowledge gained from the process
development will provide a base for cost-effective solution processing of
numerous other nanomaterials and an array of devices beyond those studied in
this proposed work, including; organic light-emitting diodes, wearable
electronics, flexible sensors, and flexible displays. This program will also
enable nanomaterials and nanomanufacturing enhancements to
undergraduate/graduate courses as well as the development of a new course and
workshop. It will reach high school students through hands-on research
opportunities.