* 1344476
* Collaborative Research: RUI: Tropical Holocene climatic insights from Andean paleoglacier dynamics
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2013,03/31/2015
* Nathan Stansell, Northern Illinois University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 03/31/2015
* USD 38,289.00

This grant supports research generating continuous, centennial to millennial-
scale records of mountain glaciation in Peru spanning the Holocene (~12 ka to
present) that tests hypotheses concerning the causes of abrupt climate change in
the tropics. Radiocarbon and 210Pb dating of glacial flour flux provides precise
ages of Holocene ice advances/retreats and records of abrupt climatic
transitions, using proglacial lake sediment cores from multiple lakes along the
steep East-West moisture gradient across the central Peruvian Andes. The flux of
glacial flour is determined based on multiple proxies at a resolution sufficient
to enable comparison with existing stable isotope records of paleoclimate
variability from the region. Previous work in the tropical Andes demonstrates
that the glacial-flour approach can provide a record of glaciation that is both
consistent with and far more continuous than radiometrically-dated moraine
records. This approach has the potential to resolve several glacial geologic
uncertainties, such as the timing of early Holocene glacial advances, and the
possible time-transgressive nature of ice margin fluctuations during the
neoglacial. The glacial-lacustrine approach is coupled with detailed moraine
mapping and the targeted application of cosmogenic radionuclide dating to select
Holocene moraines located up-valley from coring localities. The strategic
pairing of glacial flour records with dated moraines provides both the timing
and magnitude of ice margin changes. Inverse glacier mass balance-ice flow
simulations from multiple watersheds in different precipitation regimes provide
validation for the dynamical down-scaling of global-scale circulation and
paleoclimate models.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merits and Broader Impacts: Relating
the changes in tropical glacier mass to climate dynamics is a priority for
global climate modeling efforts to predict future changes based on accurately
simulating past changes under different greenhouse scenarios. The long-term
perspective of temperature and precipitation changes on tropical glacier mass
and energy balance is still poorly understood, primarily because of a lack of
detailed and continuous glacial records from both the humid and more arid parts
of the tropical Andes. This work substantially improves our understanding of the
link between alpine glacial variability, water resources and mass and energy
fluxes in the tropical "heat engine" of the planet.&lt;br/&gt;These records are
needed to better understand the timing, magnitude, and spatial extent of high
elevation (5000 - 6000 masl) tropical atmospheric change during the Holocene to
evaluate the role of the low latitude hydrologic cycle in abrupt global climatic
shifts. This, in turn, will enable testing of the following
hypotheses:&lt;br/&gt;(1) Glacier margin fluctuations in the tropical Andes
during the Holocene were driven by changes in the strength of the South American
Summer Monsoon&lt;br/&gt;(2) A broad regional pattern of Holocene glacial
variability was punctuated by periods of rapid ice advances every ~1000 to 1500
years&lt;br/&gt;(3) Abrupt (centennial to millennial-scale) Holocene glacier
variations in the southern tropics were nearly synchronous with those in the
Northern Hemisphere (i.e. The Little Ice Age)