* 1344302
* INSPIRE Track 1: Imaging Neuronal Network Activity using Voltage-Gated Optical Transitions in Graphene
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2018
* Bianxiao Cui, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 08/31/2018
* USD 1,000,000.00

This INSPIRE award is partially funded by the Electronic and Photonic Materials
Program and the Biomaterials Program in the Division of Materials Research in
the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences; the Neural Systems
Program in the Division of Integrative Organismal Systems in the Directorate for
Biological Sciences; the Instrument Development for Biological Research Program
in the Division of Biological Infrastructure in the Directorate for Biological
Sciences; and the Nano-Biosensing Program in the Division of Chemical,
Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport Systems in the Directorate for
Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: This research project
aims to develop a novel technique to detect electric activities of a neuronal
network using voltage-gated optical transitions in graphene. A neuron receives,
analyzes and conveys information in the form of electrical signals such as
action potentials. The decoding of neural data requires accurate recording of
those electrical signals. This project exploits unique electrical and optical
properties of graphene to detect electric activities of a neuronal network in a
highly parallel and non-invasive manner. It advances scientific understanding in
several important fronts, including (1) fundamental understanding of graphene as
a unique electronic and optical material for high-sensitivity bio-imaging, (2)
interfacing graphene with neuron cells, (3) non-invasive optical detection of
action potential, and (4) highly parallel imaging of neuron activity in a
neuronal network. This project builds on the complimentary expertise of
Professor Wang and Professor Cui on graphene optical spectroscopy and neural
electrophysiology, respectively.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical Description:
This project captures the tremendous opportunities provided by graphene for
optical imaging of neural network activities, which has a potential to become an
important tool in neuroscience. The research requires extensive collaboration
and exchange of students between Cui and Wang labs, which provides a unique
opportunity for graduate and undergraduate students to be exposed to sciences in
different disciplines including biology, engineering, materials science, optics,
and physics.