* 1344592
* NEESR Planning: The Role of Gravity Framing in the Seismic Performance of Steel Buildings
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Patricia Clayton, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 08/31/2017
* USD 444,909.00

The overall goal of this research is to develop a better understanding of the
role of gravity framing in the seismic performance of steel buildings, along
with the data, models and tools to quantify this role. In design of steel
buildings, the gravity framing is not usually considered as contributing to the
resistance of seismic lateral load. In reality, however, the gravity framing can
contribute substantial lateral load resistance and significantly improve seismic
performance. At present, a full understanding of this role is still lacking.
Moreover, the data and models needed to quantify the effect of the gravity
framing system on seismic performance are also largely lacking. This study will
develop a database of previous experiments on typical simple beam-to-column
shear connections used in gravity framing, generate new experimental data from a
series of large-scale experiments on simple shear connections under combined
gravity and cyclic lateral load, develop connection models at various levels of
complexity and detail, and develop preliminary system level models for gravity
framing. This research will also provide information needed to conduct a follow-
on research project examining system level behavior of combined gravity and
lateral systems in steel buildings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has the
potential for significant practical impact on seismic design and evaluation
procedures for new and existing steel buildings in the United States, with a
broader goal of improved safety and economy. The largest impact is likely to be
on the evaluation of seismic safety of existing steel buildings, where inclusion
of the gravity system in the evaluation may, in a number of cases, preclude the
need for costly seismic retrofit measures. This research will also provide
greater insights into how the gravity system affects seismic performance of new
steel buildings, and will provide information on best practices for the design
and detailing of the gravity system in new buildings. This research also has
potential impact on the seismic design of new steel buildings in lower seismic
zones in the United States, where the contribution of the gravity framing to
lateral seismic resistance may be substantial. Data from this project will be
archived and made available to the public through the NEES data repository. This
award is part of the National Earthquake Hazards Reduction Program (NEHRP).