* 1344356
* Collaborative Research: Finite Amplitude Gravity Wave Trains in the Upper Mesosphere - Lower Thermosphere Duct System: Build Up and Leakage of Energy from Local and Distant Sources
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2017
* Jonathan Snively, Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University
* Continuing Grant
* John Meriwether
* 06/30/2017
* USD 99,607.00

Earth's mesosphere and lower thermosphere (MLT) contain thermal and wind
structures that can support a large population of ducted waves that are confined
to localized regions where conditions support their existence and propagation.
Often, waves can travel simultaneously in multiple ducts. Distinctive aspects of
these waves are that they may grow to large amplitudes, travel large distances
horizontally and induce changes far from their sources. Waves ducted in two
ducts simultaneously may carry much greater energy over larger distances than
waves confined to a single duct. There is a growing body of evidence that large-
amplitude ducted waves are associated with frequent occurrences of extensive
changes in the MLT. Ducted waves may affect broader regions of the atmosphere
than non-ducted waves since the former may transfer energy horizontally over
long distances prior to dissipation. Even weak or partial ducting may cause a
significant redistribution of wave energy. Ducted waves provide a mechanism for
prolific wave sources such as in low-latitude convective zones. The processes by
which waves may attain large amplitudes, transfer energy from distant sources
and produce effects in the MLT where the waves become untrapped need to be
better understood and better characterized to help improve our understanding of
the wave control of the MLT. Such a characterization would be the basis for
improved parameterization schemes of wave drag for general circulation models.
This investigation is a theoretical study supported by data analysis to address
outstanding questions concerning the role of ducted waves in the MLT. The
specific objectives are to assess the buildup of wave energy in MLT ducts and
the propagation and leakage of energy from ducts under realistic MLT conditions.
The study will use theory, numerical modeling, and comparisons to observations
of ducted waves from an extensive data base of ducted quasi-monochromatic wave
events. Data will be obtained from airglow imagers, lidar and radar from diverse
locations (Andes Lidar Observatory, Maui, Adelaide, and Alice Springs) and from
the SABER instrument on the TIMED satellite. The research focuses on a largely
unexplored mechanism for effecting the global redistribution of wave energy in
the mesospheric and lower-thermospheric ducting system. The work will establish
that ducts populated by prolific wave sources in the lower atmosphere are of
considerable geophysical importance far from the source regions. The results
will lead to the development of modeling capabilities for investigating ducting
as a means of wave growth and the redistribution of wave energy between regions
of the atmosphere, both vertically and horizontally. It will support coordinated
multi-instrument investigations at existing sites, and provide a continuing
research opportunity for a female scientist and a graduate student.