* 1344018
* Collaborative Research: It's Not (Just) About the Money
* SBE,SES
* 09/11/2012,03/31/2018
* Catherine Eckel, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 03/31/2018
* USD 186,022.00

In this research project, the PIs will conduct laboratory experiments that
examine the desire to ?do good? as an intrinsic motive for working. The
experiments involve a new incentivized game setting where worker effort, instead
of benefitting an employer?s profit, instead benefits a third party: a needy
individual, a group of such individuals, or a public good. The experiments test
the effects of incentive contracts (requests, rewards, and punishment) on
productivity in these settings, and assess the potential for short-run and long-
run crowding out of intrinsic motivation by extrinsic rewards. This project is
inspired by recent developments in economic theory. Economics is concerned with
the extrinsic motivation provided by wages, which compensates for the disutility
of work, while social and educational psychologists study intrinsic motivation,
an inherent interest in the work itself. The prevailing finding of this research
is that financial rewards crowd out intrinsic motivation. Economic theory that
incorporates nonpecuniary motives ? such as self-esteem, identity, and status ?
concludes that the compensation of intrinsically motivated workers will involve
smaller incentive-based payments. This occurs in part because of the potential
for crowding out, but in addition, low wages serve to limit the applicant pool
to workers whose valuation of the organization?s mission is highest. While
theory incorporates a broad set of intrinsic motives, most experimental research
has focused on reciprocity between the agent and the principal. In experiments
based on trust or gift-exchange, high wages elicit high effort on the part of
workers, but the introduction of incentive contracts that involve monitoring and
sanctions robustly crowds out such intrinsic reciprocity. Work environments
where the worker?s effort produces a ?good? for someone other than the employer
have not been tested previously. However, other motivations, such as altruism,
may greatly impact effort choices in the workplace, particularly when the job
involves positive externalities or some other form of ?doing good.? In these
cases, incentive contracts may crowd out the desire to do good, as theory
suggests, or may indeed reinforce intrinsic motivation. Exogenously changing
employment contracts in the real world is difficult or impossible, making
laboratory experiments an ideal method to address this issue. Broader
significance and importance: In terms of broader impacts, the research will shed
light on the interaction between worker motivation and the structure of
employment contracts. When deciding to accept employment or exert effort on
behalf of an employer, workers take into account not only the monetary
compensation, but also the type of work and the mission of the organization.
This project focuses on settings where nonpecuniary factors are key aspects of
the job, and individuals make choices not only about ?doing well,? but also
?doing good.? Many important organizations exist to benefit third parties, and
are most effective when they can attract and motivate workers who support their
missions. Our work contributes to the development of institutions that foster
altruism and cooperation among workers who work for a cause, and not just for
the money. On a scientific level, our work contributes to understanding the
impact of non-pecuniary motivations on decision making by individuals in a wide
variety of settings. The project also implements and evaluates a mentoring
component, which utilizes a novel structure and provides a valuable
collaborative research experience to young scholars at all levels, from
undergraduate students to post-doctoral scholars.