* 1344047
* VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATED MEMS FOR MASSIVELY PARALLEL SCANNING PROBE NANOLITHOGRAPHY
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/24/2013,08/31/2015
* Siavash Pourkamali Anaraki, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Mona Zaghloul
* 08/31/2015
* USD 165,534.00

1028710-VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATED MEMS FOR MASSIVELY PARALLEL SCANNING PROBE
NANOLITHOGRAPHY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to
develop an enabling technology for low-cost high through-put parallel scanning
probe nanolithography using micro-engineered electromechanical systems. The
proposed systems include 2-dimensional arrays of nanoscale probe tips integrated
on micro-actuators with nano-precision positioning capability in horizontal
directions. An autonomous feedback mechanism integrated along with each probe
provides an interactive real time control in the vertical direction to maintain
a high level of uniformity between different probes.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: Lithography at the nanometer scale is the key step in manufacturing of
next generation electronic and electromechanical components. Currently available
probe-based high-precision nanolithography techniques are based on serial
processing (direct writing) suffering from long processing time and cost-
inefficiency for industrial applications. Most of the efforts to reach higher
through-put using arrays of probes operating in parallel focus on the capability
to address probes individually requiring extensive electrical connections, while
the main issue of uniformity between different probes has not been adequately
addressed. The proposed technology will lead to systems capable of generating a
large number of similar nanoscale patterns in parallel with great uniformity.
&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: This project contributes to development of powerful
nanolithography tools for low-cost high through-put nano-manufacturing, as well
as maskless micro and nanolithography for academic and R&amp;D environments. The
training and involvement of graduate and undergraduate students in the research
activities enables them to join the next generation micro/nano-engineering
workforce. Special efforts will be taken to encourage the participation of
students from underrepresented groups.