* 1344005
* EAGER: Super-Resolution Microscopy and Quantum Assisted Sensing Using Multifunctional Diamond Nanoprobes
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2015
* Dirk Englund, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 08/31/2015
* USD 158,231.00

Project Overview: The proposed program seeks to develop techniques for local
ultra-sensitive electric field measurements in biologically compatible
conditions, using quantum metrology based on electron spin dynamics in the
nitrogen vacancy center in diamond. While broad impact of such techniques is
anticipated, the PI seeks one specific proof-of-concept application: real-time
imaging of the electrical activity in large networks of neurons. The program
targets scalable production techniques of high-purity diamond nanoprobes with
application-driven design, and the application of such probes for high-speed,
super-resolution wide-area microscopy technique with ultra-sensitive electric
field detection. Research activities include material processing of diamond,
optical microscopy, optically detected electron spin resonance measurements, and
translation of such techniques to biological systems through extensive
collaborations with neuroscientists.

Intellectual Merit: The proposed interdisciplinary research relies on the
integration of techniques from semiconductor nanofabrication, spin physics in
solids, and neuroscience. The PI seeks to show, for the first time, that
electron spin-based sensing techniques could enable optical electric field
imaging in living cells, and that imaging could be accomplished with a sub-
wavelength spatial resolution. Improved electric field sensing technologies in
the life sciences could enable profound advances. The proof-of-concept
application real-time imaging of the electrical activity in large networks of
neurons would represent a major new tool for neuroscience. Moreover, the
techniques to be developed could also lead to new research capabilities in a
large range of fields that benefit from high-precision optical electric field
sensors. The PI seeks these advances through (i) massively parallel readout of
more than 100 nitrogen vacancy center spins simultaneously with a 2D detector
array, (ii) enhanced electric field detection using nitrogen vacancy centers in
high-purity diamond probes with 100 × longer electron spin coherence than in
currently available nanocrystals, and (iii) dynamic spin decoupling schemes to
extend the spin coherence time. Initial work indicates that the spin-based
probes appear to be sufficiently sensitive for optical measurements of neuronal
electrical activity across networks of cells with sub-millisecond temporal
resolution.

Broader Impact: The project will engage multiple student populations in physical
sciences research, including 1-2 high school students, 1-2 undergraduate
students, and 1-2 Massachusetts Institute of Technology graduate students.
Students will have close interaction with research groups spanning electrical
engineering, physics, biology, and neuroscience. Broader impact includes: (1)
Integration of the research in a new course on quantum information and quantum
metrology, and the dissemination of course and experimental projects through a
website to other institutions interested in implementing some or all of the
curriculum. (2) Effective outreach components through the Minority Introduction
to Engineering and Science, in which graduate students and the PI will engage
young researchers from underrepresented student populations; engagement of
undergraduates through the Undergraduate Research Opportunities Program. (3)
Dissemination of the research and educational components through the literature
and conferences.