* 1344227
* INSPIRE Track 1: Is Evolvability Driven By Emergent Modularity? Biomimetic robots, gene inspired information structures, and the evolvability of intelligent agents
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2014,09/30/2019
* Jodi Schwarz, Vassar College
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 09/30/2019
* USD 999,314.00

This INSPIRE award is partially funded by the Evolutionary Processes program in
the Division of Environmental Biology in the Directorate for Biological
Sciences, the Behavioral Systems program in the Division of Integrative
Organismal Systems in the Directorate for Biological Sciences, and the
Information Integration and Informatics program in the Division of Information
&amp; Intelligent Systems in the Directorate for Computer &amp; Information
Science &amp; Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For millennia, humans have bred
organisms to produce better food, clothes, and companionship. Recently,
scientists have learned how to breed robots, evolving simulated creatures in
virtual worlds, or physical robots in the real world. By combining the
evolutionary process with robotic engineering, more complex and novel designs
should be possible compared to traditional methods. In spite of the promise, so
far evolved robots only do simple things like walk, navigate, or pick up
objects. What limits progress is a lack of understanding of "evolvability," the
capacity of organisms (or robots) to change and become more complex.
Understanding evolvability is the main goal of this project: researchers will
borrow ideas from modern genetics so their robots mutate and develop in ways
that are similar to how biological creatures do. In theory, this could produce
simple robots that evolve into ever more complex, capable and useful
robots.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding how complexity evolves is central to
the study of life, and may enable even non-specialists to automatically and
continuously produce diverse kinds of machines. By linking complexity, genetics,
and evolution, this project seeks to discover new principles that can be applied
in science and industry. To help convert scientific principles into innovation
drivers, online software will be created to show how to evolve virtual or
physical robots; this will help students learn about engineering, biology, and
how to apply both to technology. Finally, evolutionary robotics can be used to
solve complex problems in robotic control that defy logical programming
solutions, so this research can help companies that manufacture robots.