* 1344069
* INSPIRE Track 1:  Zero-One Laws at the Interface Between Physics, Engineering and Biology
* MPS,PHY
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Bassam Bamieh, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 09/30/2017
* USD 982,938.00

This INSPIRE award is partially funded by the Physics of Living Systems program
in the Division of Physics in the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical
Sciences,the Neural Systems Cluster's Organization and Modulation Programs in
the Division of Integrative Organismal Systems, within the Directorate for
Biological Sciences, the Theory Program in the Division of Materials Research in
the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences and the Mathematical
Biology program in the Division of Mathematical Sciences in the Directorate for
Mathematical and Physical Sciences. This project is a first step towards the
development of transformative theories and data analysis methods for studying
the brain. In this project, the investigators will construct a theoretical
framework at the interface between physics, engineering and biology that studies
zero-one laws/phase transitions and related simplicities arising from having
many degrees of freedom in the system. The resulting methods will be applied to
both engineering examples and biological networks, particularly networks
connecting neurons or brain regions. The investigators span a broad
interdisciplinary spectrum ranging from theoretical physics and control theory
to cell biology and neurobiology, and will engage in dissemination of the
results and educating students and researchers across a broad spectrum in the
subject matter of the proposal. In particular the researchers will pursue two
neuroscience applications of the theoretical framework and tools developed in
this proposal. The first will be directed to the analysis of experimentally
determined neural circuits, and the second directed towards brain rhythms, with
a focus on understanding the corresponding phase diagrams and the
controllability of abnormal rhythms. They expect to recover the receptor field
structure of the ganglion cells in the retina from such an analysis. These
methods also will be applied to the mouse brain meso-circuit. Their analysis
will go beyond graph-theoretic measures of the network and provide a bridge to
activity measurements as well as to functional analysis of neuroanatomical
circuitry, which is currently lacking. The investigators will also explore the
consequences of the theoretical framework derived in this paper to networks of
coupled, heterogeneous neural oscillators, with a distributed drive. The PIs
will facilitate this impact by training researchers as well as holding meetings
and workshops. The postdoc and the student will play an active role in
organizing these two workshops. The PIs will publish preferentially with open
access option, using funds from the grant. They will make all computer codes and
secondary data analysis products available freely after publication of their
results.