* 1344366
* EAGER: AIR-NCS  Novel epigenetic assay to probe neural stem cell fate in neurodegenerative environment
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2013,12/31/2014
* Theresa Good, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Athanassios Sambanis
* 12/31/2014
* USD 78,538.00

Overview:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This EAGER proposal responds to the Accelerating
Integrative Research in Neuroscience and Cognitive Science (AIR-NCS) initiative.
This proposal seeks to develop novel tools that can be used to examine how
neurodegenerative environments lead to epigenetic changes in neural stem cells,
which then impact patterns of differentiation and ultimately affect how the
brain adapts and responds to the neurodegenerative environment. This proposal
responds specifically to the thematic area "adaptation to changing
environments". The work combined bioengineering (development of a novel
epigenetic assay) with neuroscience and developmental biology (examining how the
neurodegenerative environment impacts neural stem cell fate), and should impact
areas of neuroregeneration of interest to the Biomedical Engineering Program.
The proposed work is appropriate for an EAGER mechanism as it is exploratory,
based on a new, unproven hypothesis, but if successful, could lead to new
transformational discoveries at the interface between engineering and
neuroscience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
process of neural stem cell differentiation into different neuronal and glial
phenotypes requires the complex interplay between programs associated with gene
silencing and or activation. DNA methylation of promoter regions of certain
genes is one mechanism by which gene expression is dynamically regulated. It is
hypothesized that certain neurodegenerative environments induce epigenetic
changes in neural stem cells, leading to changes in cell proliferation and/or
differentiation, which contributes to the disease phenotype and limit the
neuroregenerative potential of stem cell therapies. Specifically, it is
hypothesized that a model neurodegenerative (Alzheimer's like) environment
associated with high oxidative stress and the presence of beta-amyloid will lead
to changes in DNA methylation of promoters associated with either the SMAD or
JAK/STAT pathways, leading to changes in neural stem cell fate such as a shift
away from neurogenesis and towards the formation of reactive astrocytes. To test
this novel hypothesis, it is proposed (1) to develop a novel tool to rapidly and
inexpensively probe epigenetic changes in cultured cells in response to an
environmental stimulus; (2) to use the new tool to examine epigenetic changes in
neural stem cells in response to a model neurodegenerative (Alzheimer's like)
environment; and (3) to assess how epigenetic changes are liked to changes in
neural stem cell differentiation, and how that impacts the neuroregenerative
potential of stem cell therapies. While the ultimate goal is to address all of
these goals, with funding for one year requested from this EAGER, the work
planned will be focused on the development of the novel tool for rapidly probing
epigenetic changes in cells and then address the feasibility of using the tool
in neural stem cells. This work will contribute to the understanding of how
different environments affect stem cell differentiation, and the role of
epigenetics in cellular response to the
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed work will eventually assist in the development of neuroregenerative
strategies based on stem cells. A novel tool for rapidly and inexpensively
examining epigenetic changes in neural stem cells and stem cell differentiation
could also be used to examine epigenetic changes associated with cancer or other
diseases. The epigenetic assay is based on thermodynamic principles, and will be
used as an example in a core course in the chemical engineering curriculum at
UMBC as well as the bioengineering laboratory taught by the PI. One
undergraduate researcher and one graduate student will work on the project and
receive training in an interdisciplinary environment.