* 1344275
* INSPIRE Track 1: Development of Perception-Action in Non-living, Dissipative Systems
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* James Rusling, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* david moore
* 08/31/2017
* USD 800,000.00

This INSPIRE award is partially funded by the Developmental and Learning
Sciences Program in the Division of Behavioral and Cognitive Sciences in the
Directorate for Social Behavioral and Economic Sciences, and the Chemical
Structure Dynamics and Mechanism Program in the Division of Chemistry in the
Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences, and the Office of
Multidisciplinary Activities in the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All organisms develop the ability to perceive and
act in the service of goals and intentions, no matter how rudimentary.
Behavioral scientists have traditionally considered perception and action as
properties of higher-order animals, but recent work shows that all living
things, including single-celled organisms, plants, and fungi, develop the
ability to detect information in their environments and use that information to
guide action. The diversity of biological systems capable of perception-action
suggests that, rather than reflecting a particular biological specialization,
perception-action develops through general physical principles that biology has
richly exploited. The current project aims to discover these physical
principles. The investigators take the theory of dissipative structures from
modern thermodynamics as a natural starting place for understanding how
perception-action emerges in self-organizing, epistemic systems. Dissipative
structures demonstrate the emergence of morphology from the flow of energy and
matter. The investigators' recent work shows that more complex dissipative
structures detect and move to new energy sources. To do so, these dissipative
structures store energy, and release it during time-delayed actions related to
their own persistence, thus demonstrating rudimentary perception-action. The
project focuses on non-living, physical systems that generate their own
morphology and perceiving-acting capabilities. The investigators will: 1) Create
a set of physical systems that self-organize their morphology so as to detect
information in the environment, and act on that information relative to a goal;
2) Design paradigms in which these systems develop perceiving and acting
capabilities that begin to converge on the complex perception-action behaviors
of simple organisms, including searching for new energy sources; 3) Use new
concepts, such as functional symmetry breaking, to extend the theory of
dissipative structures to encompass systems that obey thermodynamic laws locally
(i.e., on smaller spatial and temporal scales), but develop the ability to
perceive and act in the service of rudimentary goals globally (i.e., on larger
spatial and temporal scales). In so doing, the project seeks to provide an
overarching theoretical framework for understanding how self-ordering physico-
chemical systems come to detect information about their environments and act on
that information in the service of maintaining their own structures, in effect,
developing rudimentary forms of foraging for energy and
matter.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Currently, the goal-directed perception and action
of living systems is beyond the explanatory reach of natural law. The project
will provide a new starting point for understanding perception-action grounded
in thermodynamics. The work will begin with relatively simple, non-organic
physical systems, but the implications for the biological and behavioral
sciences are considerable. As such, the project should help create a new
interdisciplinary field that connects phenomena in biology (in the broadest
sense of the term), self-organizing systems, and non-equilibrium thermodynamics.
Ultimately, the results of the project may provide the foundation for a new type
of engineering, in which a system self-organizes its perception and action to
achieve an imposed goal.