* 1344531
* EAGER: Computer Architectures for 2020 and Beyond
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2018
* Wolfgang Porod, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 08/31/2018
* USD 300,000.00

This EAGER project fosters international collaboration in an area of emerging
(nano) technology, the design of novel neuromorphic cellular computing
architectures. Led by members of a group at the Notre Dame University, the joint
work will engage partners at Arizona State University and three European
institutions, the Technical University Munich in Germany, the Hungarian Academy
of Sciences, and Spain's Seville University. Each of the five locations
currently has strong research activities on various aspects of the topic covered
by the collaboration, e.g., hybrid computer architectures, emerging processing,
and sensing and enabling integration technologies. All have a distinguished
history of ongoing research with support from funding sources in their
respective countries. Together, the researchers intend to lay the groundwork for
a radically different approach to information processing that is based on brain-
inspired spatial-temporal behavior in large-scale, cellular arrays of
nanoelectronic processing elements. Specifically, their goal is to identify the
computational building blocks for future computing systems. This collaboration
will further enable the capacities of these geographically diverse groups to
facilitate student exchanges, brainstorming sessions - both physical and virtual
- and short exchange visits by junior researchers. Conferences, workshops,
summer schools, virtual classrooms to leverage the complementary expertise of
various participating centers will be organized, and dissemination of research
results and educational products will be undertaken cooperatively by the group.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Thus, the broader impact of the project should be
significant, especially for the participating U.S. students and junior
researchers, first by gaining early career, high level technical experience
abroad, some of which is not readily available in the U.S., and secondly, by
exposing them to a team-focused research environment in differing disciplinary
and cultural contexts. It is also noteworthy that this particular project enjoys
the benefits of access to complementary expertise at highly visible research
centers for societal impacts of (nano) technology, e.g., the NSF-funded Center
for Nanotechnology in Society, at Arizona State University, and the Munich
Center for Technology in Society, at the Carl von Linde Akademie in Munich. Such
interaction is expected to greatly enhance the societal and educational value of
the overall collaborative effort. This EAGER project is co-funded by the NSF's
Office of International and Integrative Activities.