* 1344251
* INSPIRE Track 1:   Manufacture and Characterization of Nanocrystalline/Amorphous Silicon for Particle Detection
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2018
* Roger Rusack, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Randy Ruchti
* 08/31/2018
* USD 550,000.00

This INSPIRE award is partially funded by the Elementary Particle Physics
Program in the Division of Physics in the Directorate for Mathematical and
Physical Sciences, the Accelerator Physics and Physics Instrumentation Program
in the Division of Physics in the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical
Sciences, the Electronic and Photonic Materials Program in the Division of
Materials Research in the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences,
the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities in the Directorate for Mathematical
and Physical Sciences, and the NanoManufacturing Program in the Division of
Civil, Mechanical and Manufacturing Innovation in the Directorate for
Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is an INSPIRE Track 1 Award to the
University of Minnesota for the manufacture and characterization of
nanocrystalline/amorphous silicon for particle detection. In alignment with
INSPIRE program objectives, this is a high risk, multidisciplinary effort
including particle physics, R. Rusack, condensed matter physics, J. Kakalios and
materials engineering, U. Kortshagen. The program objectives include: the
identification, fabrication and testing of at least one suitable
amorphous/nanocrystalline Si material with excellent performance characteristics
for charge mobility, recombination rate and robustness to radiation damage; the
development of processing conditions for these identified material(s) that allow
production of a reasonable detector size and thickness on a practical timescale
per device; and technology transfer to industry to produce the materials at
scale suitable for detector applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the first
phase of the program, the group will utilize an existing dual reactor co-
deposition system to produce and study a number of amorphous/nanocrystal silicon
films to determine the nanocrystal size and density that will optimize mobility
and recombination lifetime. Irradiation studies will factor into this
optimization. In parallel with these studies, a new, replacement reactor system
with a translatable substrate stage will be designed and fabricated. In the
final phase and with the new reactor system, the group's objective is to
demonstrate a functioning new co-deposition system for mixed phase growth over a
reasonable area, from which larger scale industrial processing could be
based.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Development of such scalable nano-manufacturing
technologies could enable mixed-phase amorphous/nanocrystalline materials to
find a broad range of applications. In addition to the development of innovative
new particle detector materials and technologies, novel mixed-phase materials
might lead to other important applications, for example potential advances in
high efficiency photovoltaic devices, non-volatile memories, materials for
medical x-ray imaging, thermo-electrics and electroluminescent devices.