* 1344948
* Developing high-resolution tremor catalogs to constrain numerical models of slow slip
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/2014,01/31/2018
* Allan Rubin, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 01/31/2018
* USD 299,961.00

One of the major discoveries in geophysics in the past decade has been that of
?episodic slow slip and tremor? in many of the world?s subduction zones. Most
known faults either slip steadily at the plate tectonic rate (a few centimeters
per year), or spend most of the time ?locked? and slip only during short-lived
earthquakes, with slip speeds of order 1 m/sec and propagation speeds of order 3
km/sec (the sound speed of rock). Slow slip events, on the other hand, have
average slip speeds of only ~0.1 micron/s and propagate up to 300 km along
strike at remarkably reproducible speeds of roughly 10 km/day. Coincident in
time and space with the geodetically-observed slow slip is a seismic signal
termed ?tectonic tremor?. Unlike typical earthquakes, which have impulsive
seismic wave arrivals, tremor is a low-amplitude signal that can last for hours
and that most often lacks clearly identifiable seismic wave arrivals. Slow slip
has now been discovered in nearly all subduction regions with sufficient
instrumentation to see it, if it were present. Tremor is coincident in space and
time with may slow slip events, and has also been discovered on the deep
extension of the San Andreas fault in California. In addition to representing a
previously unrecognized style of fault slip, episodic slow slip is relevant to
seismic hazards because it increases the stressing rate on the locked portions
of faults capable of producing magnitude 9 earthquakes. It has also been
proposed that it may delimit the down-dip extent of slip during those
earthquakes (bringing, notably, strong ground shaking considerably closer to
downtown Seattle than had previously been thought).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because
the resolution of geodetic data for deep faults is quite poor, tremor locations
currently provide our most detailed images of the space-time history of slow
slip. But because tremor lacks clear wave arrivals and can be active on multiple
regions of the fault simultaneously, it cannot be located using standard
techniques. We are developing a new tremor detection algorithm that, applied to
the subduction zone off the coast of the Pacific Northwest, is currently
producing the most accurate tremor locations in the world. Rather than the more
traditional method of comparing seismograms from different time windows at the
same station, it compares the same time windows at different stations. Relative
location errors are often less than 1 km, allowing us to image in great detail
secondary tremor fronts that arise behind, and propagate 1?2 orders of magnitude
faster than, the main front of the slow slip event. By imaging these secondary
fronts and their relation to the main with high fidelity, we expect to learn
more about the processes underlying slow slip. In addition, studies of tremor
are proliferating worldwide, but as yet there is no single, generally-agreed-
upon method for locating it. By comparing our location method with more
traditional methods and combining aspects of each, we stand to learn much about
how to improve tremor location algorithms and how to apply this knowledge in
other regions.