* 1344257
* INSPIRE Track 1: Language-Based Computational Methods for Analyzing Worldviews
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2018
* Rada Mihalcea, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 09/30/2018
* USD 793,206.00

This INSPIRE award is partially funded by the Cyber-Human Systems Program in the
Directorate for Computer and Information Science and Engineering, the Robust
Intelligence Program in the Directorate for Computer and Information Science and
Engineering, and the Social Psychology Program in the Directorate for Social,
Behavioral and Economic Sciences. The goal of this project is to gather new
insights into the ways people organize and understand their worlds within and
across different cultures by means of innovative methodologies and tools from
the fields of psychology and computational linguistics. The findings from this
project will provide a better understanding of people on the individual
psychological level as well as the cultures themselves, while developing and
demonstrating new research techniques that can be used in future by many
disciplines to exploit the vast troves of scientifically valuable textual data
currently available online. Specifically, the project targets the following
three main research objectives: 1) Construct a very large multicultural database
of writings from English-speaking cultures, covering several styles and genres,
including: social media (e.g., blogs, tweets); news articles; literary works;
student writings. 2) Build computational linguistic models that can
automatically identify differences in concept usage for different cultures, and
apply these models on a large scale. 3) Validate the findings of these
computational models through psychological qualitative and quantitative methods
in laboratory studies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ways people use words can
provide insights into the ways they see and understand their worlds. Everyday
language can also tell us about people's social, emotional, and psychological
states and even the ways they think about themselves and others. Particularly
interesting is that many of the social and psychological insights we find with
the language of individuals can be extrapolated to groups, communities, and
entire cultures. This project seeks to analyze the written language of people
across several cultures in a way that will allow us to better understand the
ways groups of people understand their worlds. In short, it will use advances in
computational linguistics and social psychology to track the underlying values,
beliefs, and concerns of very large groups of people by analyzing the ways they
use words. Unlike previous studies, which have been limited to relatively small
self-report surveys targeting a handful of concepts across cultures, this
project will help us understand the differences in perception for thousands of
concepts, by several cultures representing hundreds of thousands of
people.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project promises to shed new light on cultural
differences by analyzing the ways people understand their worlds through their
everyday language use. The approach will inform applications in communication,
threat control, tracking of cultural values, and others. The project will also
provide educational opportunities, in the form of training for students in both
computer science and psychology, who will be directly exposed to
interdisciplinary research, cultural diversity, and international experiences.
Finally, the large multicultural dataset that will be created as part of this
project, along with the tools to process it, will be made publicly available,
thus enabling future research, as well as educational projects concerned with
the analysis and understanding of cultural diversity and worldview.