* 1344097
* INSPIRE Track1: Computational Design for the Safe Development of High-Aspect-Ration Nanomaterials
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2013,10/31/2017
* Agnes Kane, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 10/31/2017
* USD 750,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;CBET - 1344097&lt;br/&gt;Hurt, Robert
H.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This INSPIRE award is partially funded by the Nano EHS
Program and the Particulate and Multiphase Processes Program in the Chemical
Biomedical Environmental and Transport Division in the Directorate for
Engineering and the Nano &amp; Bio Mechanics Program and the Mechanics of
Materials Program in the Civil, Mechanical and Manufacturing Innovation Division
of the Engineering Directorate. This proposed Track 1 INSPIRE project seeks to
identify fundamental design rules to allow the safe development of high-aspect
ratio nanomaterials (HARNs). HARNs are a class of one-dimensional fiber-like or
two-dimensional sheet-like materials that include carbon nanotubes, metal
nanowires, and graphene. Simple isometric nanoparticles often initiate toxicity
pathways through chemical surface processes that include redox reactions and
release of soluble toxicants. There is increasing evidence that HARNs depart
from this paradigm by initiating toxicity pathways through geometric and
nanomechanical interactions with target cells. Exposure to long, nano-
thin&lt;br/&gt;fibers or atomically thin sheets of large lateral dimension can
impair internalization and intracellular sequestration mechanisms leading to
frustrated uptake, membrane damage, lysosomal permeabilization, and toxicity.
Each of these steps involves the interaction of a complex material shape with a
biological membrane that surrounds the cell or defines a vesicle within the
cell. Key to the safe design of HARNs is to understand how geometry determines
these biomechanical interactions. This INSPIRE project is a joint effort of two
NSF programs: CBET Environmental Health and Safety of Nanotechnology (lead), and
CMMI Biomechanics and Mechanobiology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit
:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team hypothesizes that the biological
response to HARNs is mediated by geometric parameters, namely length and
stiffness for carbon nanotubes and lateral dimension and stiffness for graphene-
family nanomaterials. A systematic study of the geometric and mechanical
interactions of HARNs with biological membranes and target cells is proposed
using a combination of molecular dynamics simulations and biological
experimental validation on a set of carefully engineered materials of varying
length and lateral dimension. Course-grained and all-atom molecular dynamics
simulations and supporting analytical methods will be used to model lipid
bilayers interacting with HARNs of defined geometries to understand uptake
mechanisms, vesicular packaging and trafficking, lysosomal damage, and
cytotoxicity. Parallel experimental validation will expose lung epithelial cells
and fish gill cells to a unique panel of HARNs that include multi-walled carbon
nanotubes cut to well-defined lengths, and few-layer graphene materials of
varying lateral dimension. The close integration of modeling and experiment has
the potential to achieve breakthroughs in our basic understanding of the
structure-activity relations that determine nanotoxicity for these emerging
nanoproducts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
development of new nanotechnologies should be accompanied by parallel efforts to
understand and manage their risks to human health and the environment. Two of
the most important materials in the nanosafety field today are carbon nanotubes
and graphene, both of which are emerging as high-production-volume products with
a high priority for hazard assessment. The basic scientific work we propose has
the potential to identify the geometric features of HARNs that are the
underlying cause of adverse health outcomes, and allow industry to re-design or
re-formulate the materials to avoid those features for improved consumer and
worker safety. This project will also cross-train a diverse group of Ph.D.
students, post-doctoral researchers and undergraduates at the interface of
materials science, molecular modeling, and toxicology, and prepare them for
careers in nanotechnology research or industry. Finally the investigators will
engage in public policy discussions in the area of nanotechnology business,
safety and regulation, and will help translate scientific findings relevant to
the emerging nanotube and graphene business sectors. The investigators will
continue to engage in national discussions on the potential for "prevention by
design" at agencies and agency-sponsored workshops that involve business, legal,
and regulatory professionals.