* 1344587
* SCH: INT: Novel Techniques for Patient-centric Disease Management using Automatically Inferred Behavioral Biomarkers and Sensor-Supported Contextual Self-Report
* CSE,IIS
* 12/01/2013,11/30/2018
* Jessica Ancker, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 11/30/2018
* USD 1,976,976.00

The vision of patient-centric, personalized, precision medicine and wellness
will be fully realized only when an individual?s self-care and clinical decision
making are informed by a rich, predictive model of that individual?s health
status. The evolution and dissemination of mobile technology has created
unprecedented opportunities for highly detailed and personalized data collection
in a far more granular, unobtrusive, and even affordable way; these data include
activity levels, location patterns, sleep, consumption, and communication and
social interaction. However, turning this potential into practice requires that
we develop the algorithms and methodologies to transform these raw data into
actionable information. The research will develop novel and generalizable
techniques to derive robust measures relevant to individual health and clinical
decision making. The team will develop and evaluate tools that convert raw
human-activity data into clinically actionable behavioral biomarkers. This
demands creative uses of the underlying technical capabilities (i.e., passive
data capture, data analysis and machine learning, data visualization, user
experience), as well as rigorous understanding of the underlying health
condition and management (i.e. functional health measures, achievable and
optimal health outcomes, patient challenges in adherence, risks and benefits
associated with medication and other aspects of treatment, and clinical decision
making). The approach has broad applicability across disease management (e.g.,
auto-immune, gastrointestinal, depression, cognitive decline, and neurologic
disorders), but also calls for tailoring to specific conditions and individuals.
Therefore, we will conduct this initial work in a specific context, that of
chronic pain management for three prominent conditions: rheumatoid arthritis,
osteoarthritis, and lower back pain. The behavioral biomarkers associated with
our initial target domain, pain management, center around: (i) decline in
activity levels; (ii) increase in stress; (iii) decrease in sleep quality; (iv)
drop in function, e.g., reduction in travel distance or inability to go to work.
The effectiveness of passive sensing capabilities of the mobile phone to track
sleep, changes in activity level, stress, social isolation, geographic location
and several other indicators that are likely antecedents or symptoms of pain
interference has been demonstrated previously. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While
behavioral biomarkers rely extensively on passively captured data streams (such
as activity, location, communication, application usage and audio), there remain
important cases in which self-report data is required to augment or clarify
passively collected data. However, the standardized patient survey instruments
that assess relevant symptoms and behavior are not suitable for use on a daily
basis because of length, question design, or both. Further, traditional forms of
self report are often intrusive, burdensome, and suffer high rates of attrition.
A new approach, contextual recall, aims to mitigate the issues related to self-
report through three key mechanisms: optimizing the delivery of prompts,
providing the user with key contextual cues to improve recall, and employing
visual input techniques as an alternative to long-form measures that do not
scale well to frequent mobile self-reports. The approach to personalizing
disease management is intentionally scalable in terms of affordability and
accessibility. Passive data collection requires no user attention, and
contextual recall is a form of self-report designed for busy individuals with a
range of demands and constraints on their time, as well as potential literacy
and numeracy constraints. The clinician-facing components of this approach are
also designed to work in resource-constrained clinical settings where clinicians
are under particular time pressure. The team will recruit patients and
clinicians from typically underserved communities to engage in the participatory
design process. The overall contributions of this work will include development
and evaluation of: (1) software techniques to combine and transform passively
monitored and self-reported data streams into clinically meaningful, actionable,
and personalized indicators, which we call behavioral biomarkers; (2) contextual
recall that allows the collection of highly granular and contextually specific
self-report data to enhance passively captured data with information from the
patient perspective, while balancing the tension faced in balancing recall bias
and usability; and (3) a methodology that systematizes the collaboration with
clinical domain experts to develop and integrate behavioral biomarkers into
clinical decision making for specific diseases. We will create and evaluate a
modular and extensible suite of analytics and user interaction techniques
designed to facilitate iterative implementation and evaluation. These modules
will themselves be a contribution, but equally important will be the evaluation
of the overall approach of behavioral biomarkers as a driver of precision
medicine.