* 1344153
* SCH: EXP: SenseHealth: A Platform to Enable Personalized Healthcare through Context-aware Sensing and Predictive Modeling Using Sensor Streams and Electronic Medical Record Data
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Jeannie Huang, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2017
* USD 617,681.00

Current healthcare diagnostics and assessment systems are limited by health
data, which is sporadic, periodic, and incomplete. Wireless devices and health
sensor technologies are increasing in use for continuous monitoring and
assessment of key physiologic, psychological, and environmental variables and
reduce the current gaps in health data. Uptake of such data by current health
systems has been slow because of the reliance upon the physician/healthcare team
to interpret and manage incoming data. Nevertheless, the large streams of data
generated by these devices in conjunction with traditional clinical data
(Electronic Medical Records) have the potential provide real and important
insights into patient health and behavior. To address this gap, this proposal
will develop SenseHealth -- a novel software platform that will automatically
process and incorporate volumes of real-time data from sensors tailored to the
individual in the context of personal electronic medical records and available
environmental data. Such data will be integrated into the clinical care workflow
to enable system usability, feasibility, and ultimately utility. A core
component of the cyberinfrastructure is a collection of quantitative, predictive
models that are sensitive to concerns across age, diseases, and health and
variety of patient situations (ranging from low priority with no consequence on
patient management to high priority requiring emergency evaluation), and sensor
failures. The models will be integrated with a distributed real-time stream data
processing system and a complex event stream processing engine to process sensor
data in a scalable and fault-tolerant manner. Research at Rady Children's
Hospital of San Diego, an affiliate of UCSD will be leveraged to develop these
models. In each of the following studies, clinically relevant events (i.e.
events that require clinical intervention) will be identified and disease
specific models will be developed that will predict clinical relevance or the
need for intervention. Incoming data and resulting clinical management activity
from studies using various types of health sensors will be evaluated in two
different patient populations: (1) MyGlucoHealth application for evaluating the
use of a Bluetooth-enabled glucometer (for blood sugar measurements) in 40
youths with Type 1 diabetes, and (2) Asthma Tracking application for evaluating
the ability of a metered dose inhaler (MDI) tracking device to track asthma
medication use in 50 mild-to-moderate asthma subjects over a period of 6 months.
The models will then be evaluated using multiple sensor streams in youth with
diabetes (The Diabetes Management Integrated Technology Research Initiative
(DMITRI) study) and in a prospective study in youth with asthma to determine
their validity, efficacy, and utility in identifying patient scenarios of
concern.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SenseHealth system architecture will consist
of four major components (1) Health and environmental sensors linked with (2)
smartphone applications that communicate with (3) a back-end Data Center
comprised of data storage and clusters doing and real-time analytics and data
visualization, which will then provide a comprehensive health picture to
users/clients via (4) tailored, programmed user/client applications. For these
continuous sensing applications, managing sensors and smartphone in an energy-
efficient manner is critical. SenseHealth will include a novel context-aware
power management framework that uses both the application-level context (e.g.,
sensor data) and the dynamic environmental or system-level context (e.g.,
battery level, next phone charging opportunity prediction, or bandwidth
availability) to adaptively control the state of hardware components and deliver
a consistent performance (e.g. data accuracy, latency). In particular, data
sampling protocols will be energy-aware and will be designed to sample data
accurately but only as necessary to provide relevant clinical information.
SenseHealth will use Storm, an open source distributed real-time computation
system to process the data in a scalable and fault-tolerant manner. The
aforementioned predictive models will be implemented in ESPER, an open-source
complex event processing (CEP) engine. The models will use ESPER's rich Event
Processing Language (EPL) to express filtering, aggregation, and joins, possibly
over sliding windows of multiple event streams and pattern semantics to express
complex temporal causality among events and trigger custom actions when event
conditions occur among event streams. Finally, SenseHealth will fuse sensor and
clinical data in a visual format that will increase interpretability and
comprehension independent of literacy levels and will provide feedback and
ultimately intervention support that is timely and relevant to the user (patient
and clinician) based on comprehensive knowledge of data. Open source software
visualization tools developed at Calit2 that leverage advances in scaled display
wall technology will serve as the foundation for the data visualization
component. NSF-funded DELPHI project will provide the data center component to
store health sensor data and provide access to SenseHealth algorithm-processed
data and visualization protocols.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The research itself will
have direct impact on two patient communities, but the broader impacts of the
proposed research will extend well beyond them. The proposed open software
platform will be built with flexibility to allow for alternative programming
with plug-and-play data processing algorithms as required for various
sensors/data sources/clinical scenarios. The results from the proposed
development activities and prototyping experiments will be of tremendous value
to medical professionals, scientists and engineers who are engaged in planning
and developing sensor-based systems for continuous health monitoring. The
developed software products will be publicly available as open source products
under the Apache license. The tools developed from this proposal will be
designed to be extensible so that other sensors as well as models can easily be
integrated and impact a broader range of healthcare applications. SenseHealth is
an essential step toward providing a real-time 360-degree snapshot of health to
optimize patient-centered, evidence-based decisions and to empower patients to
participate in their own healthcare. The project team will contribute to
training a diverse next generation of scientists by involving undergraduate
students in the development process, both for computer science techniques and
medical science research. The exciting aspect of this proposed work is that
wellness is a very tangible and important factor even at young age. The
education program will be structured to excite students, particularly those from
traditionally underrepresented groups such as minorities and females, about
multi-disciplinary research. Through the UCSD's COSMOS program, simple, fun and
hands-on experiences for these students will be designed to allow them to
understand importance of self-health assessment and disease management at an
early age. The team is involved heavily in Graduate Medical Education at UCSD
and will promote use of SenseHealth to integrate health data into current health
systems in fellowship training activities. This proposal also funds for one
graduate student.