* 1344582
* The role of hot crust in mountain building: Testing the alpha-beta quartz transition as a crustal geothermometer
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2019
* Kevin Mahan, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Paul Raterron
* 06/30/2019
* USD 84,433.00

Of all physical parameters that control the behavior of the Earth's crust,
temperature is arguably the most difficult to determine accurately. At the same
time, temperature controls important processes such as melting (generation of
magma), the depth at which deformation processes change from brittle (usually
accompanied by earthquakes) to ductile (without earthquakes), and phase
transitions between minerals that change the density of the crust, making it
more likely to lift high terrain (less dense) or sink into the mantle (denser).
The ability to determine crustal temperature is therefore important for the
prediction of a wide range of crustal behaviors. Quartz makes up a large portion
of the Earth's crust and undergoes a change in mineral structure at a known
temperature. This change, and therefore the temperature, can be measured by
detecting a characteristic pattern in the velocity of seismic waves traversing
the material. We use a systematic combination of seismic techniques to pinpoint
the quartz transition and determine crustal
temperature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The &amp;#945;- to &amp;#946;-phase transition
of quartz occurs in a narrow temperature range that lies between 580 to 800Â°C
for pressures seen from the Earth?s surface to ~40 km depth. The phase
transition generates a sharp compressional seismic velocity (Vp) increase with
no accompanying shear velocity (Vs) contrast, unlike other mechanisms such as
melting and compositional boundaries, which create contrasts in both Vp and Vs.
The hypothesis tested in this study is: In orogens with a hot felsic middle
crust, an interface can be detected that generates P reflections but no P to S
conversions, and the inferred temperature and pressure are consistent with the
presence of the &amp;#945;-&amp;#946; quartz transition and the absence of
melting. This study uses a systematic set of teleseismic observation techniques
(tests for the occurrence of P-S conversions and P-P reflections/conversions
from the same discontinuity) in combination with petrophysical modeling to
investigate crustal temperature and its geodynamic consequences in the Himalaya-
Tibet and Taiwan orogens; if successful, the method can be widely applied to
constrain the temperature of orogens worldwide.