* 1344297
* Workshop on Opportunities in Theoretical and Computational Polymeric Materials and Soft Matter
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2013,12/31/2014
* Glenn Fredrickson, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 12/31/2014
* USD 91,568.00

SUMMARY Modeling realistic polymeric and soft matter systems requires coverage
of time intervals from nanoseconds to seconds or minutes. Even with modern
supercomputers, such a wide dynamic range can only be achieved by performing
multi-scale modeling that couples atomistic molecular simulations with coarse-
grained or field-based simulations in a self-consistent manner. Advances in
theory, modeling, computation, and data-mining are beginning to offer a
foundation for the rational design of soft matter and polymers, and their
assemblies at nanometer to macroscopic scales. Many challenges remain in
interfacing disparate methods appropriate at different scales and in managing
the massive data sets arising from tandem use of multi-scale simulations and
high-throughput experimentation, including the establishment of standards for
data collection, data mining and analysis, and storage. This award support
provides support for a workshop to be held at the University of California,
Santa Barbara (UCSB) on the topic of opportunities and challenges for theory and
simulation related to the first-principles design of polymers and soft
materials. A diverse group of participants will be drawn broadly from academic
physics, chemistry, and materials engineering disciplines, along with
representatives from synergistic fields such as biology and applied mathematics.
Approximately 10% of the proposed participants are from outside the US and
several are employed by or have experience in industry. The workshop will be
held Sunday, October 20 through Tuesday, October 22, 2013. The workshop aims to
(i) identify the major theoretical and computational challenges relating to the
first-principles design of broad classes of soft materials and polymers; (ii)
identify the missing tools/methods necessary to address these challenges and the
steps required to develop the methods; (iii) construct a vision for how theory,
computation, and experiment can interact synergistically to discover new
materials; and (iv) elaborate the theoretical advances and cyber infrastructure
needed to enable more effective synergistic interaction. The workshop will
include the identification of opportunities that lie at the interfaces with
other fields, such as biology, energy production, storage and conversion, and
water purification and reuse; the identification of materials design problems of
importance to industry and methods for strengthening academe-industry-national
lab partnerships; and strategies for educating the next generation of scientists
to be trained to work effectively at this scientific frontier. A report will
summarize the workshop and be disseminated to the broader community.