* 1344269
* INSPIRE Track 1:  Gradient Symbolic Computation
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2013,02/29/2020
* Paul Smolensky, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Joan Maling
* 02/29/2020
* USD 1,017,997.00

This INSPIRE award is partially funded by the Linguistics Program and the
Perception, Action &amp; Cognition Program in the Division of Behavioral and
Cognitive Sciences in the Directorate for Social, Behavioral &amp; Economic
Sciences; by the Robust Intelligence Program in the Division of Information
&amp; Intelligent Systems in the Directorate for Computer &amp; Information
Science &amp; Engineering; and by the Algorithmic Foundations Program in the
Division of Computer and Network Systems in the Directorate for Computer &amp;
Information Science &amp; Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Discrete,
combinatorial systems of structured symbols permeate human cognition in domains
such as language, motor control, complex action planning, learning, and higher-
level vision. Nonetheless, the computational apparatus that the brain exploits
is based on continuous, activation-based propagation of information through
complex networks of neurons. A fundamental problem of the cognitive sciences is
how to integrate gradient, continuous neural computation with the discrete
combinatorial dimension of cognition. The solution to this puzzle will provide a
deeper understanding of the mind and may also serve as the basis of a new
generation of computing systems capable of authentically brain-like
behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under the direction of Dr. Smolensky, the
research team will develop an approach to this puzzle by exploring and testing
the predictions of their theory of Gradient Symbolic Computation (GSC) in the
domain of language. Their efforts will include the development of the formal,
mathematical foundations of GSC. In parallel, the PIs will develop a framework
for modeling Gradient Symbolic Processing. To that end, the PIs will use
computational modeling and experimental psycholinguistic studies of phenomena
that typify the morpho-phonological, syntactic, and semantic characteristics of
language and language processing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of
the work include the potential to transform general computing for future
approaches to computer design, to provide innovations in computer language
processing, and to empower major advances in our understanding of human
language, its impairment in disease, and its learning and remediation. The
project also strongly engages STEM education. Undergraduate, graduate, and post-
doctoral researchers will all play key roles in highly interdisciplinary STEM
research integrating experimental, theoretical, and computational methods. The
new type of computation created will provide an integrative framework for
developing courses bridging computation theory, psychology, and linguistics.
Pedagogical materials developed in these courses will be made publicly available
to facilitate undergraduate and graduate program development at other
institutions.