* 1344254
* INSPIRE Track 1: Microbial systems biology in freshwater lakes: a new framework for scaling from genes to ecosystems
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2017
* Katherine McMahon, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 12/31/2017
* USD 783,697.00

This INSPIRE award is partially funded by the Ecosystem Studies Program in the
Division of Environmental Biology in the Directorate for Biological Sciences and
the Environmental Engineering Program in the Division of Chemical,
Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport Systems in the Directorate for
Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Microbes are critical, but often ignored,
players in all ecosystems. They have tremendous influence on ecosystem
resilience, with implications for predicting the response and feedback to
drivers ranging from climate change to land-use change and management. However,
it has been challenging to incorporate microbes and their vast diversity into
predictive environmental models. Specifically, key advances are needed to
address the knowledge gaps that prevent integration of microbial genomic
information into ecosystem-scale science. Solutions will be highly
interdisciplinary, with contributions from microbiologists, ecologists,
computational biologists, and engineers. This project aims to use genomic data
to determine how microbes in freshwater lakes control carbon cycling and water
quality, and to convert this new understanding into predictive computational
models that forecast how lakes will behave. Environmental engineers have a long
history of working quantitatively with water quality models, but they do not
incorporate microbes into them. Ecosystem scientists study the flux of matter
and energy through ecosystems but they rarely consider microbes and often do not
construct models based on first principles. This work will bring together three
disciplines that are rarely integrated: microbiology, ecosystem science, and
environmental engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will have broad
impacts on science as well as education and outreach efforts. Microbial
biologists and ecologists are hungry for new ways to transform complex datasets
and fundamental concepts into understanding and prediction. Students and post-
docs in fields of microbiology, ecology, and engineering need cross-training in
computational biology, genomics, and modeling. They will need to push their
science to be less descriptive and more predictive, which requires computational
and integrative thinking that transcends the structure of current graduate
programs in these disciplines. The project will leverage relevant network
science initiatives such as the Global Lake Ecological Observatory Network
(GLEON) and the nascent Genomic Observatories (GOs) network. Finally, our
ability to make microbial ecosystem science relevant to the broader public
depends on illustrating how tiny entities can have large impact on high-value
ecosystems services. Freshwater lakes are excellent systems for this purpose
since water quality is so tightly linked to microbes, with major feedbacks to
local economic activity, ecosystem management decisions, and public perception
of ecosystem health.