* 1344289
* INSPIRE Track 1:  Geometry and Physics of Network Dynamics
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2013,06/30/2014
* Dmitri Krioukov, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 06/30/2014
* USD 612,965.00

This INSPIRE award is partially funded by the Networking Technology and Systems
Program in the Division of Computer and Network Systems in the Directorate for
Computer Information Science and Engineering; the Mathematical Physics Program
in the Division of Physics in the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical
Sciences; and the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities in the Directorate for
Mathematical and Physical Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two grand challenges in
two disjoint fields of science are network dynamics prediction and quantum
gravity theory. The lack of understanding of fundamental laws driving the
dynamics of many complex networks, and consequently our inability to predict and
control their behavior, are among the reasons why many practical problems of
great significance remain unsolved for decades. The lack of a complete theory of
quantum gravity, unifying all the fundamental interactions, is perhaps the most
fundamental problem in physics after Einstein. Motivated by the recent results
suggesting that the two problems might in fact be intimately related via a
geometric duality between hyperbolic and de Sitter spaces---the former
reflecting the latent geometry of complex networks, the latter representing the
asymptotic geometry of spacetime in the universe---this project addresses both
grand challenges and advances science in both fields by deriving fundamental
laws of network dynamics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main hypothesis that the
project investigates is that one can extend and apply the canonical approach in
physics used to study all the fundamental interactions in nature to a wide class
of physical systems---complex networks. One part of the project focuses on
finding Hamiltonians defining Hamilton's equations of network dynamics, and
validating the derived equations against the dynamics of real networks. These
equations are expected to be simpler than the corresponding equations in
gravitational theories. Other parts of the project focus on building tools to
predict this dynamics based on the derived equations, and investigating
connections between this dynamics, its conformal invariance in the de
Sitter/conformal field theory correspondence (dS/CFT) context, and network
navigability that may lead to a different interpretation of the dark energy
problem in cosmology. This interdisciplinary project combines concepts and
methods from mathematical physics and network research by extending the
canonical approach in physics to complex networks to advance our understanding
of their dynamics, and to explore whether applying theoretical concepts in
network science will advance our understanding of dark energy. This project thus
opens exciting new research directions by hypothesizing a fundamental connection
between Hamiltonian dynamics and network dynamics that until now have been
considered completely unrelated. The transformative project thus challenges the
conventional wisdom that neither the canonical approach in physics can be useful
in studying complex networks, nor network science has anything to offer
theoretical physics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Many problems of
broader impacts in science and society are blocked on network dynamics
prediction. Examples include disease treatment, drug design, and a variety of
link-prediction problems, which are sub-problems of network dynamics prediction.
In general, connections between systems as different as the brain, the Internet,
and the universe, appeal to general public, foster creative thinking, and
attract wider and more diverse circles of students to science and engineering.