* 1344364
* CIF: Small: Collaborative Research: Design and Analysis of Novel Compressed Sensing Algorithms via Connections with Coding Theory
* CSE,CCF
* 01/16/2013,08/31/2015
* Georgios-Alex Dimakis, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 08/31/2015
* USD 196,560.00

Compressed sensing (CS) is a rapidly advancing area of signal processing and
statistics that has the potential to radically change the way that analog
signals are transformed into digital signals. The main idea is to acquire a
sparse signal from a very small number of measurements using a specialized
sampling and reconstruction process. Since one promising application of CS is
medical imaging, improvements in CS systems are also expected to advance real-
world healthcare applications. In this project, the investigators will study the
fundamental connection between error-correcting codes (ECC) and CS and leverage
recent advances in ECC to design improved CS measurement and reconstruction
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In particular, the connection between linear-
programming (LP) decoding of binary linear codes and LP reconstruction will be
used to develop a non-asymptotic theory for the design and analysis of CS
algorithms and measurement matrices. The first part of the project will focus on
novel relaxations of the CS reconstruction problem that allow non-convex
regularization and iterative solution. The second part of the project will focus
on applying the theory of pseudo-codewords, which was originally developed to
understand iterative and LP decoding of binary linear codes, to achieve a non-
asymptotic analysis of iterative reconstruction algorithms for CS. The third
part of the project will focus on exploiting additional signal structure (i.e.,
beyond sparsity) that exists in high-contrast imaging applications such as
angiograms.