* 1344471
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Non-Local Cortical Computation and Enhanced Learning with Astrocytes
* SBE,SMA
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2015
* Terrence Sejnowski, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 08/31/2015
* USD 100,000.00

The brain is composed of two major cell types: Neurons and glial cells. Glial
cells are traditionally regarded as the brain's supportive cells. However, many
lines of work over the past decade have documented that glial cells may also
participate in complex neural processes and thereby comprise an integral element
of higher cognitive function, such as working memory, learning, and sleep. Other
lines of work have shown that human astrocytes are larger and structurally more
complex than astrocytes in the rodent brain. In support of this concept,
transplantation of human glial cells into mice resulted in generation of mice
that were faster learners and performed better on memory tests. However,
existing computational modeling techniques employed for understanding the
processes involved in learning and memory do not include glial cells. The aim of
the proposed research is to: 1) Develop computational modeling techniques that
incorporate glial cells. 2) Use these novel computational modeling techniques to
make predictions regarding the role of glial cells in learning and memory. 3)
Test the predictions using a combination of patch clamping and Ca2+ imaging. 4)
Use the data collected to continuously refine the computational modeling
techniques. The broader impact of this proposal will be to further the
scientific understanding of underappreciated, yet essential substrates of
learning and memory. Including glial cells in addition to neurons in modeling
approaches additionally carries the hope of increasing computational power and
processing capabilities of adaptive learning technology, in addition to
improving the performance of bio-integrated prostheses for individuals with
impaired learning or other debilitating neurological disorders.