* 1344191
* INSPIRE Track 1: Resolving and optogenetically perturbing biofilms at the single-cell level
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/2014,02/28/2018
* Ned Wingreen, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Devaki Bhaya
* 02/28/2018
* USD 1,000,000.00

This INSPIRE award is partially funded by the Systems and Synthetic Biology
program in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences in the Directorate
for Biological Sciences, the Physics of Living Systems in the Division of
Physics in the Directorate for Mathematical &amp; Physical Sciences, and the
Biotechnology, Biochemical, and Biomass Engineering program in the Division of
Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport Systems, in the
Directorate for Engineering. INTELLECTUAL MERIT: In their natural environments,
bacteria primarily exist in multicellular, surface-bound communities called
biofilms. While biofilms are desirable in the context of wastewater treatment,
biofilms are notorious for causing undesirable problems such as chronic, medical
device-associated, and hospital-associated infections, and persistent damage to
surfaces of nearly all materials. Cells in biofilms display striking differences
from cells that are free living, such as production of adhesive polymers, and a
1,000-fold increase in tolerance to antibiotics. Studies to date have been
limited to investigations of biofilm formation, when only a few cells are
present, or to overall characterization of the entire structure. The PIs made a
recent breakthrough in microscopy: they resolved the individual cells in
biofilms. This is the first time anyone has peered "into" a biofilm, to watch it
develop, cell by cell, under conditions that model environmental, medical, and
industrial systems. The PIs have also developed procedures to perturb the
biofilm using genetic, mechanical, chemical and optical means. The PIs propose
to characterize biofilms from the gene to the genome and from the cell to the
collective. The project is based on a radically new approach that is essential
to gain the understanding necessary to solve a fundamental problem with broad
implications for science, engineering, and society. BROADER IMPACTS: This is a
project at the interface of Physics, Biology and Engineering, and as such,
offers to the students and postdoctoral researchers involved exceptional
research educational opportunities. Moreover, each investigator has remarkable
track records in teaching, outreach, and service.