* 1344218
* INSPIRE Track 1:  SPINTOP:  Spin Torque Nano Oscillator Arrays for "Big Data" Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Mircea Stan, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 08/31/2017
* USD 850,000.00

Overview: This INSPIRE award is partially funded by the Electronics, Photonics,
and Magnetics Devices Program in the Division of Electrical, Communications and
Cyber Systems in the Directorate for Engineering; the Software and Hardware
Foundations program in the Division of Computing and Communication Foundation in
the Directorate for Computer & Information Science and Engineering; and the
Electronic and Photonic Materials program in the Division of Materials Research
in the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences.

SPINTOP will explore, in detail, a new paradigm of automata computing that is
based on a non-Boolean, non-Von Neumann architecture and is enabled by the
electrical coupling of Spin Torque Nano-oscillators (STNOs). The project's goal
is to build a simple, yet clear demonstration, of how this can achieve
significant speedups in pattern recognition to match detailed simulations. This
project addresses the 'Big Data' challenge with a non-conventional solution that
can compute on the fly. The interdisciplinary nature of the INSPIRE program will
make it possible to combine magnetic materials research with device design and
test and computer architecture development involving three NSF Programs and
faculty from Physics, Materials Science and Electronic and Computer Engineering
at University of Virginia (UVa).

Intellectual Merit: SPINTOP will be pushing the frontiers of spintronic devices,
circuits and computing architectures. Key to the success of this project will be
the demonstration of a novel hybrid STNO that was invented at UVa. Magnetic
materials with low magnetization, low damping, high spin polarization,
controlled anisotropy are key to the success of the proposed hybrid device. The
proposed novel STNO combines the best features of existing devices to provide
both pure sine wave output and a large voltage signal. Electrical coupling of
arrays of these STNOs will be demonstrated in this project. According to
detailed simulations, phase lock will occur when their individual frequencies
are close - this phase locking will take place across the array rather than only
nearest neighbor locking as has been previously demonstrated using spin wave
coupling. This coherent phase locking is the key to the design for an
associative memory for pattern recognition. SPINTOP will also develop the
modeling tool used to simulate the behavior of the innovative design for STNO
arrays. Further development of this tool is key for designing and implementing
circuits as it will be integrated with existing codes for performing the
modeling, simulation and design of hybrid CMOS-spintronic circuits. Broader
Impacts: SPINTOP, if successful, will have a big impact on the scientific
community by creating a new paradigm for computing, especially pattern
recognition. This will help solve many of the Big Data applications that are a
grand challenge today. However its impact will be much broader; this project
will address many of the key issues facing society today. This project is
committed to fostering diversity in the workforce and will support at least one
student from an underrepresented group for the duration of the project. As the
INSPIRE project will fall under the umbrella of the UVA nanoSTAR Institute and
the PI is also the director of nanoSTAR, this project will be closely integrated
into the outreach programs and benefit from the resources of nanoSTAR. The
SPINTOP faculty and students will participate in outreach visits to Virginia
high schools to highlight this new technology. SPINTOP faculty and students will
also participate in Nanodays, a highly interactive event held each Spring that
brings over 650 local students from K-12 and their parents to UVA to experience
some of the wonders of nanoscience and technology. These visitors will see a
poster highlighting SPINTOP and will be invited to tour the SPINTOP
laboratories. SPINTOP along with NanoSTAR will co-sponsor a club for
undergraduates called NeXT (for Nano and Emerging Technologies) that hosts
frequent seminars with guest speakers and will be a way for students in many of
the nano-related disciplines to connect with one another. SPINTOP will leverage
programs that support undergraduate research to recruit undergraduates to
participate in summer research in the SPINTOP labs. In collaboration with UVA's
Center for Diversity in Engineering, opportunities will be provided to several
minority senior high school students to experience research in the SPINTOP
facilities. SPINTOP will also have an impact on courses at UVA; there will be at
least one new class developed under the auspices of this program. It will be a
class on automata based computing which is the computing paradigm that the
SPINTOP project will use for mapping applications at the system level. Finally,
an existing class on Spintronics taught by the PI will be updated to include
several lectures on spin torque oscillators and their application to computing.