* 1344357
* Development of Noble Gases as Tracers of Groundwater Circulation in Fractured and Karstic Systems
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2014,01/31/2018
* Chris Hall, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 01/31/2018
* USD 499,546.00

This proposal is intended to investigate the use of stable noble gases as both
tracers of groundwater flow and weather patterns in places where rainwater
infiltration is rapid, i.e., in fractured rock systems. Noble gas concentrations
in water are temperature dependent and the noble gas thermometer has been used
for decades in paleoclimate reconstructions in sedimentary systems. Recent work
in the Galapagos Islands suggests that recharge water in fractured groundwater
systems reflect the temperature of the ground surface at the precise time of
infiltration rather than the mean annual air temperature value, as is commonly
assumed. If this is confirmed, noble gases in fractured rock areas will be
recording seasonality, and thus, should provide information about timing and
location of recharge. Noble gases in many Galapagos samples also suggest that
water sometimes is not in equilibrium with the atmosphere at the surface. A
recent pilot study of rainwater in Michigan not only suggests that rainwater is
indeed not in equilibrium with the atmosphere at land surface but that there is
a direct link between the noble gas composition in rain and weather patterns.
Both rain and Galapagos spring water suggest that fog might modify the noble gas
composition of air saturated water. The main goal of the proposed work, which
will be carried out mostly in East Maui where the presence of precipitation and
fog is prominent, and where there is an abundance of springs and groundwater
wells, is to test these hypotheses and to assess whether or not noble gases can
be used to trace both groundwater flow and weather patterns in rapid rainwater
infiltration systems. &lt;br/&gt; The broader significance and importance of
this work will be felt at multiple levels, with both an intellectual and
societal nature. On an intellectual level, this study will lead to an in-depth
understanding of poorly understood and constrained surface and near-surface
processes capable of impacting atmospheric noble gas concentrations and thus,
the use of the noble gas thermometer in many regions around the world. On a
societal level, this work is relevant because it contributes to better water
resource management plans in fractured, water stressed areas, both in the US and
throughout the world. Maui itself faces a growing population and a forecasted
increase in water demand of 40% until 2030, combined with decreasing rainfall
due to climate change. This work will also foster collaborations between the
University of Michigan, US Geological Survey, and the University of Hawaii. This
project will support a PhD student and contribute to drawing increasing numbers
of undergraduate non-science majors into scientific careers by creating new
opportunities for undergraduate students to participate in the PIs? research.