* 1344672
* SNM: Roll-to-Roll Manufacturing of High Quality Bucky-tape with Aligned and Crosslinked Carbon Nanotubes Through In-line Sensing and Control
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2018
* Chun Zhang, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 09/30/2018
* USD 1,465,059.00

Carbon nanotubes (CNTs) demonstrate amazing properties; however, currently only
a fraction of these properties can be transferred into products that can be used
by engineers and consumers. To effectively transfer CNTs? properties into useful
products requires a method to efficiently align and covalently interconnect the
CNTs into tailored architectures at the nanoscale. This project will establish
the fundamental understanding and foundation for using CNTs to make thin sheet
materials, called Bucky-tapes, which can be rapidly produced in roll form and
scaled-up for industrial applications. The proposed method will use a modified
die-casting manufacturing process utilizing the self-repelling effects of
selected flow media. In-situ ultra-violet (UV) reaction chemistry can covalently
interconnect the CNTs rapidly to improve the load transfer and thermal and
electronic transport properties of CNT networks. In-line multi-stage stretching
of the web could orient the randomly dispersed interconnected CNT networks into
specific patterns to provide greater strength and optimized transport
properties. In-line Raman spectra monitoring and multistage process models will
provide affordable, closed loop quality control and variation reduction methods
for a high quality consistent nanomanufacturing process. A prototype will be
built to demonstrate the continuous roll-to-roll process for manufacturing
strong Bucky-tapes with high electrical and thermal conductivity, and low
manufacturing cost. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project can transform CNT thin
films networks from a lab-scale demonstration material into commercially viable
products with superior properties potentially surpassing the state-of-the-art
carbon fiber material. The continuous Bucky-tapes can lead to new materials
applications in aerospace, electronics, energy, medicine, and transportation.
For example, continuous Bucky-tape could replace metal shielding of 60 miles of
cables in the Boeing 787 and reduce cable weight by 25%. The education and
outreach plan will expose especially under-represented students to molecular
design, nanomanufacturing process development and quality control, structure-
property relationship studies. Application oriented materials-by-design and
nanomanufacturing process development will motivate students into
nanotechnology, manufacturing and new materials development.