* 1344291
* INSPIRE Track I: Distributed Sensing Collective to Capture 3D Soundscapes
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2018
* Jules Jaffe, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2018
* USD 1,041,748.00

This INSPIRE award is partially funded by the Cyber-Physical Systems Program in
the Division of Computer and Network Systems in the Directorate for Computer and
Information Science and Engineering, the Information and Intelligent Systems
Program in the Division of Information and Intelligent Systems in the
Directorate for Computer and Information Science and Engineering, the Computer
Systems Research Program in the Division of Computer and Network Systems in the
Directorate for Computer and Information Science and Engineering, and the
Software and Hardware Foundations Program in the Division of Computing and
Communications Foundations in the Directorate for Computer and Information
Science and Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sound plays a vital role in the
ocean ecosystem as many organisms rely on acoustics for navigation,
communication, detecting predators, and finding food. Therefore, the 3D
underwater soundscape, i.e., the combination of sounds present in the immersive
underwater environment, is of extreme importance to understand and protect
underwater ecosystems. This project is creating a transformative distributed
ocean observing system for studying the underwater soundscape at revolutionary
spatial (~100 meters) and temporal (~100 seconds) resolutions that is also able
to simultaneously resolve small-scale ocean current flow. These breakthroughs
are achieved using a distributed collective of small hydrophone-equipped
subsurface floats, which utilize group management techniques and sensor fusion
to understand the ocean soundscape in a Lagrangian manner. The ability to record
soundscapes provides a novel sensing technology to understand the effects of
sound on marine ecosystems and the role that sound plays for species
development. Experiments off the coast of San Diego, CA, and a research campaign
in the Cayman Islands provide concrete scientific studies that are tightly
interwoven with the engineering research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Oceans are
drivers of global climate, are home to some of the most important and diverse
ecosystems, and represent a substantial contribution to the world's economy as a
major source of food and employment. The technological and scientific advances
in this project provide crucial tools to understand natural ocean resources, by
studying soundscapes at spatio-temporal scales that were heretofore extremely
burdensome and expensive to obtain.