* 1344247
* INSPIRE Type 1:   Investigating Retention and Persistence with Network Analysis
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2018
* Laird Kramer, Florida International University
* Continuing Grant
* Randy Ruchti
* 08/31/2018
* USD 406,106.00

This INSPIRE award is partially funded by the Elementary Particle Physics
Program in the Division of Physics in the Directorate for Mathematical and
Physical Sciences, the Education and Interdisciplinary Research Program in the
Division of Physics in the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences,
the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities in the Directorate for Mathematical
and Physical Sciences, and the INSPIRE Program in the Directorate for Education
and Human Resources.

Supported by this NSF Track 1 award, the Florida International University
Physics Education Research Group will integrate the approaches of Network
Analysis and Qualitative Education Research to examine, test, and understand the
effectiveness of student communities in contributing to student retention and
persistence in Physics. They will concentrate their studies at their home
institution, a large public and primarily Hispanic-serving institution in south
Florida. The proponents propose to examine both academic and social integration
as they pertain to classrooms to address one of the most pressing problems in
the physics community currently - improving diversity in physics while
increasing overall numbers of students in physics. Such issues that affect the
physics community are potentially relevant for most of engineering and computer
science as well.

The program will address several questions in the Formal Learning Environment:
1. How does the Modeling Instruction program promote student retention and
persistence within the physics major? 2. How do differing learning environments
shape the formation of student networks, and how do they contribute to student
retention and persistence?

And the program will address several questions in the Informal Learning
Environment: 1. What networks are created as a result of participating in a
variety of semiformal learning environments? How does participating in these
networks correlate with achievement outcomes and persistence? 2. Can we utilize
cross-sectional analyses to develop a predictive model of student engagement
that ultimately can be used to correlate with persistence? What features are
most prominent in a predictive model of student engagement?

Such questions have broad impact by developing understanding of mechanisms for
supporting all students to persist in physics and with the unique student
population at FIU, which is historically underrepresented in physics. Further,
the development of network methods that are supported by qualitative education
research can provide unique opportunities to uncover emergent network structures
that support student participation in physics.