* 1344654
* SNM: Large Scale Manufacturing of Low-Cost Functionalized Carbon Nanomaterials for Energy Storage and Biosensor Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/01/2013,11/30/2018
* Timothy Fisher, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 11/30/2018
* USD 1,497,905.00

The benefits of graphene nano-petal structures are high surface area-to-volume
ratio and high thermal and electrical conductivities. Graphene nano-petals can
be functionalized for specific applications such as sensors, power and energy
and lightweight materials. This grant provides funding to boost the throughput
and yield of coated graphene nano-petal structures by ~5 orders of magnitude to
10m2/h from the current lab-scale throughput thus opening the door to their
commercial viability in diverse application areas such as biosensing,
electrochemical energy storage to high strength, lightweight carbon fiber
composites. This major breakthrough will arise from comprehensive research
proposed in five thrust areas, namely the design of continuous, roll-to-roll
processing systems for large scale graphene nano-petal growth; fundamental
understanding of graphene nano-petal growth mechanisms in a novel high energy
plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition reactor; understanding of vibrations
and stability of the transported web based on coarse-grain simulation models;
scalable functionalization of the nano-petals in an ambient environment; and
study of new in-line and offline metrology tools for quality control of devices
based on the functionalized nano-petal structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Graphene
nano-petal based surfaces could find wide commercial use in detection of glucose
in ultra-low concentrations, supercapacitors with concurrent high power and
energy densities with high cycle stability, and in high-performance carbon fiber
composites and new thermal interfacial materials. The breakthrough technologies
that will be developed in this project will find direct commercial outlet
through strong collaboration with start-up companies. Many results and methods
from this research are likely to be applicable to a wide variety of low-pressure
and ambient roll-to-roll nanomanufacturing processes such as for flexible
electronics and membrane technology.