* 1344862
* Accurate Characterization of Winter Precipitation Using Multi-Angle Snowflake Camera, Visual Hull, Advanced Scattering Methods, and Polarimetric Radar
* GEO,AGS
* 12/01/2013,11/30/2018
* V. Bringi, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 11/30/2018
* USD 607,967.00

This award will establish a novel approach to characterization of winter
precipitation and modeling of associated polarimetric radar observables, with a
longer-term goal to significantly improve the radar-based quantitative
precipitation estimation in stronger, more hazardous, winter events. The
principal enabling technologies are (i) multi-angle snowflake camera (MASC),
(ii) visual hull (VH) geometrical method for reconstruction of 3D hydrometeor
shapes, (iii) fast and accurate advanced higher order computational
electromagnetics (CEM) scattering methods, and (iv) fully polarimetric data from
the advanced CSU-CHILL radar. The main objectives of this research and methods
to be employed are: - Microphysical and realistic 3D-geometrical
characterization of ice particles using MASC - Combining fall speed and particle
geometry to estimate density-"size" power laws, snow rates - Calculations of
"particle-by-particle" scattering matrices and polarimetric radar observables -
Sensitivity studies of various parameters of scattering models in simulations of
radar measurables - Analysis and cross-validation of CSU-CHILL and MASC/VH/CEM
data for winter precipitation events - Derivation and validation of radar-based
snow rate relations for previously classified particle types

Intellectual merit is contained in and warranted by the research objectives
described above. Overall, it is in the synergistic use of new research
instrumentation (MASC) coupled with accurate, efficient, versatile, and robust
CEM scattering methods as well as state-of-the-art polarimetric radar (with
exceptional polarization purity) to substantially increase the accuracy of
modeling of radar observables and characterization of winter precipitation. This
is the first time real (measured) snowflake images will be used with highly
accurate and efficient realistic scattering calculations, to obtain radar
measurable parameters, which will be validated by a highly precise polarimetric
radar. This will be the first set of high-quality multi-year data for scattering
matrices and the full set of radar observables for MASC-based classified
particle types constituting winter precipitation. The full-wave CEM modeling
approach to atmospheric particle scattering based primarily on the higher order
method of moments (MoM) will be able to overcome all shortcomings of both the
T-matrix and the DDA methods. Snowflake 3D shape reconstruction by the VH method
based on three MASC photographs is much more accurate than any other available
snowflake shape reconstruction examples.

This research will significantly improve, in a longer term, the radar-based
estimation of liquid equivalent snow rates near the surface in stronger, more
hazardous, winter events by first classification of precipitation type followed
by quantification. Winter precipitation studies using the combined MASC and OTT-
Pluvio snow gauge will impact microphysical parameterizations used in advanced
cloud resolving models. "Look-up tables" with comprehensive scattering
properties of ice hydrometeors, obtained by MASC/VH/CEM-methods, at multiple
radar/radiometric sensor frequencies from 3-150 GHz, should be of interest and
use for many researchers in the field. Radar-based snow rate relations will be
directly applicable to improved quantification of winter precipitation by the
WSR-88D network. This research is also aimed at establishing and promoting the
full-wave CEM modeling approach and the higher order MoM as an enabling resource
and technology for future research in atmospheric particle scattering analysis.
Applications may be extended to radiometric cloud/snow detection and mm-wave
radars. Having potential to change the way characterization of winter
precipitation is done; this research is transformative in its nature.
Educational and outreach activities include training of two Ph.D. students, a
new course on scattering by precipitation particles, advanced workshops with a
series of seminars/lectures on the topics of the project for graduate students,
faculty, and scientists within the Colorado Front Range, and K-12 outreach
workshops on Snowflake Research for high school students.