* 1344646
* NEESR Planning/Collaborative Research: Engineered Timber Structural Systems for Seismically Resilient Tall Buildings
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2015
* John van de Lindt, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 09/30/2015
* USD 72,000.00

To enable resilient, eight to fourteen story, timber buildings in regions of
high seismicity in the United States, this planning grant combines innovative
concepts in seismic load resisting systems with a new form of a mass timber
structural component, called cross laminated timber (CLT), to research three
potential structural systems for resilient, tall CLT building construction: (a)
single-story, pre-stressed re-centering walls, (b) multi-story, segmental
rocking walls, and (c) deformable floor diaphragms with supplemental damping
devices. These systems will be distributed vertically along the height of the
building, combining deformable panels or layers with relatively rigid and stiff
ones, to leverage CLT behavior, enable rapid construction, and limit the impact
of higher modes. Based on their performance in component-level testing and
system-level simulation conducted as part of this research, promising systems
that are economically competitive will be selected for full-scale experimental
investigation in follow-on research. This planning phase research will generate
fundamental knowledge on resilient, multi-story panelized systems that have the
potential to transform the seismic design of taller buildings in general.

As urban densification occurs in U.S. regions of high seismicity, there is a
natural demand for tall buildings that can survive large earthquakes with
minimal damage and interruption. CLT is a naturally sustainable material that
has been used in Europe and Australia to rapidly construct multi-story
buildings. However, existing multi-story CLT constructions were limited to
regions of low seismicity because there is no seismic design methodology for
tall CLT buildings worldwide. In the U.S. Pacific Northwest, there is
significant interest in utilizing CLT in eight to fourteen story residential and
commercial buildings due to its appeal as a potential locally sourced,
sustainable, and economically competitive building material. With combined
expertise from the research and design community, this project will address this
societal need by prototyping three potential structural systems that are
suitable for tall CLT buildings in high seismicity regions, comparing their
performance through experimentation and simulation, and developing performance-
based seismic design methods for their implementation. Once the optimal systems
are selected in this study and verified at full-scale in subsequent research, it
is envisioned that a resilient, tall CLT building will become an option for west
coast cities in about six to eight years. In addition to providing research
training for students working on the project, the project will deliver
educational resources to introduce this new sustainable building type to
students, stakeholders, and the general public. Data from this project will be
archived and made available to the public through the NEES data repository. This
award is part of the National Earthquake Hazards Reduction Program (NEHRP).