* 1344303
* INSPIRE Track 1:  Concept Development for Active Magnetospheric, Radiation Belt, and Ionospheric Experiments using In-situ Relativistic Electron Beam Injection
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Ennio Sanchez, SRI International
* Continuing Grant
* John Meriwether
* 08/31/2017
* USD 750,200.00

This INSPIRE award is partially funded by the Aeronomy and Magnetospheric
Physics Programs in the Division of Atmospheric and Geospace Sciences in the
Directorate for Geoscience, and the Plasma Physics Program in the Directorate
for Mathematical and Physical Sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators
will study the feasibility of conducting controlled experiments in space using
million-electron-volt (MeV) beams of electrons. Energetic particles are
fundamental to the geospace environment. These particles, and their interactions
that produce gamma rays, x-rays, and radio emissions, shed light on the
fundamental physics of the space environment. In geospace, particles are
accelerated by various mechanisms in the magnetosphere, with energies upwards of
10 MeV. Targeted space-based particle injection experiments have enabled
scientific investigations of space plasmas since at least the 1950s. However,
these controlled experiments were mainly based on relatively low-energy electron
beams (&lt;40 keV). Controlled experiments with MeV-class electron beams
injected between the magnetosphere and the atmosphere will enable several types
of important scientific studies. These include atmospheric-ionospheric-
magnetospheric coupling and the response of the atmosphere to long-term
geomagnetic forcing; establishing how energetic particles are accelerated,
transported, and lost; and understanding the origin and effects of wave-particle
interactions. This project has two concurrent objectives: the first is
scientific, the other technological. Meeting the scientific objectives will
require detailed simulations, modeling, and theoretical calculations of beam-
induced instabilities, expansion, and collisions to explore the range of
properties of the electron beams. The range of beam properties identified in the
science investigation will guide the principal technological objective of this
project, which is to define the specifications of the linear accelerators with
size, power, and form factors amenable to space deployment and capable of
generating the beam characteristics needed to achieve science closure. This
study addresses high priority science areas identified by the Heliophysics
Decadal Survey and has direct relevance to the science objectives of NASA's
Living With a Star, Van Allen Probes mission. The research will also have
multiple practical applications. For instance, elucidating how wave-particle
interactions cause the radiation belts to lose electrons into the ionosphere
will enable technologies for the mitigation of space weather effects.
Experiments investigating interactions between relativistic electron beams and
the atmosphere will provide a host of diagnostic possibilities for understanding
discharges and the modification of chemical reaction paths that will enable
technologies to modify nitric oxide (NO) and ozone content in the atmosphere.