* 1344235
* "INSPIRE Track 1:" Localization: analysis, control, and design of waves in inhomogeneous media
* MPS,DMS
* 02/15/2014,09/30/2020
* Svitlana Mayboroda, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 09/30/2020
* USD 800,000.00

This is an INSPIRE award that is partially funded by the Atomic, Molecular,
Optical, and Plasma Physics Program in the Division of Physics, by the Analysis
Program in the Division of Mathematical Sciences, and by the Office of
Multidisciplinary Activities in the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical
Sciences. At the forefront of modern technology, matter structured at the
nanometer and atomic levels increasingly reveals its wavelike nature. In recent
years, cutting-edge experiments with ultracold atoms, pushing the limits of
fundamental physics, have created new states of matter and offered the
possibility of controlling quantum entanglement, with major potential
applications in cryptography and in quantum computing. The electronic waves
confined in quantum wells have yielded high-efficiency, light-emitting diodes
that are about to revolutionize the energetics of lighting. At these scales,
even the slightest disorder or irregularity can trigger one of the most puzzling
and poorly understood phenomena, wave localization. Its dramatic impact has been
observed and confirmed by experiments. At the same time, it has been
acknowledged that at the present time the design of the most promising light
sources (and, more generally, the investigation and exploitation of wave
localization) rests on ill-defined concepts, for we still lack the tools
necessary to relate disorder to the wave properties in an accurate manner. The
present project offers a new approach to wave localization. Its main objective
is to combine state-of-the-art techniques and results from harmonic analysis and
geometric measure theory with achievements of atomic physics so as to enable one
to predict (and then manipulate) localization properties of mechanical,
electromagnetic, and matter waves in precise and quantifiable mathematical
terms. The project addresses mathematical problems involving the eigenfunctions
and behavior of solutions to irregular partial differential equations seamlessly
integrated with the latest research in systems of cold atoms, and ultimately
aims to give to scientists and engineers a unique opportunity to produce desired
wave localization properties on demand, at predetermined frequencies and at
specific locations, and at the submillimeter or even atomic scales.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;What is wave localization? It is an astonishing ability of physical
systems to maintain vibrations in small portions of their original domains of
activity, preventing extended propagation. One should not, in this context,
think solely in terms of mechanical vibrations. Light is a particular example of
an electromagnetic wave, wifi is delivered by waves, sound is a pressure wave,
and, from the vantage point of quantum physics, even matter can be perceived as
a type of wave. Whether wanted or unwanted, known or ignored, exploited or only
sustained, localization of such waves plays a paramount role in our everyday
life and will play an even greater one in the science and technology of the
future. However, the intricate nature of this phenomenon and the perplexing
rules of confinement that govern it remain largely a mystery. The goal of the
present project is to establish the right mathematical tools with which to
describe and manipulate it, to design and control localization behavior, in
contrast to the current situation where researchers have to resort to limited
experiments and costly trial-and-error runs. The project's aim is to unveil the
fundamental laws of localization and eventually open the way to master
vibrations (i.e., redirect, amplify, dampen, focus, and drive them) in all of
their manifestations. The results of the research will bring novel methods to
bear in analysis, probability, applied mathematics, condensed matter physics,
mechanical engineering, acoustics, optics, and quantum physics, to name just a
few areas of potential application. In addition, the project will become a
platform for a unique interdisciplinary program of training for postdocs and
students, with a line-up of activities specifically targeted to involve women
and other STEM minorities in scientific research.