* 1344038
* INSPIRE Track 1: Lanthanide-based probes for visualizing RNAs and proteins in live organisms
* MPS,CHE
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* James Chen, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Pui Ho
* 09/30/2017
* USD 1,000,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program of the Chemistry
Division in the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences, the
Developmental Systems Cluster in the Division of Integrative Organismal Systems
of the Directorate for Biological Sciences, and the CBET-Nano-Biosensing Program
in the Directorate for Engineering are funding Dr. James Chen from Stanford
University to develop lanthanide-based systems for the imaging of RNAs and
proteins in vivo. RNA aptamers and polypeptide receptors that bind to lanthanide
chelates and enhance their photoluminescence will be developed through iterative
rounds of molecular evolution, selection, and amplification. The
receptor/chelate pairs will then be used to detect subnanomolar levels of mRNAs
and proteins in live zebrafish embryos, taking advantage of the long
luminescence lifetimes of lanthanide complexes. In combination with genome
editing using transcription activator-like effect nucleases, these technologies
have the potential to enable the simultaneous observation of tissue patterning
and organogenesis and the macromolecules that regulate these processes. Through
this interdisciplinary approach, the study will help decode the dynamic genetic
programs that give rise to complex organisms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While
currently embryonic development can be observed with single-cell resolution by
time-lapse microscopy, the biological molecules that contribute to this
remarkable transformation remain largely invisible. As a result, our
understanding of how specific RNAs and proteins contribute to the formation of
distinct tissues and organs is limited. This study develops new technologies
that may overcome this hurdle by enabling the real-time detection of RNAs and
proteins in live zebrafish embryos and other organisms. The approach is based on
use of methods pertaining to different related disciplines, specifically
synthetic chemistry, molecular imaging, and developmental biology. A
scientifically multilingual cadre of graduate students and postdoctoral fellows
will be trained. The project will also promote interdisciplinary research in
scientific communities from developing countries through a chemical biology
short-course at the University of SÃ£o Paulo in Brazil and by exposing talented
Brazilian graduate students to research at Stanford University.