* 1344174
* INSPIRE Track 1:The Development Diagnostic Assessment Strategies for e-portfolios based on the alignment of the Design Process Rubric to 21st Century Knowledge,Skills and Abilitie
* EDU,DGE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2020
* Leigh Abts, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 08/31/2020
* USD 799,687.00

This INSPIRE award is patially funded by PRIME in the Directorate for Education
and Human Resourses and REE in the Directorate for Engineering. The overall goal
of the project is to create theoretical and assessment models of 21st century
competencies as they relate to engineering and computer science. The PIs are
conducting research and a domain analysis to establish domains within the
context of Engineering Design and Computer Science Principles. The domain
analysis and models provide the foundation for developing assessment frameworks
in general research, education, engineering, and computer science communities.
Developed models will lay the groundwork for the greater research community to
develop and test human and automated methods to effectively and efficiently
assess a range of competencies through portfolio and assignment analyses.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit is its potential to advance
interdisciplinary evaluation and assessment and inform the field about new
methodologies. The research will create a foundation for automated scoring by
developing a framework to systematically dissect student work documented within
an e-portfolio or computer science work assignment&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will address broader impacts and benefit society through the development
of assessments that are universally designed, thus impacting a broad range of
learners. The research will address real gaps in portfolio-based assessment
systems that currently lack comprehensive and standardized methods to assess
21st century skills.