* 1344547
* Collaborative Research: The effects of river regulation on lateral and integrated longitudinal mass and energy transfers in coupled terrestrial-aquatic systems
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2019
* Meinhard Cardenas, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Ingrid Padilla
* 04/30/2019
* USD 326,551.00

Collaborative Research: The effects of river regulation on lateral and
integrated longitudinal mass and energy transfers in coupled terrestrial-aquatic
systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rivers and shallow groundwater are inter-connected
and continuously exchange water; river water temporarily circulates through the
beds and banks of rivers. The lateral exchange zone (LEZ) in the banks affects
instream water quality since microbial communities in the LEZ consume water-
borne nutrients and solutes. We know little about how local LEZ processes
integrate to impact instream water quality for large rivers. Globally, 60% of
major rivers are regulated by dams and some dam-regulated rivers are subject to
periodic (daily) floods. This study will examine and understand how flow and
dynamic biogeochemical regimes in regulated rivers impact nutrient and thermal
energy transfers through the river corridor. It will lead to understanding of
biogeochemical processes in human-impacted surface-subsurface hydrologic
systems. Through field observations along a 90-km section of the 6-th order
Lower Colorado River in Texas and through coupled numerical simulations of
instream and LEZ processes, we will determine how the dynamic
expansion/contraction of the LEZ during flooding/recession controls chemical
reaction rates and heat transfer within the LEZ, and how this in turn impacts
instream water quality and downstream delivery of solutes and
energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study will generate knowledge that is useful
for the management of dam-regulated rivers. Texas has the most dams amongst all
states with many more planned as part of a recent state bill that allocates
resources for water infrastructure. It is critical that the trade-offs and
potential effects of river-regulation on LEZ processes, groundwater and instream
water quality, and river ecology be understood. This has seldom been studied and
this investigation will help fill this knowledge gap. Further, the study will
train the next generation of hydrologic engineers and scientists and increase
public awareness of the importance of river-groundwater interactions,
particularly within the context of regulated rivers. Students from K-12, BS,
MA/MS, to PhD level, and K-12 teachers will participate in the research. Field
trips to the site will be organized for K-12 students. Outreach lectures will be
presented to the public.