* 1344803
* SCH: INT: Collaborative Research: A Self-Adaptive Personalized Behavior Change System for Adolescent Preventive Healthcare
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2018
* James Lester, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2018
* USD 984,818.00

The majority of morbidity and mortality during adolescence is preventable and
related to behaviors such as substance use and vehicle-related injuries. Most
adolescents visit a healthcare provider once a year, providing an ideal
opportunity to integrate behavioral health screening into clinical care.
Although the majority of adolescent health problems are amenable to behavioral
intervention, few health information technology interventions have been
integrated into adolescent care. With complementary theoretical advances
(social-cognitive theories of behavior change) and technology advances
(intelligent narrative-centered learning environments, user modeling, and
machine learning), the field is now well positioned to design health behavior
change systems that can realize significant impacts on behavior change for
adolescent preventive health.

Computationally-enabled models of behavior change hold significant promise for
adolescent healthcare. The objective of the proposed research is to design,
implement, and investigate INSPIRE, a self-adaptive personalized behavior change
system for adolescent preventive health. INSPIRE will utilize a social-cognitive
theory of behavior change built around a tight feedback loop in which a
narrative-centered behavior change environment will produce improved behaviors
in patients, and the resulting patient outcome data will be used by a
reinforcement learning optimization system to learn refined computational
behavior change models. With a focus on risky behaviors and an emphasis on
substance use, adolescents will interact with INSPIRE to develop an experiential
understanding of the dynamics and consequences of their substance use decisions.
A unique feature of INSPIRE afforded by recent advances in machine learning will
be its ability to optimize health behavior change at both the individual and
population levels. At the individual level, INSPIRE will utilize a patient
behavior model to personalize its behavior change narratives for individual
adolescents. It will customize interactions based on an adolescent's goals and
affective models. At the population level, INSPIRE will utilize reinforcement
learning to adapt its narrative generation system to systematically increase its
ability to improve two types of outcomes: behavior change and self-efficacy. The
project will culminate with an experiment conducted with a fully implemented
version of INSPIRE at outpatient clinics within the UC San Francisco Department
of Pediatrics, Benioff Children's Hospital.

It is anticipated that INSPIRE interventions will yield two types of outcomes:
1) improved health behavior through significant reductions in adolescent risky
behavior, relative to standard of care; and 2) increased self-efficacy with
respect to adolescents' ability to make good decisions about their health
behaviors, relative to standard of care. Designed for natural integration into
clinic workflow, interoperability with EHR and patient portal systems, and
security and privacy requirements, INSPIRE will report patient behavior change
summaries to healthcare providers. Through multi-platform deployments supporting
laptop, desktop, tablet, and mobile computing devices, INSPIRE will serve as an
empowering tool for adolescents, making them full participants in their own
wellbeing. It will also enable researchers to run behavior analytics to
investigate which properties of alternate interventions contribute most
effectively to behavior change outcomes. Going forward, it is anticipated that
INSPIRE will provide a testbed for a broad range of behavior change research and
serve as the foundation for next-generation personalized preventive healthcare
through computationally-enabled behavior change.