* 1344904
* SBIR Phase I:  Fully Printed Single Walled Carbon Nanotube Thin Film Transistor Backplanes
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Huaping Li, Atom Nanotechnology
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 12/31/2014
* USD 179,997.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project aims to develop printing
technologies for fully printed single-walled carbon nanotube (SWCNT) thin-film
transistor (TFT) backplanes by aerosol jet printing ultra-pure semiconducting
SWCNT ink and gold nanoparticle ink as channel materials and electrodes on
flexible substrates, respectively. The new trend in display products is driving
the needs of printed TFT backplanes. This project will leverage currently
developed aerosol jet printing technologies to implement fully printed SWCNT TFT
backplane, utilizing the innovative direct-write and aerodynamic focusing
technology to produce high resolution features down to 10microns on non-planar
substrates. The printing technology also reduces the manufacturing cost and
environmental impact, and increases fabrication size with high throughput. The
advance of ultra-pure semiconducting SWCNTs has remarkably improved the
performances of SWCNT TFTs to now be superior to other mature and available
transistors made of polysilicon, amorphous silicon, metal oxide and organic
materials.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is fully printed SWCNT
TFT backplanes of low operation voltage, fast refreshing speed and high
contrasting currents that will open opportunities to applications and products
in flat-panel displays, and will impact a plethora of low cost consumer
electronics products like mobiles, GPS, PDA and TVs. Especially, fully printed
SWCNT TFT backplanes on flexible substrates can expedite shifting display
markets to printed flexible devices. Using ultra-pure semiconducting SWCNTs as
active materials, the company's TFTs exhibit transparency, flexibility,
environmental stability and mechanical strength. The fully printed SWNCT TFT
backplanes will overcome many limitations current display backplanes.