* 1344290
* INSPIRE Track 1: Exploring New Route of Optically Mediated Self-Assembly: Final Material Properties Determine Its Structures
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* A Alivisatos, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 08/31/2017
* USD 800,000.00

This INSPIRE award is partially funded by the Electronic and Photonic Materials
Program and the Solid State and Materials Chemistry Program in the Division of
Materials Research in the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences;
and the Nanomanufacturing Program in the Division of Civil, Mechanical and
Manufacturing Innovation in the Directorate for
Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: Structure-property
relationships have long driven the discovery of novel materials. Optical
metamaterials, a composite through structural design to achieve unprecedented
materials properties, e.g., negative index of refraction and cloaking, introduce
a new dimension in materials science. Metamaterials research has conventionally
taken a "structures-determine-properties" approach. Material properties using
rationally designed symmetry-breaking structures that can be realized by top-
down fabrication methods such as lithography result in strongly anisotropic but
small-scale metamaterials. Conventional self-assembly approaches, which may
offer advantages of scalability and cost effectiveness, often result in simple
structures with high degree of symmetry because complex and symmetry-broken
structures are usually not thermodynamically favorable. In this project,
combining material chemistry with optical physics, the investigators aim to
overcome aforementioned critical challenges by exploring a path-breaking new
approach of "properties-determine-structures" for scalable synthesis of a new
class of metamaterials with unique properties, or properties not found in
nature. Through the study of the symmetry effects of nanocomposites and models
of plasmon-mediated self-assemblies, the team is developing new feedback
strategies for controlling self-assembly processes. Plasmon is collective
oscillation of electrons on metal surfaces. Using such autonomous feedback
mechanisms, the final material properties dictate the material structural
evolution during self-assembly, thereby achieving the desired complex symmetry-
breaking structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical Description: This
interdisciplinary project brings together researchers from optics and chemistry
to develop a revolutionary self-assembly route to large-scale synthesis of
materials with complex symmetries that go far beyond materials fabricated or
synthesized through conventional techniques. Light itself is used to guide the
assembly into the desired structures. The team integrates this research project
with education activities. For instance, the nanochemistry, optical physics,
fabrication, optical/chemical characterization, and computational techniques
developed in this project provide a multidisciplinary setting for training
students to be next generation of leaders in science and engineering. This
collaborative project aims to reshape materials research in both optical physics
and material chemistry with a profound impact on a broad range of applications
in manufacturing, energy technology and health care.