* 1344024
* INSPIRE Track 1: Arizona-NOAO Temporal Analysis and Response to Events System (ANTARES)
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* John Kececioglu, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 08/31/2017
* USD 733,334.00

This INSPIRE award is partially funded by the Special Projects program of the
Division of Astronomical Sciences and the Office of Multidisciplinary
Activities, both in the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences, and
by the Information Technology Research and Information Integration and
Informatics programs in the Division of Information and Intelligent Systems in
the Directorate for Computer and Information Science and
Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will construct a software
infrastructure for filtering and annotating alerts generated by astronomical
time-domain surveys, where an alert is a change in an astronomical source when
compared with a reference image. Current and future surveys are capable of
producing enormous numbers of such alerts: in particular, the planned Large
Synoptic Survey Telescope project could produce a million or more every single
night for a decade. Within this veritable flood will be a small number of rare
and unusual sources with short lifetimes that must be recognized in real time,
or else the opportunity for thorough study will be
lost.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will meet that need: the system will
include a core flow that quickly annotates alerts with already known details,
creating a useful database in its very first pass, followed by a method to
derive broad characteristic features that can be used to filter out and divert
those events not in need of rapid follow-up. Advanced, more computationally
intensive processing can be applied to those that pass the filters, including
multiple paths that allow users to select for their particular interests. The
final product for this prototype is those alerts that are the most unusual. The
system is designed to be flexible, so no alerts are lost and the stream can be
tapped by external users at any point for their own processing. Use of the
Arizona Machine Experimentation Lab allows for model construction and testing,
and for creation of novel, perhaps more efficient, filtering processes.
Throughout, decisions are completely driven by astronomical
expertise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study of known but rare objects will
transform fields ranging from stellar evolution to growth of active galactic
nuclei to the fundamental structure of the Universe, while the discovery and
characterization of previously unknown objects could create entirely new fields.
Although the prototype will focus on the rarest of objects, ultimately the
built-in flexibility and community-generated filtering processes will enable
finding items of specific interest to any user. In addition, a system that can
take alerts, aggregate ancillary information, and filter to identify specific
cases, will be of general use in many fields, from epidemiology to network
protection to homeland security and beyond, wherever rapid analysis of new
events properly associated with existing information is critical.