* 1344772
* SCH: INT: Mapping the Cardiac Acousteome: Biosensing and Computational Modeling Applied to Smart Diagnosis and Monitoring of Heart Conditions
* CSE,IIS
* 12/01/2013,11/30/2018
* Andreas Andreou, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 11/30/2018
* USD 1,980,528.00

The goal of the project is to develop fundamental science, knowledge, tools, and
technologies for smart diagnosis and monitoring of heart conditions based on
automated cardiac auscultation. An innovative wearable multimodal acoustic array
(the StethoVest) is proposed. This sensory array localizes and separates
acoustic broadband sources in space by measuring spatial and temporal
derivatives of the acoustic field. Using this StethoVest, first-of-their-kind
maps of the cardiac acousteome are generated. These maps include not only 4D (3D
space and time) measurements of heart sounds; they are accompanied by high-
fidelity hemoacoustic simulations that delineate cause-and-effect, as well as
simulation-guided source-identification algorithms that provide unprecedented
diagnostic sensitivity and specificity. The simulations take cardiac imaging
data as input, and simulate cardiac blood flow as well as the associated heart
sounds. The latter part of this four-year project focuses on investigating the
physics of aortic valve murmurs as well as StethoVest based screening for
hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Annual national
expenditure on heart disease exceeds half a trillion dollars with over half a
million deaths attributed to this disease each year. The proposed research
leverages emerging capabilities in biosensing, computational modeling, imaging
and signal processing, to produce a diagnostic technology that moves us away
from management of heart disease that is mostly reactive, expensive and
hospital-centric, towards an approach that is smart, proactive, patient-centric
and cost-effective. The sound inventory generated from continuous, automated
monitoring and interpretation of heart sounds has the potential to generate
unprecedented understanding of human physiology. The project promotes
interdisciplinary education and workforce development through involvement of
undergraduates, graduate students, and postdocs in the research, development of
courses and clinical training tools, and local and international outreach
activities.