* 1344280
* INSPIRE Track 1: Earthcasting fluvial systems:  Physical, ecological, and biogeochemical dynamics
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Mark Meerschaert, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Holly Barnard
* 08/31/2018
* USD 1,000,000.00

This INSPIRE award is partially funded by &lt;the Hydrologic Sciences Program in
the Division of Earth Sciences in the Directorate for Geosciences, the
Geomorphology and Land Use Dyanmics Program in the Division of Earth Sciences in
the Directorate for Geosciences, the Ecosystems cluster in the Division of
Environmental Biology in the Directorate for Biological Sciences. Most natural
systems are structured by diverse processes that operate over a wide range of
scales, but current understanding is derived primarily from controlled
investigations of isolated subsystems with suppressed complexity. As a result,
available models for landscape and ecosystem dynamics consider only a very
limited range of processes and scales, and this incomplete understanding sharply
limits our ability to predict future system trajectories. The project team will
develop a general trans-disciplinary basis for Earthcasting coupled system
dynamics by providing the theory, models, and data needed to relate local
dynamics of water, soils, sediments, cells, carbon, and nutrients to large-scale
geomorphological, ecological, and biogeochemical outcomes. The project team will
explore the underlying structure and connectivity of river networks to provide a
common basis for linking physical, ecological, and biogeochemical dynamics in
watersheds. This work will exploit concurrent advances in theory for stochastic
transport and dynamical processes on networks to develop methods for
probabilistic prediction across scales. The resulting holistic, multi-scale
simulations will be used to design data collection strategies that better
consider the underlying system dynamics. By advancing general theory for
anomalous transport on complex networks and partnering with diverse data
collection efforts, this project will develop both the theoretical and
observational basis for Earthcasting. The research effort will be linked with
integrative, trans-disciplinary education in earth, ecosystem, and
sustainability science. The project team will develop a cross-cutting course on
fluvial system dynamics and related stand-alone educational modules on
geomorphological and biogeochemical processes, and deliver them via an
innovative web-based, multi-institutional format. Subsequently this material
will be developed into a massive open on-line course (MOOC) focused on
Earthcasting. The project includes eight international research partners from
seven countries including Spain, Canada, the United Kingdom and Austria.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This effort will improve capability to predict earth and
ecosystem dynamics. Such Earthcasting capability is needed to achieve long-term
sustainability of land, water, and ecosystems. The central contribution of the
proposed research will be to determine how basic processes interact to control
important outcomes in river and floodplain environments. This effort focuses
specifically on river systems because they support extensive human populations
and are tremendously important to storage, processing, and export of carbon,
sediments, and nutrients. This project will develop the essential underpinnings
of Earthcasting and work with leading data collection efforts in the U.S. and
Europe to translate these fundamental advances into practical management
strategies. The project team will also use these scientific gains as the basis
for educational programs delivered both through virtual courses and live
outreach activities.