* 1344514
* EAGER:   Preliminary Investigation of the Stott and Timmermann Hypothesis that Hydrothermal Carbon Fluxes Influenced Glacial/Interglacial DELTA 14C Variability
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2014
* Lowell Stott, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 06/30/2014
* USD 36,800.00

A large number of studies have sought explanations for glacial/interglacial
atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2) cycles via ocean processes that transfer CO2
to/from the deep ocean. While research continues to pursue such mechanisms,
recent studies have introduced new observations that require consideration of
geologic processes as well. One recent hypothesis that incorporates geologic
processes (Stott and Timmermann, 2011) posited that changes in ocean
temperatures, which are fixed at high latitudes, regulate CO2-hydrate stability
at intermediate depths in the Pacific Ocean and in doing so, modulate the
accumulation and release of CO2-rich fluids that accumulate within the sediments
that blanket hydrothermal systems. However, without the availability of cores
from the sites near known hydrothermal systems in the western Pacific, it has
not been possible to adequately test this hypothesis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
EAGER project, led by the faculty member at the University of Southern
California who co-authored the concept paper, will fund collaboration with a
team of German scientists to collect sediment cores from the western tropical
Pacific, near Mindinao. These materials should enable testing of the
controversial hydrothermal CO2 hypothesis. If a geologic source for the old
carbon signal could be identified and conclusively linked to the water column
signals, it could potentially transform the way we think of the connections
between the solid Earth and climate. Funding supports participation in the
research expedition for two members of the principal investigator's research
group, along with generation of key preliminary data from the cores.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts include international collaborations and
partial support of a graduate student at the University of Southern California.