* 1344363
* Industrialization of Biology:  A Roadmap to Accelerate Advanced Manufacturing of Chemicals, 500 5th Street, N.W., Washington, DC
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,02/28/2015
* India Hook-Barnard, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Friedrich Srienc
* 02/28/2015
* USD 300,000.00

1344363&lt;br/&gt;Friedman, Douglas&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The National Research
Council of the National Academy of Sciences, through its Board on Chemical
Sciences and Technology and its Board on Life Sciences, will identify key gaps
in knowledge, tools, techniques and systems needed to realize the potential for
advanced manufacturing via biological systems, using manufacturing of chemicals
as the case study. An ad hoc committee will develop a roadmap of necessary
advances in basic science and engineering capabilities needed to realize
advanced manufacturing of chemicals using biological systems. Working at the
interface of synthetic chemistry, metabolic engineering, molecular biology, and
synthetic biology, the committee will identify key technical goals for this
next-generation chemical manufacturing, identify the knowledge gaps which must
be filled to meet those goals, and targets and timelines for achieving them. It
will also consider the skills necessary to accomplish the roadmap goals, and
what training opportunities are required to produce the cadre of skilled
scientists and engineers needed. While focused on industrial manufacturing of
chemicals, it is anticipated that the roadmap challenges will advance tools and
techniques that are also required for new developments in health, energy, and
environmental applications.