* 1344203
* INSPIRE Track 1: Condensed Phases and Transitions of Cellular Patterns
* BIO,MCB
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2018
* Jennifer Ross, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 09/30/2018
* USD 859,263.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;This INSPIRE award is partially funded by the Cellular
Dynamics and Function cluster in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biology
in the Directorate for Biological Sciences, and the Biomechanics and
Mechanobiology Program in the Division of Civil, Mechanical, and Manufacturing
Innovation in the Directorate for Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: The scientific goal of this project is to discover the universal physical
laws governing the organization of proteins and organelles inside of cells.
Materials from the physical world (e.g. water, metal) exist in phases (e.g.
solid, liquid, gas) that reflect the lowest energy, or equilibrium state. By
contrast, biological matter contains components that drive them far from
equilibrium and the rules governing such materials are not understood. Unlike
water that can be solid, liquid, or gas, biological matter is active with
nanoscale motors (protein enzymes) that use an energy source to push and pull
the components, in this case the fibers that form the skeleton of the cell
(actin and microtubule filaments). Like typical equilibrium phases, the
organization of such super active biological systems depend on the
concentration, pressure, and volume that the researchers will methodically
adjust in their experiments. The researchers will uncover the "phase diagram" (a
diagram describing the shape, activity, or state) of biological matter using
purified biological proteins in controlled experimental systems. The research is
important to discover how the cell rapidly reorganizes its interior body to
respond to its exterior environment, go through cell division, or differentiate
into a new cell type. The project will also shed new light on the physics
descriptions of systems that use energy, which is still an open, ever evolving
challenge for modern physics. It has broad positive possibilities for discovery
in both life science and the physical sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: Science is based on laws and scientists uncover these laws based on
experiments, discovery, analysis, and understanding results. The results are
typically conclusions that benefit humanity (society) and the natural world we
live in. The research project seeks to uncover and establish the laws for the
fundamental workings of cells, which form the basis of tissues in plants,
animals, and humans. Understanding the primary basis of how cells develop and
organize can have broad implications for agriculture, energy, and technology.
The positive national possibilities of this research are endless yet measurable.
The researchers performing this work are two qualified women in physics who take
an active role in physics education and mentoring of students from high school,
college, graduate, postdoctoral, and professional education for K-12 teachers
and college professors. The researchers train these groups through lectures and
hosting students in their laboratories. As two women, the researchers are role
models for women and minorities in the sciences. Further, the researchers
endeavor to bring science to the public through public lectures, Op-Ed articles,
social media networks.