* 1344300
* INSPIRE Track 1: Data-Fusion Imaging Observatory for Space and Solid Earth
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2018
* Adam Schultz, SRI International
* Continuing Grant
* Carrie E. Black
* 09/30/2018
* USD 799,716.00

This INSPIRE award is partially funded by the Aeronomy and Magnetospheric
Physics Programs in the Division of Atmospheric and Geospace Sciences in the
Directorate for Geoscience, and the Earthscope Program in the Division of Earth
Sciences in the Directorate for Geoscience.

The investigators will develop a self-consistent data-fusion algorithm that will
simultaneously image the ground conductivity and ionospheric parameters based on
magnetic field measurements and incoherent scatter radar measurements. The solar
wind, magnetosphere, ionosphere, and atmosphere are coupled to Earth?s crust and
mantle through electromagnetic induction, with geomagnetically induced currents
(GICs) deep into the Earth. However, current assumptions and simplifications
limit the interpretation of observations. Ionospheric currents are derived from
ground-level magnetic perturbations without knowledge of the conductivity in the
crust and mantle. Conversely, variations in conductivity of the crust and mantle
assume that the ionosphere radiates a plane electromagnetic wave that drives
currents through the varied ground-conductivity distribution. The source-
strength is factored out of the analysis by forming the impedance from the
magnetic and electric fields measured at ground level. The apparently
inconsistent assumptions have been reconciled through statistical methods, but
the effects of these assumptions are unknown. Near Fairbanks, under the auroral
oval, is a multibeam incoherent scatter radar (Poker Flat Incoherent Scatter
Radar (PFISR), with a multispectral all sky imager (ASI), and an imaging Fabry
Perot interferometer. The National Geoelectromagnetic Facility (NGF) is a
repository of magnetotelluric (MT) sensors that will include EarthScope?s
Transportable Array to be deployed in Alaska. The combined data sets will allow
the first testing of the fundamental paradigm concerning the source of ground-
electromagnetic perturbations---a paradigm that has been challenged by a growing
number of controversial papers identifying electromagnetic precursors to
earthquakes, and that does not normally account for magnetic permeability. This
fundamental paradigm also governs the GIC hazard, which, for the first time,
will be analyzed with full knowledge of the ground conductivity and ionospheric
current. The data-fusion algorithm to be developed will numerically solve the
geoelectromagnetic induction problem and determine if the full suite of ground
and ionospheric measurements can be rendered consistent, and with what accuracy.
Any deviations will be investigated and their physical cause sought, thereby
opening the door to new discoveries. Assuming that any inconsistencies can be
resolved, the data will be fused to produce time-evolving three-dimensional
images of auroral arcs, including the full three-dimensional current system that
connects them to the magnetosphere through field-aligned currents. The first
three-dimensional view of the electrical conductivity structure of the Alaskan
lithosphere and upper mantle will also be produced, along with a two-dimensional
transect of the Alaska margin, through the cordillera, and into cratonic North
America beyond. The scientific results will guide development of an empirical
model for the GIC hazard by identifying the needed descriptors of ground
conductivity and geomagnetic activity. A postdoc and a graduate student from a
traditionally underrepresented group will be trained in interdisciplinary
research through their involvement with the project.