* 1344255
* Meeting: SICB 2014 Adaptation or developmental constraint? Uniting evolutionary theory and empirical studies of phenotypic plasticity in Austin, TX.
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2014
* Haruka Wada, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Tamra Mendelson
* 08/31/2014
* USD 14,995.00

On every set of genes in every individual (the genotype), the environment exerts
its influence to shape observable traits (or phenotypes); this is phenotypic
plasticity. Recently, the field of phenotypic plasticity has been split into two
subfields: the first is a focus for evolutionary biologists whose goal is to
understand how phenotypic plasticity evolved over time, and the other is a focus
for physiologists whose goal is to identify the physiological mechanisms
underlying the gene-environment interaction. This symposium has three goals
aimed at bridging these two subfields. First, the meeting will bring together
researchers from the two subfields who otherwise do not cross paths to discuss
how their respective theoretical framework can be tested experimentally and how
empirical data from one group can give insights to the other. This will help
advance our understanding of the costs, benefits, and limitations of phenotypic
plasticity and to identify future direction of this field. The second goal is to
foster interaction and future collaboration between researchers from the two
subfields to bring new approaches and define new directions. The third goal is
to encourage participation from early career scientists (e.g., undergraduate and
graduate students and postdoctoral researchers) and scientists from
underrepresented groups to provide them with an opportunity to receive feedback
from senior scientists and identify future mentors. The sequence of talks,
alternating between evolutionary biologists and physiologists, and inclusion of
designated time for questions and discussion are designed to further cross-
disciplinary interactions. Abstracts from all the talks and posters will be
publicly available, and papers from the symposium talks will be published in the
Integrative and Comparative Biology journal to ensure the dissemination of the
symposium.