* 1344178
* INSPIRE Track 1:   Sensing and Computing with Oscillating Chemical Reactions
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2019
* Steven Levitan, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 08/31/2019
* USD 700,000.00

This INSPIRE award is co-funded by the Polymers Program of the Division of
Materials Research and the Software and Hardware Foundations Program of the
Division of Computing and Communications Foundations, with additional
contributions from the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities of the Directorate
for Mathematical and Physical
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The aim of this project is to lay the foundations for new
research directions in "materials that compute". To achieve this goal the work
will focus on developing integrated sensing, computing and responsive systems by
using non-linear oscillating chemical reactions to perform spatio-temporal
processing and recognition tasks. The specific materials that will be considered
for these tasks are polymer gels undergoing the oscillatory Belousov-Zhabotinsky
(BZ) reaction; these materials are flexible and stimuli-responsive and encompass
distinct oscillating domains. The temporal coherence of the BZ reactions in
these gels will be harnessed to perform associative processing between sets of
stored or learned patterns and input stimuli in the form of patterns of light,
pressure, or chemistry. The effective resonance between the input patterns and
the oscillators will be used as the basic computation paradigm. In effect, the
aim of the studies will be to "let the physics do the computing". Hence, the
research will enable the design of systems where the behavior of dynamic
attractors will make possible rapid convergence to the solution. Consequently,
these materials systems will respond to their environment in programmable ways.
The development of these new materials systems -- which are capable of
autonomously sensing, communicating, and responding to environmental changes --
will provide an opportunity for new interactions between the materials and
computer science communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The overarching goal of this work is to transform
computing platforms away from desktops or even hand-held mobile appliances
fabricated from a large collection of heterogeneous parts to a computational
"fabric" built with new material systems and implementing new computational
paradigms. The ideal computing material would be lightweight and mechanically
compliant, and would sense and respond to human touch and motion in order to
perform a level of computing that will enrich the lives of its users.
Furthermore, the material would perform these "sense, compute and respond"
functions in a relatively autonomous manner, enabling it to operate without
connections to an external power supply. This work seeks to achieve these
objectives by investigating the co-evolution of energy-transducing, soft
materials, such as oscillating chemical gels, and modes of computation, such as
non-Boolean associative processing, which can exploit these materials
characteristics. The impact of this work will be to nucleate a new field of
"materials that compute"; that is, systems where the computer and the material
are one and the same entity. The ability to create smart materials that can
sense the environment, process information and react to complex stimuli should
enable new systems that will interface with humans to provide tactile,
temperature, and photonic inputs to smart clothing, robotic manipulators and
possibly prosthetic limbs.