* 1344222
* INSPIRE Track 1: Programming Digital Materials: Additive Assembly of Integrated Electronics
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2014,06/30/2017
* Neil Gershenfeld, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 06/30/2017
* USD 798,977.00

This INSPIRE award is partially funded by the Interdisciplinary Research Program
in the Division of Civil, Mechanical and Manufacturing Innovation in the
Directorate for Engineering, the Computer systems Research Program in the
Division of Computer and Network Systems in the Directorate for Computer and
Information Science and Engineering, and the Robust Intelligence Program in the
Division of Information and Intelligent Systems in the Directorate for Computer
and Information Science and Engineering.

Integrated circuits are produced in billion-dollar chip fabs, which require many
months of processing to go from a design to a chip. The goal of this proposal is
to accomplish that in an afternoon, with a table-top process. Rather than
etching or depositing electronic materials, as is done today, it is based on
assembling digital materials. These use a discrete set of components, reversibly
joined in a discrete set of relative positions and orientations. Those
attributes allow positions to be determined by the parts, errors in their
placement to be detected and corrected, dissimilar materials to be joined, and
them to be disassembled rather than disposed. A conducting and insulating part
type will be used to replace multilayer printed circuit boards, connectors and
cabling for three-dimensional interconnect, inductors and capacitors, striplines
and antennas. A resistive part type will be added for producing passive
components, semiconducting part types will be added for active components, and
magnetic and flexural part types for electromechanical components.

This project will develop prototypes of the parts, the processes to produce
them, the assemblers to place them, and the software tools to design with them.
The research will progress in stages of size and complexity, reproducing the
history of integrated electronics. First will be the equivalent of small-scale
integration, using tens of parts with a 100 micron feature size. A test case at
this level of integration will be assembling a radiofrequency matching network.
Then will come medium-scale integration, using hundreds of parts with a 10
micron feature size. A goal here will be assembling a ring oscillator and binary
counter. Finally, large-scale integration will use thousands of parts with a 1
micron feature size, with a goal of assembling a microprocessor. Computer-
controlled manufacturing has progressed from subtractive to additive processes;
this research roadmap will introduce the discrete assembly and disassembly of
functional digital materials, to code the construction of complete systems in an
integrated process.