* 1344187
* INSPIRE Track 1::From population ecology to physics and back: understanding spatiotemporal synchrony using Ising class phase transitions in noisy dissipative models
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2018
* Alan Hastings, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 09/30/2018
* USD 600,000.00

This INSPIRE award is partially funded by the Population and Community Ecology
Program in the Division of Environmental Biology in the Directorate for
Biological Sciences and by the Emerging Frontiers Program in the Directorate for
Biological Sciences, by the Condensed Matter and Materials Theory Program in the
Division of Materials Research and Office of Multidisciplinary Activities in the
Directorate for Mathematics and Physical Sciences, and by the Office of
Integrative Activities.

Spatial and temporal variability are common across many areas of study ranging
from physics to ecology. In all areas, it is important to understand dynamics
across space: under what conditions are dynamics synchronous across space and
when is there a lack of spatial coherence? Ecologists have struggled to
understand spatial synchrony for over a century, in part because lack of
synchrony often promotes persistence of populations. Within physics, studies of
magnetic materials or of crystal structures have posed similar questions about
the coherence of states across space. This project will explain how broad-scale
synchrony can arise from local couplings by mapping relevant ecological models
to an equilibrium model developed in physics. The interdisciplinary team of
researchers has preliminary data establishing a correspondence between
ecological non-equilibrium models and the equilibrium properties of physical
models. Research will build on these preliminary results to confirm the presence
of phase transitions for a wide variety of systems, thus providing ways to unify
approaches for understanding the dynamics of synchrony. The primary tools will
be computer simulations that are complemented by analytic approximations that
provide understanding of transitions. This combination will both provide a deep
understanding of synchrony in ecological systems that is not model specific, and
produce new models of interest within physics, thus benefitting both
disciplines.

This novel interdisciplinary project will contribute basic, new theory to the
disparate fields of ecology and condensed matter physics by developing a basic
understanding of the dynamics of synchrony at different spatial scales.
Understanding of the emergence of spatially and temporally synchronous behavior
in agroecological systems could have tremendous impact on effective management
of plant and animal diseases, control of pests, agricultural strategies, and
ultimately on food security. It is very rare that a theoretical project spanning
two disparate disciplines has such potential to address questions of food
security, providing novel ways to address a problem that will grow in importance
with time. The researchers plan to train students in interdisciplinary
approaches and will hold workshops both at the National Institute for
Mathematical and Biological Synthesis and the Santa Fe Institute to provide
broad dissemination of the approaches developed.