* 1344296
* INSPIRE Track 1:   Aurorasaurus - Citizen Scientists Experiencing the Extremes of Space Weather
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2013,12/31/2017
* Michelle Hall, New Mexico Consortium
* Continuing Grant
* Irfan S. Azeem
* 12/31/2017
* USD 998,957.00

This INSPIRE award is partially funded by the Space Weather Research Program in
the Division of Atmospheric and Geospace Sciences in the Directorate for
Geoscience; the Human Centered Computing Program in the Division of Information
&amp; Intelligent Systems in the Directorate for Computer &amp; Information
Science &amp; Engineering; and the Advancing Informal STEM Learning Program in
the Division of Research on Learning in Formal and Informal Settings in the
Directorate for Education and Human Resources. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a
two-year inter-disciplinary project pursuing tightly coupled goals within human
centered computing, citizen science, and space weather research. The aurora
borealis of the northern hemisphere and its twin, the aurora australis of the
southern hemisphere, are among the most beautiful and awe-inspiring of natural
phenomena. They are a manifestation of the interaction of solar plasma with the
Earth's atmosphere, magnetic field, and surface, the combined effect of which is
termed space weather. As the aurora is a visible manifestation of space weather,
observations of aurora are potentially a means of forecasting its catastrophic
extremes. Capitalizing on public curiosity of normally intangible plasma
physics, the objective of this project is to create a system for collecting,
analyzing, interpreting, and redistributing data on the dynamics and evolution
of auroral events using crowd-sourced ad hoc Tweets and more purposeful postings
from citizen scientists. The current solar maximum is the first since the
emergence of the ubiquitous use of social media that has changed - and will
continue to change - our interactions with computers and the world. Building on
a demonstrated prototype system, the project is poised to take advantage of the
approach in 2013-2014 of the maximum in the current 11-year solar activity
cycle, with several high activity years following. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
team combines expertise in space weather science, human-computer interface
design, and informal science education to realize each of its intertwined goals.
&lt;br/&gt;1) For space science, the contribution will be a totally new data
source for auroral observations and the potential for real-time, higher-
resolution space weather forecasts that are a critical step towards transforming
our ability to protect and manage critical infrastructure susceptible to
interruption and damage. With crowd-sourced data and user contributions, it is
possible to achieve the increased density of high quality data needed for
improved predictions. State of the art human-computer interfaces, for data
upload, analysis, and interpretation that make participation easy, intuitive,
and rewarding, will be developed to ensure the high quality data critical to
forecasting.&lt;br/&gt;2) For the field of human-centered computing, the
creation of new frameworks will transform our understanding of how the emergent
processes of crowd-sourced knowledge and labor come together for scientific
discovery under the structures of networked computer platforms. Specifically,
the stickiest problem in making crowd-sourced media actionable is the
verification of the messages received at a high enough tolerance level for
organizational decision-making. A transformative approach will be adopted,
employing verification techniques within a community of active participants who
will also engage the data, offering human intelligence in collaboration with
machine intelligence.&lt;br/&gt;3) The education approach is innovative and
potentially transformative in its use of social media to explore the beautiful
and mysterious aurora, through which participants in a dynamic social network
will come to understand the relevance of space weather to their lives.
Intellectually engaging resources, research projects, and motivational
incentives for participation will help build a community of citizen scientists
committed to advancing knowledge of space weather.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
low-cost, citizen science system for improved forecasting of geomagnetic storms
has the potential to transform the way space weather prediction is done and
considering the enormous potential cost to society of damage due to such storms
would be cost-effective. The project will help enhance public understanding of
this little known phenomenon so that citizens are aware and prepared to respond
to the effects of space weather. Resulting new understanding of effective
approaches to citizen science and the impact of human computer interactions on
motivations and success at learning will have value to a wealth of other ongoing
citizen science programs.