* 1344133
* INSPIRE Track 1: Following the Carbon Trail in Planetary Formation
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Geoffrey Blake, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Faith Vilas
* 08/31/2017
* USD 799,868.00

This INSPIRE award is partially funded by the Special Projects program of the
Division of Astronomical Sciences and the Office of Multidisciplinary
Activities, both in the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences, and
by the the Petrology and Geochemistry Program in the Division of Earth Science
in the Directorate for Geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project combines
cutting-edge research from two intellectually distinct areas (astronomy and
geochemistry) in order to significantly advance understanding of how terrestrial
planets form and develop a biosphere. The main goal focuses on how dominant
carbon-bearing molecules in the solar nebula were incorporated into the
primordial Earth and how they were geologically cycled between the planet?s
interior and atmosphere. This work will constrain models of carbon delivery to
the Earth by combining astronomical observations of planet-forming disks (with
ALMA and Keck observatories), laboratory experiments involving molten lava, and
astrochemical modeling of carbon-bearing compounds in the solar nebula.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The astronomers will use the Atacama Large
Millimeter/Submillimeter ARRAY (ALMA) and Keck Observatory to obtain radio and
infrared spectra, respectively, of carbon-bearing molecules in circumstellar
disks to measure how the carbon budget is allocated between molecules in the gas
and solid phase, and how much of it is destroyed (or chemically reduced) by
starlight irradiation. In parallel, the geochemists will conduct experiments in
order to better understand how carbon cycles between the interior and surface,
which plays a large role in maintaining Earth?s biosphere. Their experiments
focus on the chemical exchange between material from the surrounding planet-
forming environment and the molten silicate surface of the young Earth. The
experiments will subject samples made from carbonaceous chondrites (from Allende
and Homestead meteorites) to varying temperatures and pressures and then measure
solubility and partitioning of carbon. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers
will work with graduate students and postdoctoral scholars in their research,
and with teachers in the K-12 system through introductory courses and web-
interface tools.