* 1344201
* INSPIRE Track 1: UDiscoverIt: Integrating Expert Knowledge, Constraint-Based Reasoning and Learning to Accelerate Materials Discovery
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Bart Selman, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2017
* USD 699,986.00

This INSPIRE award is partially funded by the Information Integration and
Informatics Program in the Division of Information and Intelligent Systems in
the Directorate for Computer and Information Science and Engineering and the
Solid State and Materials Chemistry Program in the Division of Materials
Research and the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities in the Directorate for
Mathematical and Physical Sciences.

The past two decades have seen a rapid development in experimental high-
throughput experimentation (HTE) methodologies that would be extremely valuable
for (i) the discovery of new applied materials with high complexity and (ii) the
generation of deep understanding of structure/function, structure/activity and
structure/performance relationships. Especially high photon flux X-ray
techniques have enormous transformative potential in materials discovery. The
research team leverages the data being collected by the Cornell High Energy
Synchrotron Source (CHESS) and at Caltechs Joint Center for Artificial
Photosynthesis (JCAP). While high-throughput inorganic library synthesis is
relatively well-established, high-throughput structure determination, which is
at the heart of the proposed research, is in its infancy. X-ray diffraction is
well-suited for rapidly collecting information on the atomic arrangements in an
inorganic sample, but the data do not immediately reveal a crystal structure.
The development of data analysis, data mining and interpretation methodologies
has not kept pace with the development of experimental capability. Consequently,
data acquired in a week can take many months of traditional analysis by
researchers. Automation and machine-intelligent processing of the data are
absolutely necessary to maximise the impact of complex multidimensional
datasets.

This project addresses this state of affairs head-on; It investigates
computational techniques that allow dealing with the multiparameter space
associated with HTE structure determination of materials libraries, through
constraint guided search adn optimization, statistical machine learning, and
inference techniques in combination with direct human input into the process.
Anticipated advances include new probabilistic methods and computational
discovery tools that integrate soft and hard constraints that capture the
complex background knowledge from the underlying physics and chemistry of
materials with insights gained from high throughput data analytics and machine
learning. If the project succeeds in achieving the anticipated enormous
efficiency gains in complex structure determination, it could have have a
transformative impact on materials discovery and complex solid state chemistry
and physics.

The ability to reduce complex materials dicovery and optimization from
timeframes of months or years to hours or days could lead to a paradigm shift in
the development of products benefiting society, with technological advances as
well as commercial impact on energy, sustainability, health and quality of life.
The planned free dissemination of data sets and computational tools to the
larger scientific community is likely to enhance the broader impacts of the
project. The project facilitates increased interdisciplinary interactions
between computer scientists and material scientists at Cornell University and
offer enhanced opportunities for training of a new generation of researchers at
the interface between the two disciplines.