* 1344188
* INSPIRE Track 1: Maximum Entropy Production and Evolution of Complex Systems
* BIO,MCB
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2018
* Friedrich Srienc, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 09/30/2018
* USD 1,036,000.00

This INSPIRE award is partially funded by the Systems and Synthetic Biology
Program and the Cellular Dynamics and Function Program in the Division of
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences in the Directorate for Biological Science;
and the Biophotonics Program and Biomedical Engineering Program in the Division
of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport System in the
Directorate for Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: In this INSPIRE
project, unique concepts from several disciplines are combined in a novel way to
give a consistent theoretical framework for the analysis, design, construction
and evolution of metabolic networks. First, the proposed work builds on the
premise that metabolic networks can be discretized into fundamental pathways or
elementary modes. Cells function only according to these elementary modes or
combinations of modes in compliance with the mass conservation law. These
unique, discrete metabolic states of a network can be rigorously evaluated with
computational tools to reveal all the possibilities that a cell can perform.
Because the entire property space of a cell is known, the design of a metabolic
network can be carried out on a completely rational basis and then implemented
with molecular biology techniques. Second, the Maximum Entropy Production
principle (MEP) predicts that the most probable metabolic state is reached when
the usage of the individual, discrete elementary modes is distributed according
to the Boltzmann distribution law. Third, when the predictable most probable
state, which is computed from the distributed usage of elementary modes, is
compared with the current measurable state of the network, it is possible to
predict what reaction will be altered during the course of evolution. Thus, this
research has far reaching implications and, therefore, requires careful
investigation to prove its general validity. If proven to be valid, this
represents a design principle in synthetic biology that needs to be followed in
order to engineer robust, stable systems that do not evolve further in time.
&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This research has the potential to transform the
field of metabolic engineering in several significant ways. For example,
biotechnology processes that produce valuable chemicals, including
pharmaceuticals or biofuels, may be enhanced. The proposed study could also
provide a platform for the sequestration and transformation of carbon dioxide
into isobutanol, the production of carotenoids and bioethanol from biomass. It
would further impact society by providing advanced training to the next
generation of scientists, including high school, undergraduates, graduate, and
post-graduate students. Most importantly, the project would lay the foundation
for the scientific community to further advance and apply these groundbreaking
principles in novel ways.