* 1344372
* NEESR Planning: Influence of Local-Global Synergistic Instabilities on the Seismic Collapse Resistance of Steel Columns
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Sherif El-Tawil, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 09/30/2017
* USD 450,000.00

Columns in steel moment resisting frames can be subjected to high axial loads
coupled with large lateral cyclic displacement demands during strong seismic
events. Under such conditions, the occurrence of plastic hinging can introduce
local buckling, which interrupts the load path and can synergistically promote
other types of instabilities, such as flexural or lateral torsional bucking. The
mechanisms by which such instabilities adversely interact to reduce the load
carrying capacity of steel columns have not yet been investigated and are the
focus of this research. Using analytical modeling and high fidelity
computational simulation, fundamental studies will be conducted to investigate
the vulnerability of steel moment frame systems associated with poor column
performance. The studies will address the inelastic behavior of steel wide
flange columns and connection subassemblies under large axial loads and lateral
displacements and determine the role that local and global buckling of columns
plays in promoting vertical progressive collapse of a structure during and after
a seismic event. The models developed as part of this study will play a major
role in moving performance-based design to the next level. Moreover, the
findings of this planning grant research will provide key insight toward the
development of test matrices for a future experimental program that will use
NEES2 capabilities to further explore the problem. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Columns
in steel frame buildings are the last line of defense against collapse. Such
members are heavily loaded and subjected to severe demands during strong seismic
events. Developing a clear understanding of how their load-carrying performance
degrades under severe loading regimes will have a significant impact on how
structural engineers design steel frames in seismic regions. By understanding
the potential vulnerabilities of steel columns and the load carrying system,
more resilient and robust designs can be achieved that better protect lives and
property during severe seismic events. The findings may also be applied to other
hazards where there is potential for poor column performance. Visualization
models developed as part of this research have the potential to improve steel
structural design education and help students better envision how instabilities
occur in steel structural members. A diverse pool of students at both the
graduate and undergraduate level will be involved at all levels of this study,
allowing them the opportunity to gain important experience in the behavior of
steel members and seismic design. Simulation and metadata from this project will
be made available through the NEES data repository. This award is part of the
National Earthquake Hazards Reduction Program (NEHRP).