* 1344265
* INSPIRE Track 1: Three-Dimensional Seismometer Array at the Homestake Mine
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Vuk Mandic, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 08/31/2017
* USD 437,938.00

This INSPIRE award is partially funded by the LIGO Research Support program in
the Division of Physics in the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical
Sciences and Geophysics program in the Division of Earth Sciences in the
Directorate of Geosciences. Seismometer arrays are commonly used in geophysics,
seismology, and engineering to study the propagation of seismic waves, detect
and study their sources, and assess properties of the Earth's interior at
various depths. The vast majority of seismometer arrays to date have been
surface-based due to the ease of installation. This project will build and
operate a dense, underground, three-dimensional array of 13 high-sensitivity
broadband seismometers. The array will be located at the Homestake mine, SD,
whose accessible depth of 4850 feet and vast horizontal span allow probing a
1-mile underground cube. Bringing together the existing techniques in
gravitational physics and geophysics for analysis of transient and stochastic
wave signals, this project is expected to give rise to qualitatively new seismic
data analysis techniques. Importantly, results of these studies will also have a
profound impact on the design of future underground experiments in gravitational
physics, such as probes of the Equivalence Principle of Einstein's theory of
relativity. Future underground gravitational-wave detectors that will observe
otherwise inaccessible signatures of various astrophysical phenomena and of the
Big Bang will also be designed based on the seismic noise studies conducted
within this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will enable interactions
between the geophysics and gravitational physics communities that would be of
substantial mutual benefit. Since the future of gravity experiments is arguably
underground, it is critical for the gravitational physics community to draw from
the large body of knowledge in geophysics on seismic noise and seismic wave
propagation. By allowing a team of physicists and geophysicists to work together
on the analysis of this unique high-quality data in a mutually interesting
environment, this project will lead to breakthroughs in seismic noise
tomography. Such breakthroughs will have a broad range of applications and
societal implications, ranging from nondestructive material testing to medical
diagnosis, geophysical prospecting (detecting mineral deposits and oil), and
homeland security (detecting underground cavities). The project will also
educate several graduate and undergraduate students, exposing them to the
frontiers of research at the intersection of the fields of geophysics and
gravitational physics.