* 1344553
* The Hydromechanical Wild Card: The Role of Ice Sheets in Crustal Stress Changes, Anomalous Pore Pressures Generation and Seismicity within the Midcontinent Region of North America
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2014,02/28/2017
* Mark Person, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 02/28/2017
* USD 174,650.00

The midcontent region of the North American craton has experienced a number of
large ( &gt; M6) earthquakes beyond the terminus of the Laruentide Ice Sheet
during the Holocene and Anthropocene. The mechanisms responsible for these
earthquakes are poorly understood. The main goal of this study is to assess the
consequences of lithosphere flexure associated with Pleistocene ice-sheet
loading on the build up and preservation of pore pressure anomalies and
seismicity within the Proterozoic crystalline basement and overlying sedimentary
rocks of the Michigan and Illinois Basins. We hypothesize that shear stress
build up within the upper crust (10-20 km depth) beyond the ice sheet terminus
causes pore pressure increases within low-permeable environments capable of
inducing seismic events. Underpressures, such as those observed at the proposed
Canadian nuclear waste repository site on the eastern flank of the Michigan
Basin, should occur in formerly glaciated areas undergoing rebound today. Using
COMSOL, we will develop a two-dimensional geomechanical-hydrologic-solute
transport model capable of representing lithosphere flexure and poro-elastic
deformation as well as asthenosphere and groundwater flow. We will utilize a
simple Mohr-Coulomb failure criteria as a metric for determining regions of the
Earth?s crust that are likely to fail. Ground truth for this model will include
the position and (where possible) depths of midcontinent Holocene and
Anthropocene earthquakes as well as pore pressure/salinity/isotopic data from
reservoirs and confining units of the Illinois and Michigan Basins.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Isolating high-level nuclear waste requires consideration
of future hydrologic and geomorphic conditions on time scale of up to one
million years. The results of this project should be especially relevant to
nuclear waste isolation programs in countries located at high latitude countries
( &gt; 40o N) such as those in Canada, Sweden, Switzerland, and Finland. All of
these countries could experience future glacations. Project results will be made
available to the Canadian Nuclear Waste Management Organization (NWMO) and the
Swedish Nuclear Waste Management Agency (SKB). This work may also be of benefit
to groups studying induced seismicity within the midcontinent by indentifying
regions of the Earth?s crust that could preserve high fluid pressures and would
be prone to failure. This project will train one graduate student at NM Tech, a
minority-serving institution. Effort will be made to recruit a woman and/or an
individual from an under-represented group.