* 1344221
* INSPIRE Track 1: An Optical Turing Machine for Native Computing Using High-Capacity Transmission Modulation Format Symbols
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2013,03/31/2017
* Alan Willner, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Ann Von Lehmen
* 03/31/2017
* USD 749,852.00

This INSPIRE award is partially funded by the NeTS program in the Division of
Computer and Network Systems in the Directorate for Computer and Information
Science and Engineering, the Directorate for Computer and Information Science
and Engineering, and the Directorate for Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will design and build "The Optical Turing Machine" (OTM) a digital
device that computes using a optical data modulation format compatible with
long-distance, high-speed transmission to support terabit-per-second. It
integrates computation and communication by computing with the same symbols used
for transmission, which enables native optical processing of network data while
avoiding costly optical-electronic-optical conversion or modulation format
conversion (e.g., serial to parallel). Specific to the NSF INSPIRE program, OTM
explores in-network high-speed processing that necessitates concurrent cross-
disciplinary development across networking, computation, and optical devices. It
involves new perspectives on modulation to support computation, the
transformation of algorithms into serial architectures and system design based
on the needs of networking within the constraints of optical capabilities that
cannot be developed from any single vantage point or
focus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OTM motivates research in serial computation,
algorithms in higher-order logic, homomorphic transforms, new methods for big
data analysis, and new active optical devices. OTM benefits society by enabling
faster communication and computation at potentially lower power and complexity,
supporting enhanced in-network capabilities for privacy, error correction, and
packet services at rates far in excess of those capable by current electronic
processing. If successful, it also provides an opportunity to reexamine the
fundamental assumptions of several decades of attempts at optical computing.
Cross-publication across both CS and EE will enhance this effect.