* 1344962
* RTG: Research Training in Applied Mathematics
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2022
* Donald Schwendeman, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 05/31/2022
* USD 1,999,975.00

The training program in applied mathematics at the Rensselaer Polytechnic
Institute is centered on large multi-scale nonlinear systems and the
mathematical and numerical methods needed to analyze them. Areas of application
include problems from mathematical biology, optical properties of materials,
oceanography, and combustion. Essential components of this effort will be the
introduction of emerging research methods into the curriculum and a much closer
interaction with researchers outside mathematics. This will enrich the
educational and professional experiences of students and postdocs, and this will
make them strong researchers who are able to work on emerging real-world
problems in science and engineering. In addition to attracting more students
into graduate study in mathematics, the goal is to also encourage and advance
mathematical science students and postdocs so they successfully achieve their
career goals. In the process the principal investigators will develop a model
program that involves integrating research, research-linked communication,
mentoring, seamless transitions, and broad educational experiences. Included in
this effort will be innovative recruitment and retention components, as well as
careful management and assessment of the program.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The core
of the research training program in Applied Mathematics at the Rensselaer
Polytechnic Institute is mentored participation of students and postdocs in an
interdisciplinary research team. The group provides a mentored research
environment that is designed so that creativity, invention, scientific
communication skills, as well as professional leadership, are promoted and
developed. The program will also broaden significantly the educational and
professional experiences of the participants as they will regularly interact
with scientists and engineers, both theoretical and experimental, at other
academic, industrial and government laboratory facilities. The activities that
will be developed will reach a wide audience and combine research, mentoring and
broad education experiences. Specific examples are Applied Math Days, the mini-
courses, and mini-symposia. Included in this effort will be innovative
curricular changes that will provide mentored transitions that will both
increase the number of students interested in, and prepared for, graduate school
in mathematics and which will also prepare graduate students and postdoctoral
associates for careers in academia or industry.