* 1344279
* INSPIRE Track 1: Selection as an organizing process: from molecules to languages
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2018
* Rick Dale, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 08/31/2018
* USD 799,998.00

This INSPIRE award is partially funded by the Perception, Action, and Cognition
Program in the Division of Behavioral and Cognitive Sciences in the Directorate
for Social, Behavioral, and Economic Sciences and the Mathematical Biology
Program in the Division of Mathematical Sciences in the Directorate for
Mathematical and Physical Sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work explores the
role of selection and adaptation in two radically different domains, 1)
molecules and 2) languages. Consider, for example, human languages. The
6,000-7,000 languages spoken by people display a dazzling variety of sounds,
words, and grammatical forms. This diversity is typically explained as a product
of random drift: As a single population splits and drifts apart, the
accumulation of small random changes eventually produces mutually unintelligible
languages. An alternative is that some of the variation we see among human
languages is due to selection. In this account, languages adapt to some extent
to the different social and ecological environments in which they are spoken.
Similarly, researchers have only recently considered the role of selection and
adaptation in the study of prions (self-replicating proteins)and how they
propagate within and across generations of cells. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Though
biological structures and human languages are radically different domains, they
share properties that suggest they may be described by a common mathematical
framework. Specifically, (i) they are both epigenetically inherited, (ii) they
both capitalize upon a pre-existing biological substrate, and (iii) they both
propagate in a system of agents (cells, people). A highly interdisciplinary team
of cognitive scientists, linguists, biologists, and mathematicians seek to
connect and inform these domains by using mathematical models and large-scale
behavioral experiments to understand the selective processes. They will assess
convergent tests of the idea that selection acts as an organizing principle of
systems at different scales. This work has important implications for issues
such as the role of environmental context in the spread of structures such as
prions or linguistic elements. For example, results could help explain how a
structure newly infects populations, such as when a new word "invades" a
linguistic environment, or when a prion structure successfully propagates and
infects cells in its environment. The interdisciplinary nature of this award
will provide a unique training experience for graduate students and will include
outreach efforts to local schools.