* 1344990
* CSR: EAGER: Design and Implementation of a Fine-Grained Appliance Energy Profiling System for Green Building
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2015
* Nirmalya Roy, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 12/31/2015
* USD 290,040.00

Green building applications need efficient and fine-grained determination of
power consumption pattern of a wide variety of consumer-grade appliances through
non-intrusive load monitoring (NILM) techniques for an effective adaptation and
percolation of demand response model down to the consumer level appliances. A
key inhibitor to the widespread adoption of such demand response policy at the
consumer grade appliances for intelligent building energy management, is the
inability of smart plug to efficiently determine, control or infer the power
consumption pattern of multiple devices in tandem. In practice, deploying smart
plug based NILM and acquiring the low-level power measures of a large number of
devices is often difficult or impossible due to the deployment complexity and
varying characteristics of devices and thus must instead be employed at the
circuit-level and inferred through the incorporation of novel usage-based
measurement and probabilistic level-based disaggregation algorithm. But the
challenges in deploying non-intrusive load monitoring algorithm involve
disaggregating individual device?s consumption from the aggregate power
measurement, as well as modeling and incorporating the usage based prediction.
Thus in this project we will focus on advanced machine learning and data
analytics algorithms that capture the measurement based approach and circuit
level NILM with the autonomous profiling and prediction logic to enable the
deployment of flexible and fungible smart plug and the evolvability of future DR
model in green building applications.