* 1344266
* INSPIRE Track 1: Primary School Organizations as Open Systems: Strategic External Relationship Development to Promote Student Engagement in STEM Topics
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2018
* Paul Leonardi, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 09/30/2018
* USD 714,599.00

This INSPIRE award is partially funded by the Science of Organization Program in
the Division of Social and Economic Sciences in the Social, Behavioral and
Economic Sciences Directorate, and the Math and Science Partnership Program and
the Discovery Research K-12 program in the Division of Research on Learning in
the Education and Human Resources Directorate. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our country
faces a decline in student engagement, particularly in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) disciplines and among underrepresented
minority groups. Most often this problem is discussed in the context of an
achievement gap, where racial and socioeconomic groups perform unequally on
academic assessments. To understand what creates the achievement gap,
researchers must understand the STEM "opportunity gap" that exists between
students from different backgrounds, where these same students achieve
differently because of varying exposure to out-of-school enrichment and learning
experiences. The STEM opportunity gap arises from the inequity of out-of-school
learning experiences for children. Therefore, efforts to engage minorities and
women in STEM in primary schools will only succeed if we consider the complex
organizational environment in which primary schools operate. The focus of this
study is on what interorganizational relationships are necessary for schools to
maintain to ensure equitable, efficient, and effective opportunities for
students to engage in STEM. External relationships require schools to commit
time and resources, and schools must decide which relationships to develop and
maintain. Understanding what kinds of relationships particular school types
invest in and what level of effort to commit to maintaining those relationships
is important for improving student engagement opportunities in STEM.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the study explores the following issues in 9
schools across 3 neighborhoods in Chicago, IL: &lt;br/&gt; (1) How student
engagement in STEM is enabled and constrained by the school's relations with its
external community. &lt;br/&gt; (2) The similarities and differences in
partnerships, particularly STEM-related partnerships, across different types of
schools in three different urban neighborhoods by mapping networks, and
assessing the costs and benefits of creating, maintaining, and dissolving
network ties.&lt;br/&gt; (3) How to model school and network decisions,
relations, and resources using an operations research framework. The model
prescribes network configurations that address strategic, tactical, and
operational concerns, to ensure the school will equitably, efficiently, and
effectively utilize partners to improve student engagement in STEM.