* 1344385
* Collaborative Project:  EarthCube Domain End-User Workshop:  Developing a Community Vision of Cyberinfrastructure Needs for Coral Reef Systems Science
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2015
* Mark Schildhauer, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 07/31/2015
* USD 65,760.00

The Geosciences EarthCube program recognizes the importance of aligning cyber-
infrastructure activities with the needs of end user research communities. To
that end we propose to convene 50-70 members of the coral reef community in two
workshops, one held at the University of Hawaii (HIMB) and the other at the
University of California Santa Barbara National Center for Ecological Analysis
and Synthesis (NCEAS). The specific objectives of the workshop are to:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Define current and future (5-15 years) scientific
challenges in the field&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. Summarize data and cyber-
infrastructure constraints that prevent these challenges being
realized&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. Collate current community data and modeling
resources and their locations&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;4. Identify and recommend
data infrastructure that could facilitate rapidly addressing the scientific
challenges in the field&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The coral reef research community
is multidisciplinary and the data on reefs is diverse and complex, crossing
biological scales from genes to ecosystems, temporal scales from nanoseconds to
millennia, and spatial scales from nanometers to kilometers. The challenge is to
integrate across these data sources to identify patterns and relationships that
rapidly improve our understanding of coral reefs systems. This effort has been
hindered to date by the lack of tools to accomplish this and ineffective means
of sharing data or collaborating. This project will support workshops that
engage the coral reef community to 1) develop a common vision of the grand
science challenges in the field 2) highlight how data cyber-infrastructure needs
will integrate the complex datasets and potentially facilitate rapid progress in
key areas of coral reefs ecosystem science and 3) emphasize the value of
collaboration and data sharing as a first step to changing and improving the way
coral reef scientists support each other and advance the
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As ecosystem engineers, corals provide the
nutritional, economic, and structural basis of&lt;br/&gt;an ecosystem worth
billions of dollars annually. This workshop proposal convenes the coral reef
community and will address how cyber-infrastructure can inform coral reef
systems science. The latter will ultimately accelerate understanding of reef
ecosystems, broaden the scope of the questions that can be asked and build
capacity to predict how these societally relevant and fragile ecosystems will
face the challenges of climate change and human development. The workshops will
also be attended by at least 4 postdocs and represents a significant
professional development opportunity for these individuals. Results will be
disseminated on the EarthCube website, the NCEAS website, and the HIMB website
making them broadly accessible to the science, education and the public. The
product from the proposed endeavor will be a report to NSF EarthCube summarizing
the discussion for each of these objectives that will serve to define and align
the needs across the Geosciences and help prioritize EarthCube activities. There
is also an opportunity to use the results to develop a manuscript that
articulates how cyber-infrastructure can address the science challenges facing
the coral reef community and facilitate a systems level science agenda. Such a
product could have high value in both the science funding and policy realm.