* 1344615
* NEESR Planning/Collaborative Research: Simulation and Design Tools for Tsunami Bridge Engineering
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2016
* Marc Eberhard, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 09/30/2016
* USD 315,000.00

The technical objective of this project is to develop tsunami loading and design
recommendations for bridges that address issues that must be treated differently
for bridges than for buildings. These issues include (1) three-dimensional
bridge geometries such as deck shape, skew and embankments, whose hydraulic
characteristics can lead to channelization, bore entrapment, and shielding; (2)
debris impact and debris damming that can greatly increase the forces on a
bridge, both during the initial impact of the tsunami waves and during the
outflows; and (3) fluid-structure interaction effects that can be significant
for particular types of bridges and retrofit strategies, such as the deployment
of fenders or in cases with flexible structures. Bridge-specific retrofit
strategies will also be explored. Recent advances in the development of parallel
processing software and the availability of powerful computational platforms
make it possible to simulate these complex effects. Computational fluid dynamics
(CFD) modeling will address the effects of three-dimensional hydraulic
geometries. The Material Point Method (MPM) will address the effects of debris
impact fields and damming by modeling debris explicitly. The Particle Finite
Element Method (PFEM), as implemented in OpenSees, will allow researchers to
consider the fluid-structure interaction, the effects of the preceding
earthquake shaking and the effect of uncertainties. As part of this planning
grant, the simulation strategies will be developed sufficiently to guide the
detailed design of critical experiments in a NEES2 facility early in FY2015.

Over the past decade, tsunamis have caused hundreds of thousands of deaths and
hundreds of billions of dollars of damage. The loss of critical lifeline
structures has exacerbated these catastrophes by delaying emergency response
efforts and post-event economic recovery. Large tsunamis also threaten at least
five U.S. states and numerous U.S. territories. Nearly all past tsunami research
has focused on run-up modeling, the development of evacuation strategies, and
more recently, on the design of buildings to resist tsunamis. In comparison,
little research has addressed the tsunami performance of bridges, and no
guidelines are available to design safe and economical tsunami-resistant bridges
or to develop retrofit strategies. To these ends, the proposed research will
transform the design of tsunami-resistant bridges, and consequently, greatly
improve post-event response and recovery efforts. Data from this project will be
archived and made available to the public through the NEES data repository. This
award is part of the National Earthquake Hazards Reduction Program (NEHRP).