* 1344263
* INSPIRE Track 1: Intrinsic Oscillations in Supramolecular Assemblies: Novel Ultra-High Sensitivity Protein and Virus Detection
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Peter Ortoleva, Wright State University
* Standard Grant
* Dimitris Pavlidis
* 09/30/2017
* USD 625,500.00

Overview: This INSPIRE award is partially funded by the Electronics, Photonics,
and Magnetics Devices Program in the Division of Electrical, Communications and
Cyber Systems in the Directorate for Engineering; and the Chemical Structure,
Dynamics and Mechanisms program in the Division of Chemistry in the Directorate
for Mathematical and Physical Sciences. Objective: Recently predicted autonomous
oscillations in virus-like particles are investigated via simulation and
experiment. Types of biological systems displaying such oscillations will be
identified, and implications for pure and applied sciences drawn. Novel
multiscale theoretical methods will be developed for the simulations, and
nanofluidic coupling structures will be fabricated for high-sensitivity high-
resolution GHz-to-THz detection of the oscillations. Intellectual merit: At the
boundary between the microscopic and macroscopic worlds, sustained autonomous
structural oscillations in nanostructures will be investigated. As the phenomena
of interest involve both long- and short-temporal scale processes, novel
concepts in multiscale theory will be developed. Coarse-grained variables will
be coevolved with the positions and momenta of the N atoms using Trotter
factorization with attendant accuracy control. Innovations include: (a)
discovery of sustained autonomous oscillations in equilibrium mesoscopic
systems; (b) methods in multiscale theory; (c) biosample presentation and
spectroscopic identification of autonomous oscillations in virus-like particles;
(d) methods for viral threat detection and nanomedical design; and (e)
autonomously oscillating molecular circuit elements. Broader impacts: A
successful investigation will revolutionize structural biochemistry and the
electromagnetics of biological systems, and could provide a radical change in
viral sensing for threat-detection and human health. Methods for computer-aided
design of nanostructured materials for molecular electronics and nanomedical
systems are developed. Opportunities for under-represented groups in STEM
education are created. Why Inspire? Electrical engineers understand the
importance of nondissipative oscillatory circuit elements. Chemists and
physicists have expertise in multiscale theory. Biologists understand the
responses of virus-like particles. Few scientists appreciate all these topics.