* 1344208
* RCN-UBE  The Case Study and PBL Network
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2013,06/30/2018
* Patricia Marsteller, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Pauley
* 06/30/2018
* USD 507,781.00

This project supports the development of a Research Coordination Network for
Undergraduate Biology Education centered on expanding the use of and knowledge
about two effective teaching approaches: case studies and problem based learning
(PBL). Using these approaches, students collaboratively analyze a scenario that
presents a biological issue within a realistic setting. Students then conduct
investigations and report findings. Case studies or PBL have been shown to help
undergraduates develop superior skills in question formulation and data analysis
while they learn as much content as with traditional methods. The Case Study and
PBL Network will stimulate pedagogical innovation while furthering understanding
of the effectiveness of these methods.

Intellectual Merit: The Case Study and PBL network brings together the expertise
and resources of several existing U.S. centers for case studies and PBL in a
unified effort to engage other biology faculty in using, developing or
conducting research on these teaching approaches. The network will bring to
fruition the potential for these pedagogies to utilize emerging technologies,
data analysis and quantitative reasoning in biology learning while addressing
NRC recommendations for problem-based, interdisciplinary biology education.
Broader impacts: This project deliberately encourages and supports participation
by members of traditionally underrepresented groups: minority faculty and
minority serving institutions, community college faculty, graduate students and
post docs. All institutional types from a wide range of geographic locations
(including international members) are expected to participate. Recruitment will
begin with existing mailing lists from the case study and PBL centers (over
10,000 people). The network will organize and stimulate the dissemination of
resources, findings, and opportunities, and will encourage members to develop
new projects and research proposals.

This project is being jointly funded by the Directorate for Biological Sciences,
Division of Biological Infrastructure and the Directorate for Education and
Human Resources, Division of Undergraduate Education as part of their Vision and
Change in Undergraduate Biology Education efforts.