* 1344579
* High Temperature Deformation of Lower Mantle Minerals Phases in the Diamond Anvil Cell
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2014,05/31/2018
* Lowell Miyagi, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 05/31/2018
* USD 305,000.00

Seismic anisotropy is observed in many regions of the deep Earth and is believed
to be due to texturing of mantle rock as a result of solid state convection.
Thus observations of seismic anisotropy can be used to interpret the dynamic
processes occurring in the Earth's interior. However, this requires that the
relationship between deformation geometry, texture development and seismic
anisotropy are well understood for the appropriate mineral phases. In the upper
mantle where deformation mechanisms are well understood, interpretation of
seismic anisotropy in terms of mantle flow has been highly successful. However,
in deeper parts of the Earth, little is known about the deformation mechanisms
of the major mineral phases such as MgSiO3 perovskite and post-perovskite. This
is largely due to the fact that pressures needed to stabilize these phases are
beyond the range of conventional deformation devices. The diamond anvil cell
combined with radial diffraction technique can be used to study deformation and
texture development in these phases, but until recently these experiments could
only be performed at room temperature. Since textures can be affected by
temperature, it is problematic to extrapolate these results to the deep Earth
where temperatures are high. Recent developments now allow diamond anvil cell
deformation experiments to be performed at lower mantle pressures and
temperatures. This project will use this new technique to study texture
development and deformation mechanisms in lower mantle mineral phases at high
pressure and temperature conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The significance of
this project is that it will establish an experimental basis for linking seismic
observations to deformation structure in the very deep Earth. This will lay the
groundwork to allow the use of seismic data to map flow patterns in the
lowermost mantle. Understanding the dynamics at the base of the mantle will
provide new insight into the mechanics and geometry of mantle convection. A
better understanding of mantle convection, in turn, has implications for plate
tectonics, mantle geochemistry, and thermal history of the Earth. In addition,
new technical developments resulting from this project will be available to
general users at the Advanced Light Source at Lawrence Berkeley National
Laboratory and thus will serve the broader scientific community. Furthermore,
the capability to perform high pressure and high temperature deformation studies
has application beyond the field of geophysics and will also advance knowledge
of material science at extreme conditions.