* 1344567
* SNM: Continuous, Large-Scale Nanocomposite Production Via Micellular Electrospray
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,11/30/2017
* Barbara Wyslouzil, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 11/30/2017
* USD 1,184,126.00

This grant provides funding to establish new methods and equipment to produce
nanocomposites for biomedical applications at increased volume for direct
translation to industry. This new synthesis method will combine electrospray, a
top-down, continuous spraying process, with self-assembly, a bottom-up process
that occurs spontaneously. Three equipment configurations will be examined to
optimize the ratio of particle formation speed (i.e., kinetics) to particle
quality (i.e., thermodynamics). This process will be developed in collaboration
with experts in science communication to ensure that appropriate societal,
ethical, and environmental health and safety considerations are integrated into
the process design as it is being developed. The results of this process will be
evaluated in two industrial test-beds focusing on biomedical imaging and
separations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this research will addresses
critical roadblocks in nanocomposite commercialization by providing a continuous
manufacturing strategy for nanocomposite formation. Because electrospray droplet
morphology is tightly controlled, this method should enable greater process
control and improved particle uniformity, reproducibility, and scale. This
research will study three nanocomposites with strong commercialization
potential: composite magnetic nanoparticles, composite quantum dots (QDs), and
magnetic QDs, which have potential applications in biomedical imaging, clinical
diagnostics, and pharmaceutical separations. However, this approach could be
used to manufacture composites containing any hydrophobic components smaller
than the nanocontainer, and could thus impact a diverse range of fields
including electronics, optics, and energy. Broad sharing of our endeavor to
safely commercialize new nanocomposite products will be undertaken by two
outstanding non-profit educational partners: Edheads, award-winning education
web game producers, and the Museum of Science, Boston, lead of the NSF Nanoscale
Informal Science Education (NISE) Network.