* 1344424
* Collaborative research:  Origin of hydrologic responses to earthquakes: constraints from New Zealand, Taiwan, Chile, and USA
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/2014,02/28/2019
* Chi-Yuen Wang, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 02/28/2019
* USD 315,546.00

Earthquakes generate hydrological responses, such as increases in stream flow
and changes in the water level in wells. Such hydrologic responses are important
because they provide unique insight into the coupling of hydrologic and tectonic
processes at spatial and temporal scales that are otherwise difficult to study.
The origin of hydrologic responses to earthquakes has been the subject of
controversy, in large part because there are many models to explain observations
and few measurements suitable for distinguishing between hypotheses. We will
study responses to earthquakes in New Zealand, Chile, Taiwan, and California to
test competing hypotheses by 1) compiling observations, 2) collecting new
measurements, and 3) developing analytical and numerical models to interpret the
hydrological and related geodetic data. We will address the following questions:
Does the excess discharge in streams originate from the shallow or deep
subsurface? How do the response of deep and groundwater systems differ? Are
there different and understandable responses of fracture-dominated rock and
unconsolidated materials? Are there permanent changes in properties of the
subsurface such as permeability? Are static or dynamic stresses more important
for explaining the observed changes?

This project offers an interdisciplinary training opportunity that integrates
geophysics and hydrology, and combines modeling and field studies. The proposed
work is an international collaboration with scientists in Taiwan, Germany and
New Zealand. We will integrate the proposed research with courses taught at UC
Berkeley, including freshman seminars, undergraduate-level geodynamics, and
graduate level classes. The study of earthquake-induced hydrologic changes has
implications for water resources and engineering, including assessing the role
of earthquakes in damaging aquifers, affecting underground repositories, and
changing water supplies.