* 1344214
* How does mangrove habitat structure influence parasite transmission and predation in tropical estuaries?
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/2014,02/29/2016
* James Byers, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Dudka
* 02/29/2016
* USD 38,577.00

F13-NSF Catalyzing New International Collaborations Program
(12-573)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal 1:
OISE-1344214, title: ?How does mangrove habitat structure influence parasite
transmission and predation in tropical estuaries?? by James Byers at University
of Georgia&lt;br/&gt;Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;This proposal aims to catalyze a
research collaboration between professor Byers from the University of Georgia,
professor Torchin from the Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute and Professor
Lopez from the Institute for Scientific Research and Technological Services
(INDICASAT) in Panama. The addition of Professor Lopez to this collaboration
adds expertise in plant biology and mangrove forest structure to the proposed
project and gives a new direction to the existing collaboration between Drs.
Torchin and Byers. This project will examine the effects of parasitism and
predation of a group of congeneric mud snails of the genus Cerithidea in
tropical mangroves. These preliminary experiments would be carried out during
one summer to gather preliminary data for the submission on an NSF proposal in
the future. The project will provide fundamental training opportunities for a US
undergraduate student and a postdoc on ecosystems engineering and conservation.
Public outreach activities would have potential broader impacts and educational
benefits to the Panamanian community.