* 1344928
* SCH: INT: Collaborative Research: Physiological Studies of Brain Signals using a Wireless Neuro-Sensing-Diagnostic System
* CSE,IIS
* 12/01/2013,11/30/2018
* Junseok Chae, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 11/30/2018
* USD 887,232.00

The goal of this project is to develop a fully-passive intra cranial sensing
system. This novel electronic brain-machine interface utilizes an implantable
miniaturized neurosensor based on microwave back-scattering, a miniature textile
antenna, and RF circuits on flexible polymer substrate. It has the unique
properties of only minor heating, thus, minimizing injury and trauma to the
brain, eliminating the need for wires through the cranium, and preserving
natural lifestyle and comfort. The acquired neurosignals are collected by a
self-powered wearable body area network for continuous real-time monitoring and
subsequent physiological interpretation. The project includes physiological
studies of the acquired brain signals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While conceived
initially as a tool for long-term monitoring of brain signals, this sensing
technology has a very wide range of potential applications in health, including
control of prosthetics and early detection of seizures. Overcoming the
challenges in safety and long-term reliability presented by conventional
neurosensor technology could transform healthcare for people suffering from
severe chronic neurological disorders. Results of the physiological studies are
disseminated through a data repository for understanding brain disorders.
Research is integrated with education through several activities, including
hands-on experience for students in this new area, summer camps, and a variety
of outreach activities to attract women and minorities in engineering.