* 1344284
* INSPIRE track 1: Asynchronous circuit design principles in the essential regulatory network of Caulobacter Crescentus
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* David Dill, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Nina Amla
* 09/30/2017
* USD 1,000,000.00

This INSPIRE award is partially funded by the Software and Hardware Foundations
Program in the Division of Computing and Communication Foundations in the
Directorate for Computer and Information Science and Engineering, the
Developmental Systems Program in the Division of Integrative Organismal Systems
in the Directorate for Biological Sciences, and the Biological and Computing
Shared Principles working group. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Every cell contains an
extremely complex control system for functions essential for survival and
reproduction of the organism. Identification of the design principles embodied
in this poorly understood core regulatory circuitry of the cell is the focus of
this project. In many ways, this cellular control system resembles the
electronic systems that humans design, although it uses biochemical and genetic
reactions instead of transistors as its underlying technology. Over many
decades, electrical engineers have learned design principles that enable the
design of robust, reliable systems. This project investigates whether cellular
control circuitry makes use of these same principles, and whether there are new
principles that can be learned from cells. This is addressed by analysis of the
essential logic controlling the bacterium Caulobacter crescentus. Caulobacter
control circuitry resembles asynchronous digital circuits, a type of digital
design that does not use a global clock signal to coordinate the system. The
design of reliable asynchronous circuits is a difficult engineering challenge,
and many interesting methods for designing and analyzing these circuits have
been developed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project maps out the essential
control circuitry, which regulates the processes that are vital to cell
viability, using a combination of laboratory and computational methods. The
research integrates results from several types of high-throughput data,
including ribosome profiling, RNA-seq data at various points in the cell cycle,
and ChIP-seq, and combines that with computational DNA binding motif search. A
hybrid continuous and discrete mathematical model will be developed for the
essential cell regulatory system, and a homologous asynchronous digital circuit
will be constructed and analyzed using model checking software. The circuit
structure and model checking results are used to map existing asynchronous
circuit design concepts to the biological domain, and to identify new circuit
design methods that may have been selected by evolution that lead to the extreme
robustness displayed by living cells.