* 1344991
* RTG: Geometry and Topology
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2020
* John Lott, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2020
* USD 1,996,302.00

This award provides continued support for participants in the research training
group (RTG) in geometry and topology at the University of California at
Berkeley. The program will be led by six faculty members (Ian Agol, Denis
Auroux, Michael Hutchings, John Lott, Peter Teichner, and Constantin Teleman),
who will work in collaboration with other members of the Mathematics Department
to build on the success of the previous RTG project by further enhancing the
training of undergraduate students, graduate students, and postdoctoral fellows.
The previous project incorporated a number of mechanisms for training
enhancement, some of which worked better than others. The group will expand on
the successful mechanisms and try follow-up innovations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With geometry and topology becoming ever more multifaceted
and technical, it is difficult for students to acquire the tools they need for
research. The activities of this research group will benefit trainees at all
levels, beginning with a strong effort to recruit undergraduate students into
research, continuing with seminars and hot topics courses to train graduate
students in the latest techniques, and finally including mentoring to help
postdoctoral fellows to launch their research careers. The mechanisms to provide
such training will include an undergraduate research class during the school
year taught by graduate students, a summer undergraduate research program run by
graduate students under the guidance of senior faculty, undergraduate mentoring
by postdoctoral fellows, a background seminar for graduate students and others,
a geometry and topology colloquium, hot topics courses taught by senior faculty,
summer graduate workshops taught by postdoctoral fellows, and an exchange
program with the Max-Planck-Institute in Bonn. The project will involve
approximately three postdoctoral associates, twelve graduate students per year,
twelve undergraduates in each of the undergraduate research programs, and thirty
participants in each of the summer graduate workshops. The proposed training
activities will increase the number of US citizens and permanent residents
entering and continuing in mathematics research, both directly and indirectly:
directly via the recruiting and support of the trainees in the group, and
indirectly via the establishment of models for research training that can be
emulated elsewhere.