* 1344238
* INSPIRE Track 1: Advancing groundwater restoration through qualitative analysis:  What  practitioners and stakeholders care about and why it matters
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,12/31/2018
* Alan Rabideau, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 12/31/2018
* USD 872,326.00

1344238 (Rabideau). This INSPIRE award is partially funded by the NSF
Engineering Directorate (ENG) and the NSF Directorate for Social, Behavioral,
and Economic Sciences (SBE). This project is motivated by the long-standing
prevalence of inactive waste sites resistant to the restoration of contaminated
soil and groundwater. Recently, the National Research Council (NRC, 2012)
identified thousands of complex sites, "complex" referring to a collection of
physical, chemical, and regulatory factors that inhibit cleanup. Because the NRC
committee was unable to identify potential technological breakthroughs, its
report focused on the need for long-term management (LTM) of these sites, which
will require many decades of cooperation between regulatory agencies,
responsible parties, and host communities. While attention to LTM represents a
progressive and positive development in the culture of groundwater restoration
(GR), some compelling alternatives to LTM have not been fully evaluated,
including: (1) a reinvigorated research agenda to develop cost-effective cleanup
technologies, and (2) a paradigm shift from current practices (which emphasize
technical analysis of health/cost tradeoffs) to a more holistic decision process
informed by local stakeholder values and the core ideals of adaptive management,
sustainability, environmental justice, and intergenerational equity. The INSPIRE
team brings together scholars from environmental engineering, philosophy,
sociology, and oral history to address important questions raised by the
proposed shift to LTM: (1) to what extent has inadequate engineering
implementation of remedial technologies contributed to failures to achieve
cleanup targets (in contrast to the presumed inherent challenges of contaminated
sites), (2) has the dominant risk-versus-cost paradigm adequately engaged the
environmental values held by practitioners and stakeholders (including
sustainability), (3) how has GR practice and policy development been shaped by
group identify and differences in core values and beliefs among government
regulators, responsible parties, technical professionals, citizens, and academic
researchers, and (4) how should the concerns of community residents, who will be
most affected by the transition to LTM, be appropriately engaged? Recognizing
that the above questions are not easily addressed by disciplinary or "expert
panel" research, this three-year INSPIRE project will emphasize the qualitative
analysis of recorded audio data (RAD), collecting and analyzing 100-200 hours of
RAD from focus groups, workshop dialogues, oral history testimonies, and phone
interviews with a diverse community of professional, government, academic and
citizen practitioners and stakeholders. Open-ended interviews are a well-
established and appropriate vehicle to engage, study, and learn from the local,
often undocumented, knowledge of the diverse communities that engage in complex
projects such as GR. Using new database tools for thematically mapping anecdotal
interviews as meaning-dense RAD, analytic methods such as frame analysis,
applied collaboratively by the interdisciplinary team, will support the
development of new decision paradigms for more effectively managing GR and
complex waste sites. Disseminated results will include journal articles,
practitioner-oriented workshops, and new tools to support collaborative
scholarship. The project will advance the field of GR by critically examining
the pervasive assumption that restoration to health-based levels is
technological infeasible for most sites, and by assessing alternative paradigms
such as reinvigorated basic research, adaptive management, and/or sustainability
analysis. Two doctoral, one MS, and several undergraduate students will receive
cutting-edge training in cross-disciplinary research. Furthermore, the
experience of collaborative qualitative analysis of RAD data (by the entire
research team working together) will constitute a new and potentially
transformative model for research that fully integrates science, engineering,
ethics, and policy.