* 1344668
* SCH: INT: Large-Scale Probabilistic Phenotyping Applied to Patient Record Summarization
* CSE,IIS
* 02/15/2014,01/31/2020
* Noemie Elhadad, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 01/31/2020
* USD 1,994,224.00

This project creates novel methods and tools for the analysis of large-scale
Electronic Health Record (EHR) data. Models of disease, or phenotypes, are
derived from a large collection of patient characteristics, as recorded in the
EHR. To assess their value and robustness in a clinical application, the
phenotypes are incorporated into a longitudinal patient record summarization
system for clinicians at the point of patient care.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research for this project contributes to two inter-related outcomes: (i) a
probabilistic graphical model of a patient record, specifically a Latent
Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) model of the patient phenotypes. Models that can
handle the heterogeneous data types in the EHR, along with their challenges,
such as sparseness and artificial redundancy are investigated. For the models to
be useful in the clinical world, they must be interpretable by humans, easily
adaptable for EHR-driven applications, and clinically relevant. This is achieved
by specifying prior clinical knowledge into the models and learning from
clinicians' feedback automatically; and (ii) a patient record summarizer for
clinicians at the point of patient care. The summarizer leverages the
probabilistic patient model and learns new models of salience through the
clinicians' interactions with the deployed summarizer, in essence learning
relevance of different patient phenotypes. For the evaluation of the phenome
model and the summarizer, particular care is given to assessing their value in a
real-world clinical setting, at the point of care.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research builds on and is translated into deliverables that are robust and are
inter-operable with the EHR of a large hospital in New York City. If successful,
the availability of interpretable and actionable patient models can impact
drastically both EHR-driven research activities and patient care, through better
tools for clinicians. Finally, the project introduces students in the field of
medicine to STEM activities, while presenting real-world, exciting application
to STEM students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For further information see the project
website at: http://people.dbmi.columbia.edu/noemie/phenosum