* 1344199
* MCTP: A Postdoctoral Program for Interdisciplinary Mathematics Preparation And Career Training (IMPACT) in the School of Mathematics at the Georgia Institute of Technology
* MPS,DMS
* 04/15/2014,03/31/2021
* Douglas Ulmer, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 03/31/2021
* USD 1,299,994.00

The Interdisciplinary Mathematics Preparation and Career Training (IMPACT)
Postdoctoral Program in the School of Mathematics at Georgia Tech (GT Math)
addresses the critical transition from graduate student to tenure-track faculty.
In terms of research expectations, teaching responsibilities, and professional
commitments, the postgraduate years are one of the most crucial junctures in the
academic career path. The IMPACT Program addresses these challenges through
clearly-defined objectives and well-structured activities to expand research
horizons, enhance teaching effectiveness, and advance professional development.
A key component uniting all three goals is an interdisciplinary summer REU
program with local partner institutions Spelman, Morehouse, and Agnes Scott
Colleges and Georgia State University. A critical mass of postdoctoral fellows
is an essential prerequisite, precluding any sense of research isolation and
providing significant opportunities for group and peer as well as individual
mentoring. Hence, 8 IMPACT Fellows will be recruited in 3 cohort groups centered
around the following "Math+X" research themes: (1) Applied &amp; Computational
Mathematics plus Computational Science &amp; Engineering (2014 - 2017); (2)
Discrete Mathematics plus Molecular Biology (2015 - 2018); and (3) Analysis plus
Electrical &amp; Computer Engineering (2016 - 2019). Through this innovative
interdisciplinary research cohort model, and with the support of mentored career
training, IMPACT Fellows will be well-prepared for the challenges faced by new
faculty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The GT Math IMPACT Postdoctoral Program has two
innovative features: (1) an interdisciplinary focus on formal research mentoring
and (2) highly structured career mentoring and professional development.
Preparing new mathematics PhD's for an interdisciplinary research career aligns
with increasing recognition of the value in engaging with other STEM
disciplines. The interdisciplinary research program will broaden the
intellectual horizons of cohort postdocs, GT Math faculty and graduate students,
and Math+X REU participants. The complementary career training brings best
practices for STEM postdoctoral mentoring and new faculty development into
action in mathematics, adapting them to the unique circumstances of the field.
The formal structures developed will serve as a national model for the
mathematics community. In this way, the IMPACT Program will have a profound
"ripple effect" on local and national scales.