* 1344369
* INSuRE EAGER
* EHR,DGE
* 07/15/2013,06/30/2016
* Alan Sherman, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 06/30/2016
* USD 299,927.00

This project develops a partnership among four successful and mature Centers of
Academic Excellence in Information Assurance Research (CAE-R) and the National
Security Agency (NSA), the Department of Homeland Security and other federal
agencies in order to design, develop and test the research network. The project
is a self-organizing, cooperative, multi-disciplinary, multi-institutional, and
multi-level collaborative research that can include both unclassified and
classified research problems in cybersecurity.

The project provides an opportunity for students to work on problems proposed
and mentored by practitioners in the real world rather than just faculty led
research. More pressing and urgent problems are addressed and the students also
benefit from the guidance of multiple and interdisciplinary research faculty
from multiple institutions. The student lead research may provide solutions for
pressing national problems.

This pilot is designed to break down the competitive barriers and lack of
community that currently exists within CAE-R institutions. By jointly addressing
a shared problem space, the participating institutions establish a stronger and
more trusting relationship. Mississippi State brings a high concentration of
minority students but also provides the lessons learned from the NSF-funded
project aiming to increase the number of female participants in cybersecurity.