* 1344264
* INSPIRE Track 1: Acoustic Sensor Networks for Ice-Covered Seas
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2018
* Andreas Muenchow, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 12/31/2018
* USD 999,520.00

This INSPIRE award is partially funded by the Arctic Natural Sciences Program in
the Division of Polar Programs in the Directorate for Geosciences, the
Communications, Circuits and Sensing Systems Program in the Division of
Electrical, Communications and Cyber Systems in the Directorate for
Engineering,and the Division of Computer and network Systems in the Directorate
for Computer and Information Science and Engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
PIs propose to design and develop an integrated underwater acoustic sensor
network for ice-covered&lt;br/&gt;seas. It will transmit data wirelessly through
acoustic waves from sub-surface ocean sensors to a receiving array with a
surface connection to satellites and the Internet. The PIs will expand the
limits and capabilities of underwater communication networks in the transition
zone where sea ice changes from 1) smooth land-fast ice to 2) ridged mobile ice
to 3) open water. This transition zone evolves in both time and space within the
30-50 km foot-print of the proposed networked sensor and communication network
array. This goal requires integration of both existing knowledge from a set of
diverse disciplines and intellectual innovations within each discipline. It will
modify underwater communication network theory, coastal acoustic propagation and
scattering, and experimental design of oceanography. Providing long-term, long-
range acoustic connectivity, the PI team will address three major new research
challenges: 1) Mid-frequency (1-5 kHz), mid-range (10 km) acoustic wave
propagation in the transition zone; 2) Data telemetry in the new communication
environment; and 3) Resilient sensor networks that cope with and harness complex
dynamics of the transition zone. The multi-disciplinary team will implement
reliable modem hardware, integrate it with resilient network protocol, and
optimize the system design for Arctic deployment to support an ocean experiment
off Thule, Greenland.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The sensor and communication network
will support 1) long-term, intelligent distributed Arctic observing systems, 2)
assimilation of remote-sensing and in-situ under-ice measurements, and 3)
regional and global climate modeling with real-time measurements. Such a network
holds the promise to revolutionize under-ice ocean sampling in polar regions.
Data will be broadly disseminated via the web and archived for public access.
Planned outreach includes participation in the field program of Greenlandic
residents from the Inupiat village of Qaanaaq and meaningful classroom
involvement from the elementary to community college levels. The PIs are also
committed to outreach through their global print, radio, TV, and electronic
media contacts.