* 1344703
* The direct and indirect effects of plantation forestry expansion on usable water in the southeastern US
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2019
* Gabriel Katul, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Ingrid Padilla
* 05/31/2019
* USD 401,197.00

The southern United States, particularly its Southeastern region, includes some
of the most intensively managed forests. Currently, planted pines are at some 40
million acres and occupy about 20 percent of entire forested area in the
southern United States. Economic models predict accelerated areal expansion in
pine plantations within the Southeastern US by industry and private owners, in
part, due to federal policies to reduce timber harvesting from western forests.
Over the last 50 years, this expansion primarily replaced natural and thus older
pine forests with younger and faster growing Loblolly pines. Given the regional
scale of this land-cover change, future water resources planning for the
Southeastern US must account for the rapid areal expansion in pine plantation
area. This project evaluates the direct effects of this rapid land-use
conversion on evapotranspiration (loss of water to the atmosphere directly from
the soil and through plants) and groundwater recharge, as well as its indirect
effects on summertime rainfall initiation within the Southeast region. Given
that forests are "first-users" of precipitated water, this direct effect can
significantly alter "usable" water in the Southeastern. With regards to the
indirect effects, the link between root-zone soil water and the initiation of
rainfall is now attracting significant attention as potentially having a key
role on the alterations brought about by the replacement of natural forests with
other uses. Previous studies focused either on aboveground pathways of water
movement or on below ground processes. Here, a complete soil-plant-atmosphere
mathematical model is proposed to address the impacts of pine plantation
expansion. The model and its various components will be evaluated individually
and collectively against a number of long-term field
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given the rapid growth of the human population
in the southeastern US, the consequences of increased drought frequency and
duration can be severe on usable water resources as trees are ?first users? of
precipitated water. Hence, the broader significance of this project lies in the
development of mechanistic mathematical models that can identify future
vulnerabilities of water resources resulting from pine plantation expansion.
This project supports a graduate student and a post-doctoral fellow, which
enables integration of research and inter-disciplinary training in hydrology,
ecology, and atmospheric sciences and prepares the next generation of scientists
to tackle complex societal problems such as large scale land cover changes and
water resources vulnerability. As a general public outreach, the project
leverages recent initiatives at the North Carolina Museum of Natural Sciences
that seeks to showcase museums as illuminating the intersection between
scientific discovery and advancements in addressing societal problems to the
public.