* 1344135
* SCH: EXP: Discovering Patterns to Improve Health to Overcome Health Disparities
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Bonnie Westra, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2016
* USD 527,207.00

The use of multidisciplinary scientific evidence based practice (EBP) guidelines
during hospitalization can assist low income and minority populations to regain
and maintain health, thus reducing rehospitalization. However, EBP guidelines
may not be equally effective across all populations. The national mandate for
all health professionals to implement interoperable electronic health records
(EHRs) by 2015 provides an opportunity for reuse of EHR data to address new
research questions that explore patterns of patient characteristics and
resources, EBP interventions (actions of health professionals in treatment of
the patient), and improvement in health, e.g., the effectiveness of multi-
disciplinary EBP during hospitalization and follow-up. This exploratory project
is interested in groups of patients that (1) share a particular condition, e.g.,
severe sepsis and septic shock or patients with diabetes or diabetic
complications, (2) were hospitalized for this condition or related
complications, (3) were treated as an outpatient in a clinic during a succeeding
period of time, and (4) have an identifiable outcome, e.g., rehospitalization,
emergency room (ER) visits, death related to the condition, or condition under
control without rehospitalization. These patients will be analyzed to understand
the differences between patients with the same condition but different outcomes,
with the goals of (1) evaluating whether EBP guidelines made a difference and
(2) discovering interventions which lead to improvement in outcomes that may
need to be added to EBP guidelines. Achievement of these goals requires the
development of new analysis techniques for deriving insights into health
outcomes from EHR data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The algorithms and approaches
developed in this project will advance health informatics by enabling
researchers to extract, from the relatively raw and unorganized mass of data in
an EHR, a higher level view of the evolution of the patient's health and
treatment over time and use that information to analyze the differences between
patients with favorable and unfavorable health outcomes. More specifically, new
techniques and tools will be developed to (1) create patient and intervention
profiles that summarize important characteristics of the patient, their
environment, and their treatment, (2) find groups (clusters) and patterns in
these profiles, and (3) use the profiles, clusters, and patterns to analyze the
differences in outcomes between patients with a common health condition.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Achievement of these goals poses significant challenges.
For instance, EHR data in its original form is, for research and analysis
purposes, mostly in a relatively unorganized and low-level format, e.g.,
flowsheets, which contain primarily nursing documentation, have numerous rows of
data representing patient assessments and results as well as laboratory and
other diagnostic tests. This necessitates the extraction and summarization of
information relevant for the task. Because time plays such an important role in
this data, extracting useful features from the data across time is critical.
However, the time series involved are often irregular. More generally, not all
patients have the same set of information and information is not available at
regular intervals. Furthermore, data may need to be viewed at multiple temporal
resolutions, e.g., sudden increase in blood pressure versus gradual, but noisy
increase over several years. Additional complexities arise from population
substructure, differences in the types of features, incorporating knowledge of
prior dependencies among features, and incomplete and missing data. This project
will address these challenges. Success in these efforts will advance data mining
in the areas of classification, clustering and pattern mining, as well as
various types of temporal data analysis, including trend, change point, and
anomaly detection. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The novel pattern mining approaches
proposed for this project will help generate the insights biomedical researchers
need to make progress in understanding a number of serious health problems and
avoiding poor outcomes. Such progress is likely to advance personalized health
care and thus has the potential to improve human health and reduce health care
costs. Beyond health applications, this work has broad and immediate
applications to any complex system for which creating a comprehensive predictive
model for complex entities is often unrealistic, at least in the near future,
and the best that can be hoped for is to identify specific patterns that provide
insight into the current or future state of an entity or system with respect to
certain specific conditions of interest. Examples include transportation and
energy systems, business and government organizations, ecosystems, sophisticated
machinery, and computer / network systems. The creation of the proposed
frameworks and algorithms will also directly train a number of graduate and
undergraduate students in the areas of data mining and its use in analyzing
health data. The results of this project will be presented in various
conferences and journals in computer science, as well as those in domains
related to the target applications.