* 1344272
* INSPIRE Track 1: The Age of Water and Carbon in Hydroecological Systems: A New Paradigm for Science Innovation and Collaboration through Organic Team Science
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2013,03/31/2018
* Christopher Duffy, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 03/31/2018
* USD 1,000,000.00

This INSPIRE award is partially funded by the Geobiology &amp; Low Temperature
Geochemistry Program in the Division of Earth Sciences in the Directorate for
Geoscience; the Human Centered Computing Program in the Division of Information
&amp; Intelligent Systems in the Directorate for Computer &amp; Information
Science &amp; Engineering; and the Virtual Organizations as Socio-technical
Systems Program in the Division of Advanced Cyber-Infrastructure in the
Directorate for Computer &amp; Information Science &amp;
Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop new scientific work
practices and cyberinfrastructure tools to advance the fields of hydrology and
limnology (lake ecology). The project will develop a socio-technical model of
"organic team science" in which scientists are motivated to collaborate across
diverse scientific communities and to share and normalize data to solve
scientific problems through an open framework. potentially creating new cross-
disciplinary collaborations around the modelling problems. The project will
advance hydrology by making already-collected geospatial data more usable for
analysis and simulations. It will advance limnology by developing an integrated
hydrodynamic model of lakes as connected to the broader hydrologic network to
quantify water, material, nutrient and energy fluxes, which is potentially
transformative for limnology. The project will be carried out with collaborators
including the NSF Susquehanna/Shale Hills Critical Zone Observatory and the
GLEON projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will provide benefits by
developing cyberinfrastructure to provide access for limnology to climate and
geospatial data and models as well as novel practices for supporting organic
team science. The later is potentially a significant and transformative
contribution to the infrastructure for science. The hydro-dynamic model could be
useful for those managing lakes. The proposal includes plans for outreach to the
scientific community to share these findings.