* 1345118
* Collaborative Research: NSF/DOE Thermoelectrics Partnership: High Performance Thermoelectric Waste Heat Recovery System Based on Zintl Phase Materials with Embedded Nanoparticles
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2013,09/30/2013
* Ali Shakouri, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 09/30/2013
* USD 85,233.00

1048801 / 1048799&lt;br/&gt;Shakouri / Kauzlarich&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
Novel thermoelectric materials will be developed based on abundant and non-toxic
Zintl phase magnesium silicide alloys. A synthesis method is proposed that
naturally provides embedded nanoparticles within a magnesium silicide alloy
matrix, providing uniform mixing with minimal aggregation. With the use of
embedded nanoparticles of appropriate concentration and diameter, thermal
conductivity will be reduced by scattering of mid-long-wavelength phonons.
Controlling the heterostructure band offset and the potential barrier of
nanoparticles with respect to the matrix, the power factor will be increased by
selective scattering of hot carriers. Preliminary transport calculations show
that ZT&gt;1.8 at 800K could be achieved. Extensive characterization of the
material thermoelectric properties will be performed and the results will be
benched marked with collaborators at NASA JPL and
BSST.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: This proposal seeks to provide
fundamental knowledge which can have a major impact on waste heat recovery.
Benefiting from the careful optimization of the electron and phonon transport
achieved in eptiaxially grown nanoparticle in alloy material and focusing on
scalable bulk material synthesis and spark plasma sintering, the plan is to
develop a low cost, high performance thermoelectric material.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The close collaboration between co-PIs with background in
chemistry and engineering will provide a great learning opportunity for graduate
students working on the project. Students will present their research at
national and international meetings and will develop an appreciation for the
complexity of materials development. The PIs have a history of participation in
underrepresented minority outreach programs, supervising minority students and
trainees, and participating in a broad array of activities.