* 1345303
* SBIR Phase I:  Developing Low-Cost Instrumentation for Self-Digitization-Based Digital PCR
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Jason Kreutz, Lamprogen Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2014
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes to
develop a low cost instrumentation platform for loading and imaging digital PCR
devices. Microfluidic technology has enormous potential to impact medical,
diagnostic and research applications, but generally suffers from higher costs
and more complicated workflow that limits broad implementation. Specifically,
microfluidics has enabled the field of dPCR, which offers superior
quantification compared to quantitative PCR based on "Real-time" measurements,
however dPCR has remained a niche market due to its relatively higher cost. By
coupling the simple self-digitization (SD) microfluidic devices with a platform
based on low-cost mass-producible instrumentation technology it will greatly
reduce the barrier to implementation and adoption by the relevant communities.
This project will utilize principles from existing commercial platforms to
develop a parallelized digitization and imaging instrument prototype. A
functional prototype would validate this cost efficient pathway and provide a
strong foundation for further commercialization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact/commercial potential of this project, if successful, would result
in a second generation dPCR platform that would be directly competitive within
the several $100 million dPCR market, and could potentially transform the
multibillion dollar qPCR market. It will provide widespread access to the high
precision quantification offered by dPCR, due to the simple, closed system
workflow of SD devices and a price structure that would make it competitive with
qPCR. Additionally, the flexibility this platform offers would allow for a
diverse set of experiments to be executed on a single platform. Applications
ranging from high sensitivity assays, requiring large sample volumes, to high
resolution assays, needing to differentiate samples very close in concentration,
to high throughput assays would be available. A user friendly cost effective
dPCR platform could facilitate research and diagnostics across a range of
applications including cancer research, viral and bacterial diagnostics, and
personalized or patient specific medicine.