* 1345916
* SBIR Phase I:  Development and Validation of Palladium Supported on Hierarchically Porous Monolithic Carbon Catalysts
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Franchessa Sayler, ThruPore Technologies
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 12/31/2014
* USD 179,999.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop long
lasting, hierarchically porous monolithic carbon catalyst supports that require
greatly reduced precious metal catalyst loadings while improving the catalytic
efficiency for chemical manufacturers. There is an ever present need for better
catalysts to increase throughput, yields, and purity in current and new chemical
process technologies. The high porosity at various length scales afforded by the
proposed technology allows for more intimate contact between the reactants and
catalyst, reducing the amount of precious metal catalyst needed while also
enhancing catalyst performance avoiding expensive process upsets and shutdowns
due to loss of catalyst activity, selectivity and integrity. These carbon
supports accomplish this by maximizing the dispersity and decreasing the size of
the catalyst nanoparticles, resulting in longer lifetimes and improved
performance. In this Phase I project the company will further develop this
catalyst, identify industrially relevant chemical reactions that it enhances,
and compare the effectiveness to currently available catalysts. The research
involved will provide the necessary data needed to test the catalyst in lab and
pilot scale fixed bed reactors.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project is that the hierarchically porous
monolithic carbon catalyst being developed promises a longer lasting catalyst
with more efficient utilization of precious metals, a limited resource. This
more active catalyst can lower the operating temperature in chemical reactions
thereby decreasing energy usage and giving products with fewer impurities,
requiring a smaller number of purification steps. Success will therefore impact
both ecological and commercial sustainability in the chemical industry. The
catalyst to be tested represents the first of a new class of hierarchically
porous catalyst supports and so further validation of this new product will
provide the foundation for introduction of a broad class of catalysts with these
superior properties. If successful, manufacturing of this new class of catalysts
will be pursued, leading to job creation in the United States. The early
adopters of this technology can expect less chemical reactor downtime and
increased chemical production, resulting in increased operating income giving
them a clear advantage over their competitors.