* 1345157
* ATLAS Phase-I Upgrades
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2014,12/31/2019
* John Hobbs, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Cooperative Agreement
* Mark Coles
* 12/31/2019
* USD 11,091,193.00

The Large Hadron Collider (LHC) at CERN in Geneva Switzerland is the world's
premier particle collider facility in operation. By recording the collisions of
protons at the LHC, the ATLAS experiment studies nature at the shortest
distances and highest masses ever accessible in a laboratory. In essence, it is
simultaneously the world's most powerful microscope and an experiment creating
conditions that existed in nature only near the time of the Big Bang. Studies
there have already led to discovery of a new fundamental particle, the Higgs
Boson. This discovery is of such high scientific impact that the 2014 Nobel
Prize in Physics was given to the people who first predicted the existence of
this particle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSF award enables upgrades of the ATLAS
experimental apparatus needed for high precision studies of Higgs Boson
properties and a wide variety of searches for particles needed to explain
unresolved puzzles. An example of one such puzzle is "What is the dark matter
which makes up nearly 30% of the universe"? There are many other similar
questions. The next three years represent a transition of the LHC physics
program from a collision energy of 8 Teraelectronvolts (TeV) data-taking and
operation, to extended operations and data taking at nearly double the energy,
13-14 TeV. Over a thousand scientists from the United States are involved with
this scientific program on several major experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award provides support for Dr. Hobbs at the State University of New York at
Stony Brook and his collaborators at three U.S. universities to upgrade the
ATLAS detector so that it can continue to operate efficiently at higher energies
for a longer time and at a higher rate. This upgrade will enable scientists to
collect data to search for new physics to explain inconsistencies in the
particle theory that arise as the energy is increased and to fully understand
how the Higgs boson fits into a fundamental theory of the universe.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The universities supported by this award will build new
instrumentation to be installed in the ATLAS detector, which is necessary in
order to carry out a real-time selection and collection of data and provide a
better measurement of particle energies. In addition to producing results which
advance fundamental scientific knowledge, the work associated with these
upgrades trains students, young researchers and technicians to carry out basic
research by formulating questions and procedures to understand what is not
known, and it also trains them to develop and operate complex, custom
electronics systems and advanced computer algorithms needed to sustain extremely
high data rates and classify large, complex data sets in fractions of a second.