* 1345541
* SBIR Phase I:  High Throughput Characterization of Stem Cells using Spatial Domain Stimulus Response
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2014
* John Collins, Biopico Systems
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2014
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes to
develop the technical feasibility of a high throughput label-free electrical
field potential marker-based characterization of stem cells. This patent-pending
technology of Spatial Domain Stimulus Response (SDSR) records stimulus response
from individual cells from an array of spatial electrodes and reconstruct time
domain signals. This proposed high throughput characterization of stem cells
using SDSR will address the unmet need of derivation of patient-specific
reprogrammed somatic cells for use in studying disease development, creating
therapies for diseases or disorders and developing perfect models for the cells
of the human system that are harmed in the diseases. This will contribute to the
goals in regenerative medicine in sorting stem cells in order to avoid the
obstacles due to teratoma formation, aberrant reprogramming, and the presence of
transgenes. This proposed project will be the basis for the isolation of
differentiated cells from the cells that hinder graft performance without
exogenous labeling or genetic modification for clinical applications. In this
project, the electrical field potential recordings of differentiated cells will
be compared and correlated with gene expression markers to assess the
characterization.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project, if successful, will be
the development of a powerful, automated, rapid, cost-effective label-free cell
sorter, and overcome the barriers that prevent successful translation of stem
cell biology into clinical therapy. This cell sorting can produce an unlimited
supply of viable cells with improved control, portability, and reduced cost for
clinical applications. This may have a significant impact for the improvement of
human health and control of human diseases. For example, the system may be a
potential tool for the replacement of lost progenies, remyelination and support
of adjacent cells at risk in neurodegenerative disorders such as amyotrophic
lateral sclerosis, Parkinson's disease, Alzheimer's diseases, Huntington's
disease, stroke, traumatic lesions such as spinal cord injury, and for studying
development and progression of such diseases. The global market for tissue
engineering and cell therapy products for these diseases is set to more than
quadruple from 2009 to 2018. Specifically, the market for stem cell research
products is estimated to be $872M, and expanding through double digit growth
each year, representing a significant financial opportunity.