* 1345176
* SBIR Phase I:  American Sign Language (ASL) Science Technology Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) Thesaurus.
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,06/30/2014
* Corinne Vinopol, Institute for Disabilities Research and Training, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 06/30/2014
* USD 149,998.00

This SBIR Phase I project proposes to produce online software that enables deaf
users to obtain English equivalents for American Sign Language (ASL) science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) signs. Many deaf and hard of
hearing people who rely on ASL for communication do not have good facility with
English, which is both spoken (and so aurally inaccessible) and written,
resulting in poor reading achievement and subject content deprivation. This
population has been particularly underserved in STEM literacy and under-
represented in STEM careers. There are three primary reasons: First, nearly all
scientific information currently available is English audio and text-based and
without interpretation into sign language. Second, few educators investigate and
use research that points to instructional practices that yield best results for
deaf students. Third, few materials interpret STEM content into ASL and none
from ASL to English. This proposed assistive technology will take a novel
approach to assisting ASL users in understanding and appropriately using STEM
terminology by creating the first-ever ASL STEM Thesaurus. Via menus, users will
be able to describe signs using four descriptors (i.e., hand shape, palm
orientation, location, and motion) and find corresponding English STEM terms,
ASL and English definitions, and concept pictures.

The broader/commercial impact of this assistive technology is its intrinsic
value to a set of online assistive technology tools currently being developed
whose ultimate goal is to improve literacy and educational achievement of deaf
and hard of hearing students, particularly in science technology, engineering,
and mathematics (STEM) fields. Having all of these tools on a central website
makes instruction on STEM topics more accessible, efficient, and of better
quality. Under a previous National Science Foundation grant, one of these tools,
English-to-American Sign Language (ASL) translation software with a database of
over 30,000 words, phrases, idioms, and symbols was developed. Because ASL is an
unwritten language, translation output is represented as graphics and video.
Further research was undertaken to recognize ASL using camera and sensor-enabled
glove technologies for reverse translation (i.e., ASL-to-English). This project
will use a sign language descriptor system in Phase I and camera/glove
technologies in Phase II to enable deaf users to access STEM vocabulary from
their own linguistic perspective. In this way, they will be able to better
understand STEM terminology, navigate STEM content, and produce more cogent
written discussions on STEM topics.