* 1345219
* CREST Phase II: Computational Center for Fundamental and Applied Science and Education at North Carolina Central University
* EHR,HRD
* 02/01/2014,01/31/2021
* Marvin Wu, North Carolina Central University
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Santiago
* 01/31/2021
* USD 5,409,302.00

With National Science Foundation support, North Carolina State University will
continue to develop the Computational Center for Fundamental and Applied Science
and Education. The vision of the Computational Center is to lead the
University?s transformation into a research intensive university with
established Ph.D. programs across STEM disciplines. Project objectives are to
leverage the successes of Phase I effort to establish a nationally recognized
research facility with outstanding scientific and educational programs centered
on active collaborations with academia, industry, government and international
partners. This objective will be achieved by advancing cross-disciplinary,
integrated research, educational, and outreach programs, to meet a confluence of
needs in computational science and education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit:&lt;br/&gt;The Center will include sustainable, nationally recognized,
computationally driven research programs across four areas: (1) development of
novel nanomaterials and application of these materials in advanced
optoelectronic devices; (2) low-to-medium-energy nuclear and hypernuclear few-
body physics; (3) Intelligent systems and robotics; and (4) geophysical
characterization of intraplate seismic zones. The center builds on the
complementary and closely interwoven research and extensive collaborations
established in Phase I. The computational structures developed by the Center
will result in significant new contributions in all of the four research
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts :&lt;br/&gt;The Center has already
significantly enhanced the STEM research and education capacities at North
Carolina Central University, and is now leading the transformation of the
institution to a research oriented institution. The Phase II Center will broaden
the educational and research infrastructure to enable the expansion of Ph.D.
programs in STEM disciplines. Center activities include: a) improved STEM
matriculation and graduation, especially among African-American students, women,
and socially and economically disadvantaged students; b) establishment of Ph.D.
programs in STEM disciplines; c) improved STEM undergraduate and graduate
curriculum; d) STEM graduates trained in fields critically needed by industry;
and e) greater awareness of applied computational sciences among middle and high
school students and the general public.