* 1345444
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of Vorcat for Cloud-Based Simulations
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,09/30/2014
* jacob krispin, Vorcat, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 09/30/2014
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will offer
breakthrough Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) technology in a high-performance
computing cloud environment. Looking towards eliminating the need for physical
testing, it is now common practice in the energy, automotive, aerospace,
chemical process industries, among many others, to use CFD to predict turbulent
gas and liquid flows within and around solid objects. The new CFD approach
pursued in this project has distinct advantages over both traditional RANS
(Reynolds-Averaged Navier-Stokes) modeling, as well as currently-available Large
Eddy Simulation (LES) technology, in efficiently capturing the physics of
turbulence ? the single, most complicated phenomenon in fluid engineering.
Specifically, the first application proposed here will solve one of the most
complex fluid engineering problems, namely flows about rotating/moving bodies,
which will undoubtedly advance current design capabilities for next generation
energy, automotive and aerospace-related technologies. Moreover, by offering
this innovative CFD software in a cloud application, this project will provide
unique accuracy and reliability to a wide range of CFD users, including small
and medium-sized businesses for which large scale computing in CFD has
heretofore been too costly or technically difficult to
pursue.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential
of this project is far reaching. The benefits to all segments of industry
include cost &amp; time savings in product development, better engineering,
enhanced safety and the exploration of advanced concepts that are too difficult
or dangerous for physical experiments. Since high-end CFD software requires
access to High Performance Computing (HPC) systems and annual licenses are
relatively expensive, small and medium size businesses seldom possess the
expertise or resources to utilize them. This project harnesses the affordability
of cloud computing by fostering diverse new applications that these companies
can use to solve a vast array of practical flow problems dominated by
turbulence, thereby leveling the playing field and promoting innovation.
Although the focus is on energy and automotive applications that will be
employed for validation and go-to-market purposes, flows of interest include
those encountered in the development of wind/hydro turbines, ground vehicles,
rotorcraft, wave and ocean current power generation devices and many other
applications of direct relevance to a wide range of industries. Furthermore,
development of this unique technology in a cloud will provide affordable
opportunities for students and postdoctoral researchers to engage in the
solution of complex scientific problems.