* 1345404
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel Thermochromic Roofing Materials with Excellent Weatherability
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,06/30/2014
* Jared Sommer, Sommer Materials Research, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 06/30/2014
* USD 149,953.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will incorporate
thermochromic pigments into inorganic coatings to be used as a replacement for
colored clay-coatings on roofing shingle granules. This novel inorganic coating
will turn dark in low temperatures and light at higher temperatures, to absorb
solar heat in the winter and reflect solar radiation in the summer, thereby
increasing the energy efficiencies of buildings. The thermochromic roofing
materials will be resistant to UV radiation and chemical degradation. The
thermochromic coating can also be used as durable thermochromic paint for
existing low-slope roofs. In Phases I and II, Sommer Materials Research, Inc.
will demonstrate the stability of the thermochromic material as a granule
coating. Mechanical properties, UV stability, chemical stability and
weatherability of the thermochromic coating will be investigated. Various tests
will be done in different climate zones to test the durability of the material
ranging from mild to severe weather conditions. Sommer Materials will
collaborate with commercial shingle manufacturers to incorporate the inorganic
coatings on their shingle products.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will be focused on
reducing heating and cooling needs of buildings and homes by >30% average
annually by using these novel thermochromic coatings. Buildings consume almost
40% of the energy of the world. The global demand for air conditioning systems
have skyrocketed in developing countries world-wide and significantly increased
energy demands. Over 50% of the world's population lives in urban areas and the
percentage is substantially increasing, thus creating the "heat-island" effect
in cities, with daytime temperatures in cities 2-5oC higher than in the outlying
rural areas. Using thermochromic roofs on buildings would help mitigate these
summer heat islands by reducing energy consumption for summer cooling and by
improving urban air quality.