* 1345015
* Using Dense Seismic Arrays to Map Sharp Features in the Deep Mantle
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2019
* Meghan Miller, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Raterron
* 06/30/2019
* USD 187,000.00

With the advent of EarthScope's USArray and other dense seismic arrays, there is
an unprecedented opportunity for investigating the seismic structures within the
deep Earth, all the way to the core. Detecting structures in the very deepest
part of the Earth provide essential constraints in understanding many aspects of
the chemical and thermal history of the planet. This grant will fund further
development of array imaging techniques that will allow for more detailed
investigation of how and why there are such complex structures at this great
depth and how they link to the evolution of the Earth. The grant will provide
support for a postdoc, a graduate student, and foster continued international
collaborations in Europe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Observations of seismic phases
sampling the lower mantle have suggested Ultra Low Velocity Zones (ULVZs), a
possible perovskite to postperovskite related D" layer, Large Low Shear Velocity
Provinces (LLSVPs), and rolling-hills of primordial material on the core-mantle
boundary (CMB). Considerable progress has been made toward developing dynamical
and mineralogical based mantle models compatible with seismic observations at
the deep mantle, yet many details are still missing. It is still uncertain
whether the densities and velocities of ULVZs are related to possible partial
melting or have a distinct chemical origin, but the information about physical
properties needed to answer this question are poorly constrained. For example
the major phase used in imaging ULVZs, SPdKS, is not particularly sensitive to
density and the velocities have strong trade-off with the shape of the
structures. Other seismic observations have shown connections between the
geographic distribution of the observed D? layer: where the post-perovskite
layer is thickest beneath fast regions and disappears beneath slow regions.
However, it is difficult to distinguish the velocity gradient effects caused
subducted oceanic lithosphere at the base of the mantle from phase boundary
effects. The data set from USArray and other arrays, especially the greater
PICASSO (partially funded by NSF-CD and CAREER) array, display waveform
complexity at all ranges with remarkable coverage. This grant will provide
funding to better constrain mantle structures and answer questions such as: (1)
Can we resolve and distinguish between the trade-off of different elastic
properties? (2) Can we determine the 3D geometry of the ULVZ's? (3) Are there
other types of low velocity zones besides ULVZs existing at CMB? (4) How
compatible are the inferred slab histories with the presence of lower mantle
structures? (5) What is the relationship between D? and slabs in the deep
mantle? (5) How well can we resolve the edges of the LLSVPs? To answer those
questions, we will use array seismology techniques, waveform modeling and the
newly developed Multi-Pathing Detector (MPD) to sharpen current tomographic
models and produce synthetic seismograms that match observed waveforms
complexities. The physical dimensions of these structures in the lower mantle
and their inferred seismic parameters will be used in geodynamic models of
mantle convection and explored in mineral physics experiments at CMB conditions.
These further mineral physics and geodynamic experiments will allow for
improvement in our understanding of the connection between subducted slabs, the
D? layer, ULVZs, and LLSVPs and the dynamic evolution in the deep mantle.