* 1345937
* SBIR Phase I:  Fire Suppression With Enviromentally-Friendly Water Additives
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Scott Bocklund, EarthClean Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 12/31/2014
* USD 178,097.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will determine
the feasibility of significantly enhanced fire suppression including
extinguishment and ignition prevention by applying coatings of aqueous yield
stress fluids, that is, fluids which undergo a solid (gel) to liquid transition
under the influence of shear stress. In the situation of diminishing
availability of water and increased recognition of the negative environmental
consequences of incumbent water additives such as aquatic toxicity, extreme
environmental persistence, and bioaccumulation, there is a need for
environmentally less impactful suppressants which potentially may include
aqueous yield stress fluids. The main deliverables of the Phase I Research Plan
are providing evidence that fire extinguishment and retardation are functions of
applied coating thickness and demonstrating that the applied coating thickness
is a function of controllable and deliverable rheological properties. The
research will consist of rheological characterization of candidate yield stress
fluids, verification of large scale pumping and spraying, measurement of
extinguishment with sprayed yield stress fluids, and measurement of ignition
retardation of coated combustible substrates. The anticipated technical results
include demonstrating deposition of acceptably thick and uniform coatings by
practically implementable methods and demonstrating that coatings so deposited
exhibit useful levels of extinguishment and/or ignition
prevention.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project is that achievement of effective levels of fire suppression at an
acceptable cost may no longer be mutually exclusive with negative environmental
effects of chemical additives. Fire is a continuing danger to life and property
worldwide. The total cost estimate of fire in the US in 2010 was $328 billion,
equivalent to 2.2% of the GDP, with 3,120 reported civilian fire deaths. More
effective suppression can provide an important additional tool along with other
methods to offset such losses. The dynamic rheological properties of complex
non-Newtonian fluids especially as regards yield stress fluids and processes
such as pumping, spraying, and coating deposition have heretofore been minimally
treated in the scientific literature. The requirements of this project will
require significant advances in this area. The estimated commercial impact of
this project in terms of market opportunity is expected to be in the hundreds of
millions of dollars in sales of suppressants, translating to billions of dollars
reductions in losses due to fire.