* 1345592
* SBIR Phase I:  Integrating Electrical Flux Metrology with Third Party Machine tools for Precision On-board Measurements
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,06/30/2014
* Jonathan Montgomery, SmalTec, International
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 06/30/2014
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will quantify the
reliability of Electrical Flux Metrology (EFM) technology, compare its precision
against existing state-of-the-art metrology processes, and verify the
portability onto a third party machine tool. One of the greatest obstacles in
machining micro-parts is inspection and verification. Prospective customers,
partners and investors currently considering EFM technology do not have a
measure for comparison that demonstrates how this new product will fit their
process demands and portfolios. This project will (1) define a figure of merit
for metrology standards with respect to precision and uncertainty. It will (2)
directly compare the capabilities of EFM technology to the current state-of-the-
art technologies of optical scanning and coordinate measurement machines.
Finally, It will (3) integrate the EFM technology onto a third-party machine
tool to verify the portability of the technology and determine how it alters the
base figure of measurement. This is a non-contact and non-destructive in-situ
metrology process, allowing parts machined on a platform to be measured and re-
machined on the same platform. Comparing and integrating the EFM technology will
verify the precision of this new technology. The result of this project will
provide vital commercialization components and prove
marketability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial
potential of this project is focused toward miniaturized products with micro-
sized features and applications that are rapidly expanding in the medical,
automotive, and aerospace industries. As an example, the minimally invasive
medical products market, supported by micro-metrology, was a $19 Billion
industry in 2011. One of the most challenging aspects to micro-manufacturing is
inspection of machined features. New manufacturing and hybrid processes to
improve throughput and reduce operator time and material waste are required and
addressed with the EFM technology, an elegant on-board metrology solution for
micro-parts. As the parts and features of parts get smaller, better metrology is
required. The EFM technology allows features to be measured that were previously
only possible through destructive testing. This technology will advance micro-
manufacturing and allow for higher precision parts to be manufactured more
effectively. The micro manufacturing market is desperately asking for improved
metrology of small features. EFM technology will fill this void. The commercial
potential for this product is significant and will create new manufacturing
jobs. Companies, small and large, will integrate this technology directly into
the manufacturing process flow. This technology will enhance the manufacturing
of improved and advanced micro-parts and micro-features in products.