* 1345940
* SBIR Phase I:  Resource-efficient Remote Monitoring and Diagnostics for Cyber-Physical Systems
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Vinaitheerthan Sundaram, SensorHound, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 12/31/2014
* USD 165,197.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to develop
an efficient remote monitoring and diagnostic software system to detect and
diagnose software defects in cyber-physical systems (CPSs). CPSs have the
potential to bring about a revolution in efficiency, robustness, and safety in
application domains such as smart utility grids and smart health care. To
unleash their potential, CPSs must themselves be robust. However, despite state-
of-the-art testing, software defects currently do escape into deployed CPSs.
Current state-of-practice monitoring and diagnostic systems cannot improve the
situation as they were not designed with the constraints of CPSs in mind, which
include real-time execution, unreliable links, and resource constrained
processors. The proposed technology is aimed at creating a software system
capable of monitoring embedded nodes in CPSs for anomalies and providing
detailed execution information to quickly diagnose the software defects
responsible for any anomalies. The proposed work extends the company's extensive
research in efficient collection of information for diagnosing software defects.
The company expects to create a prototype monitoring and diagnostic software
system for CPSs and demonstrate its effectiveness on existing software defects
in CPSs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project derives from the fact that increasing the reliability and robustness of
CPSs will directly increase their adoption in real world applications. CPS
technology is directly applicable to a broad range of sectors, including utility
grids, smart buildings, manufacturing, health care, transportation, etc. These
sectors account for more than $32.3 trillion in economic activity, with the
potential to grow to $82 trillion by 2025 - about one half of the global
economy. CPSs are thus critical to the national interest in areas such as
manufacturing competitiveness, defense, health care, energy production and
usage, and disaster monitoring and recovery. Due to the increasing reliance on
CPSs in the future, system defects could have drastic consequences. The proposed
technology could significantly improve reliability of CPSs by catching defects
before they result in significant loss, outages, or failures.