* 1345876
* SBIR Phase I:   Development of a highly reliable continuous wireless monitoring system for cardiac patients through implantable sensors
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Xinchuan Liu, Biosensor Tech LLC
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2014
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop a
battery-free and wireless pressure sensing system for monitoring physiologic
parameters, such as pressure, of infant/child's heart during and after cardiac
surgery. Transthoracic intracardiac catheters have been the current standard
practice in the neonatal and pediatric populations for monitoring physiologic
parameters, which can change rapidly and may require immediate intervention.
However, three major risks for current intracardiac line technology are 1)
infection, due to transcutaneous passage of the catheter, which poses high risks
for infection, sepsis, and endocarditis. 2) embolization and drug exposure risks
inherent in maintaining catheter lumen patency; and 3) the bleeding risk from
catheter withdrawal. The reality is that one out of four kids dies from the
catheter removal. With the recent advancements in integrated circuitry, sensing,
microfabrication, and wireless communications, an implantable, biocompatible,
battery-free, wireless pressure sensing system will be developed to allow direct
physiologic intracardiac monitoring that carries little or no bleeding and
infection risks. This new polymeric planar pressure sensing system is based on
resistance changes of unique patterned gold coatings, which is low-cost, fully
biocompatible, highly sensitive and easy to fabricate. This novel sensing system
may be used in many other pressuring sensing
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial
potential of this project is the contribution to the implantable wireless
sensing product commercialization. The battery-free and wireless sensing
technologies may revolutionize the vital sign monitoring in healthcare and also
eliminate many potential clinical complications with traditional catheter based
sensors, such as bleeding, infection, and so on. Since there is no safe sensing
technology for monitoring physiologic parameters of infant/child's heart during
and after cardiac surgery, this new wireless sensor system is likely to be
approved quickly by FDA under the Orphan Device Act of 1983 and the FDA
Humanitarian Device Exemption. This new sensing product will help many young
children and their families. In addition, the same battery-free and wireless
sensing technologies may also be used in adult medical sensing devices and other
non-medical based pressuring sensing applications. The wide range of
applications of this new sensing technology may have high commercial impact.