* 1345036
* Mechanics of Earthquake Faulting along the Himalayan Convergent Plate Boundary
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2014,02/28/2019
* Steven Wesnousky, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 02/28/2019
* USD 359,404.00

There are several elements to this research project. First, there is the
research directed to define the past history of great earthquakes and thus
strain release along the Himalayan Frontal Thrust (HFT) of India. Here
geological principals are used to determine the past size, frequency of
occurrence, and location of great earthquake displacements along the greatest
continental thrust fault in the world. The location of the study is chosen
because India affords the unique situation where the entirety of the crustal
deformation associated with recurring earthquakes is situated on land. The
ultimate purpose of the study is to compare and understand the relationship of
the size and extent of earthquake displacements observed in the geology to
ongoing measures of strain accumulation measured by geodesy. Understanding this
relationship holds the potential for ongoing measures of geodetic strain to be
used to predict the size and location of future great earthquakes along major
active fault zones not just in India but also elsewhere along other major fault
zones such as the San Andreas which runs through the United States. Second,
there is a synergistic element of international cooperation with Indian
Investigators that will leverage funding from NSF to collect many more
observations than would likely be possible with funding from NSF alone. The
third element is education, including the training of several Ph.D. students,
the involvement of undergraduates in an exciting international project
addressing a fundamental problem in fault mechanics, and the use of the proposed
research as a platform to conduct a short course in Himalayan geophysics and
tectonics to students and scientists from India and surrounding developing
nations with the logistical and financial assistance of the International Centre
for Theoretical Physics of Trieste, Italy. Thus, the proposed project will
additionally produce unique liaisons for future international collaboration
between emerging young scientists. It will directly impact assessment of seismic
hazard and raise awareness of seismic risk along this most densely populated
megathrust fault in the world, particularly for those in agencies aimed at
mitigating and responding to natural disasters.

The methodology employed in this research will entail the mapping and dating of
Quaternary deposits and surfaces that have been offset by earthquakes along the
Himalayan Frontal Thrust of India (HFT). The age of Quaternary surfaces mapped
to be offset by the HFT will be determined with radiocarbon analysis of charcoal
samples taken from the deposits. Dividing the amount of the offset by the age of
the deposits will define the rate of Himalayan Frontal Thrust (HFT) offset
averaged over thousands of years at each site studied. The mapping will also
serve to define sites that are most amenable to placing trenches across the HFT.
Structural, sedimentological, and stratigraphic relationships exposed in the
trenches will be the basis to determine the number, size and timing of
earthquakes that have displaced the deposits. It is the goal of this project to
implement the methodology at up to 9 sites along the ~2500 km length of the HFT.
The resulting observations will, when combined with the results of prior
studies, provide the basis to assess the rupture length and amount of coseismic
slip of prior great earthquakes along the length of the HFT. It is ultimately
through the collection of this type of data and its comparison to geophysical
measures of strain accumulation that the seismological community will advance
understanding of the physical factors that control the size of future
earthquakes.