* 1345158
* Proposal to Support Student Travel for the ACM CoNEXT 2013 Conference
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Phillipa Gill, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 08/31/2016
* USD 20,000.00

The 9th International Conference on emerging Networking EXperiments and
Technologies&lt;br/&gt;(CoNEXT) will take place from December 9th to 12th in
Santa Barbara, CA. CoNEXT is a highly selective (&lt;20%), high-quality
conference sponsored by the ACM Special Interest Group on Data Communication
(SIGCOMM). The conference is a major forum for presentation and discussion of
novel networking protocols and technologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal
requests funds to partially support the travel of 20 US-based graduate students.
The support amount will be $1,000 or the actual documented amount of expenses,
whichever is less. Each student will need to cover expenses in excess of the
fixed amount from other funds. If students spend less than the $1,000 limit the
surplus funds will be used to support students from under-represented
institutions. Preference in the award of the travel grants will be given to
students who have their work accepted to the CoNEXT student workshop which will
take place the first day of the conference. Other criteria will include evidence
of a serious interest in networking, as demonstrated by coursework and/or
project experience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: &lt;br/&gt;This
project integrates research and education of students through exposure to a
premier technical meeting in computer networks and communications. Students will
have the opportunity to observe high-quality presentations and interact with
senior researchers in the field both in the main conference and the associated
workshops. The PI will especially encourage women and under-represented groups
to participate.