* 1345626
* CAREER:  Stochastic Optimization for Water Resources Management
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Guzin Bayraksan, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 08/31/2018
* USD 366,737.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project
is to investigate stochastic optimization models and methodologies that will
assist in managing and adapting water resources and infrastructures in an effort
to ensure a sustainable future. The project will focus on two problems. The
first is a large-scale multi-period water allocation problem under uncertainty
(Lower Colorado River Basin) and the second is a regional-scale water reuse
infrastructure design and operation problem. The proposed research will address
these water resources management problems in a comprehensive manner by: (1)
formulating mathematical optimization models under known and ambiguous
uncertainties; (2) investigating decomposition-based solution methods that
exploit the special structures of these models; and (3) advancing theory and
methodology to evaluate the resulting solutions and other multi-period
adaptation and mitigation policies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will have a
significant impact on the well-being of the 25-30 million people who reside in
the southwestern United States. The models and methods developed can be applied
wherever water is scarce. The project also addresses two of the grand challenges
identified by the National Academy of Engineering: to help restore and improve
urban infrastructure and to provide access to clean water. While the project
focuses on water resources management, if successful, it will result in
modeling, algorithmic and computational advances in stochastic optimization.
These advances may help solve other important optimization problems. The
curricular materials and tutorials developed will serve to educate the next
generation of engineers on the methods and real-world applications of stochastic
optimization. The project will also promote and increase the visibility of women
students through a "Women in Industrial and Systems Engineering Research
(WISER)" program.