* 1345568
* SBIR Phase I:  Safe Li-ion battery with low temperature molten salt electrolyte
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,06/30/2014
* Thomas Kaun, INVENTEK CORP
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 06/30/2014
* USD 149,984.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to resolve a
glaring safety issue of Li-ion battery for grid energy storage. Li-ion has
experienced a number of high profile failures that lead to fires. In spite of
its high-rate capability, long life and efficiency, the excessive cost and
inadequate safety of Li-ion will limit its broader application for grid storage.
The safety issue is closely tied to the standard organic carbonate that is
highly flammable, costly and toxic. In thermal runaway, the cell becomes a blow-
torch. A molten nitrate electrolyte (125-175 deg C) replacement removes the
electrolyte safety problem and makes the battery safe from external fire. It is
a low viscosity liquid that also has application to solar heat transfer. Initial
research with molten nitrate as an electrolyte for Li-ion has shown encouraging
performance and stability for energy storage. Ongoing research has identified
electrodes with greater compatibility and stability with the molten nitrate. A
proof of concept demonstration establishes cycle-life and efficiency for a grid
storage application. The cost of materials accounts for at least 60% of the cost
of energy storage system. The low cost of the nitrate electrolyte coupled with
electrode materials reclaimed from cell phone batteries will help approach a
$100-150/kWh cost target for this safe battery. This inherently safe electrolyte
has a further benefit of resorting to an inactive-state battery at room
temperature for safe battery transport and installation. Siting and permitting
can be a significant cost for grid energy storage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact/commercial potential of this project is a safe, cost-effective
solution for grid energy storage. Grid energy storage is looking for a ?one size
fits all? solution to standardize and reduce installed cost. The safety concerns
of Li-ion are overcome with the substitution of a low temperature (125-175 deg
C) molten nitrate (inorganic) that can also lead to 50% lowered cost,
$100-150/kWh. With a fundamental change to safe electrolyte/electrode materials,
this Li-ion battery will compete with flow batteries, sodium-based batteries and
advanced lead/acid. This cost-effective energy storage will improve the
economics of renewables (wind and solar) and reduce dependence on less
environmentally-friendly modes of electricity production. The US economy depends
on readily-available, low cost electricity. States (with California being the
first) are mandating that batteries be a significant part of the grid energy
storage solution.