* 1345707
* SBIR Phase I:  Integrating Neurobiology and Cell Culture for Careers in Neuroscience
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,06/30/2014
* Karen Graf, EDVOTEK Inc
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 06/30/2014
* USD 150,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project proposes to provide the required neuroscience and
eukaryotic biology resources to usher new content and skill sets for upper level
high school and lower level college life science courses. Neuroscience today is
an important focus for our society due to the aging population, since it will
offer the beginnings of understanding on brain function and disease etiology.
Unlike many of the sciences, neuroscience requires understanding eukaryotic
biology and contributions beyond the classical life sciences to include aspects
of quantitative sciences and engineering. Increasing numbers of jobs in
pharmaceutical divisions of major companies require scientists from various
disciplines. Likewise many universities are devoting large divisions to
neuroscience research. Therefore it is important to expose students early to the
necessary building blocks of neuroscience. The proposed neuroscience experiments
will include cell culture-based research study of nerve damage, a hands-on
animal behavioral study, and a student participation study of neurobiology of
human taste. The long-term objective for the company is to manufacture safe
robust and affordable classroom neuroscience resources that are linked to
eukaryotic cell and molecular biology that will be introduced as comprehensive
classroom experiments coupled to teacher professional development workshops and
student learning assessment studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader/commercial
impact of this SBIR is substantial, since it will advance student learning by
exposing a diverse student population to neuroscience. Over the past 15 years
basic science has moved to eukaryotic systems with pharmaceutical companies
shifting their focus from small molecule medicines to large human proteins that
treat neurological disorders, such as interferon for multiple sclerosis,
produced in mammalian cells. Likewise, neuroscience has become a focus of
graduate school research and is beginning to be offered to college and upper
high school students. The company recognizes that introducing eukaryotic cell
culture skills in high schools is challenging due to the cost of required
laboratory equipment. Since students are provided with prefilled 96-well plates
that contain medium and pre-attached cells, the company now has the opportunity
to introduce a novel micro-scale cell culture option that minimizes the need for
equipment, including expensive cell culture hoods, incubators and cell media.