* 1345627
* SBIR Phase I:  An Instruction and Learning Analytics Platform to Improve Learning and Teaching in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Muniram Budhu, YourLabs, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 12/31/2014
* USD 153,500.00

This SBIR Phase I project proposes to develop a novel diagnostic algorithm and
methodology for obtaining detailed learner feedback in multi-step problem
solving questions. This feedback is fundamental to derive learning patterns,
identify at-risk learners, assess knowledge mastery, and inform both students
and teachers about what was learned, what needs to be learned, and where and how
mistakes were made. It informs the teacher what the students know and don?t
know. The wealth of data collected by the proposed prototype will promote peer
standards of excellence and student self-regulated learning, inform teaching
practice, revise curricula, and inform educational administrators. This project
is responding to a need in the educational system for personalized learning
experiences for every learner, evidence-centered learning, and data that will
improve teaching efficiency and effectiveness. The diagnostic assessment of the
product will help educators understand the extent to which learners have
mastered critical Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics skills to
identify specific areas in which improvement is needed and in which areas
learners have mastered.

The broader/commercial impact of this proposal is the real-time student feedback
and the subsequent analysis of that data to efficiently transform Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics education. It provides a formative, low
cost technology product that can help teachers personalize and revise curriculum
in real-time and promote step-by-step problem solving skills required for 21st
century careers. This will help the U.S compete effectively in the global
market. The in-depth learner database informs school administrators and
education policymakers on changes required to improve student performances and
teaching practice, and compliance with recently adopted common core state
standards. Data mining across multiple levels - from single problem to school to
district to state and internationally - allows school administrators to compare
performances within the U.S. and abroad. This project allows for the discovery
of knowledge gaps while enhancing teaching, learning and training in all
educational settings.