* 1345892
* SBIR Phase I:  A Novel Extended Delivery Dual-action Platform for Peptide-based Anti-fibrotics
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,06/30/2014
* Prakash Narayan, Angion Biomedica Corp
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 06/30/2014
* USD 149,761.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project seeks to develop
a new drug-delivery microscaffold that can help millions of patients suffering
from chronic kidney, liver or lung disease. These diseases are characterized by
chronic inflammation of the organ, stiffening or hardening of the organ and a
gradual decline in organ function. The proposed microscaffold brings together on
one single platform two drugs with very different actions. One drug is aspirin
that reduces inflammation and the other drug is Relaxin which can soften
hardened tissue and preserve tissue function. Unfortunately, Relaxin cannot be
taken orally and is therefore not being used for these indications. This
microscaffold, to be implanted under the skin, is designed to release these
drugs continuously over several days or weeks. This Phase I program seeks to
demonstrate the feasibility of such a concept in cell-based studies by
demonstrating that this microscaffold releases both aspirin and Relaxin and that
these two drugs retain their activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project is significant. These chronic
diseases are currently without cure. In fact, chronic kidney disease, cirrhosis
and idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis all necessitate organ transplant. In addition
to their attendant morbidity and mortality, these diseases cost this country
billions of dollars in health care expenses and lost wages. The potential
healthcare impact of this highly innovative technology is exceptionally broad.
Sustained-release microscaffolds will enable less frequent dosing and translate
to better patient compliance. In fact, similar to antibody-based therapies, this
extended-release scaffold might necessitate administration only once monthly or
even less frequently. By encapsulating a variety of highly potent drugs from
insulin to growth factors, custom platforms can be designed to treat a host of
indications such as diabetes, keloid scars and tissue fibrosis.