* 1345646
* SBIR Phase I:  Commercialization of multi-modal nanoparticle imaging contrast agents for multi-scale use in biomedical applications
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,06/30/2015
* Jose Assouline, NanoMedTrix, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 06/30/2015
* USD 179,999.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will demonstrate the
feasibility of using an innovative multimodal imaging agent for cell tracking.
While traditional contrast agents are suitable for many clinical imaging
approaches, new fields of medicine, such as stem cell transplantation, and
improvements in imaging technology are creating small?but growing?niches for
more sophisticated contrast agents than what is traditionally used. For
instance, there is a great deal of interest in functionalized contrast agents
which tag specific cells based on surface markers, or are internalized by stem
cells prior to transplantation so that the cell bolus may be tracked non-
invasively to its site of engraftment. To address these markets, this project
intends to develop a range of imaging tools based on mesoporous silica. The
50-200 nanometer particles have 3-4 nm pores into which a drug or other
bioactive molecule can be loaded, and with further surface functionalization to
give the particle contrast in magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), computed
tomography (CT), ultrasound and fluorescent microscopy. The result is a multi-
modal, multifunctional particle that addresses all the needs of state-of-the-art
bioimaging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;begins with the relative ease and very low cost
of production of our mesoporous silica nanoparticles, which can be priced
competitively with other products that have a fraction of the functionality:
quantum dots, traditional contrast agents, and even other novel contrast agents,
which may be used for stem cell tracking, but only one imaging modality. This
includes new products offered by other niche manufacturers. Using these
nanoparticles, an investigator can label a stem cell transplant, use ultrasound
for an image-guided deployment of the cells into a host animal, and perform
follow-up studies with MRI or CT. After the experiment, histology can be
performed to detect labeled cells in-situ. With one reagent used through the
whole experiment, the investigator can more rapidly assess his/her approach,
which leads to a more rapid translation to clinical implementation.