* 1345469
* SBIR Phase I:  Educators' Coach for Learner Interventions and Performance Strategies
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Rodney Ford, TiER1 Performance Solutions, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 12/31/2014
* USD 149,959.00

This SBIR Phase I project proposes to develop a novel electronic performance
support system (EPSS), the Educators' Coach for Learner Interventions and
Performance Strategies (E-CLIPS), to aid faculty in the design of online
learning content. The face of higher education is dramatically changing in the
United States. Shrinking state budgets have taken a heavy toll at public
institutions, reducing the number of seats available for students to take
courses needed to graduate. A significant number of courses are moving to online
or blended formats, but without the corresponding focus on instructional design
tools and methods to help faculty deliver a successful online learning
experience. The goal of this SBIR project is to design, develop, and
commercialize a virtual instructional design toolkit that that significantly
enhances instructor capabilities and thus the online learning experience of
students. This SBIR project seeks to conduct research on the instructional
design coaching model and then develop an innovative EPSS to aid faculty in the
selection and design of learning activities, thereby providing students with an
engaging online experience.

The broader/commercial impact of the project is in the potential to transform
the way any educator or corporate trainer delivers online content and learning
interventions. There are limited tools on the market that addresses the critical
issue of transforming the way faculty use instructional design tools. Faculty
desire a tool that allows them to be more strategic about course design and more
tactical with respect to student performance. Student analytic data is limited,
requires extensive IT support, and is rarely provided immediately. The project
provides a scaffolding tool to college instructors that makes it easier to
rapidly and quickly adapt lessons rather than wait for IT experts to help them.
This is the equivalent of other tools, which have revolutionized blogging for
all those people who do not want to learn computer programming to express their
viewpoints online. The project is a step in the right direction to transform the
way faculty deliver online learning with corresponding transformational effects
on student success rates. Extensions of the project to government and K-12
(i.e., virtual high schools) are well within reach and provide additional
markets to grow revenue.