* 1345335
* SBIR Phase I:  Artificial Characterization of Objects Relating to Human Tactile Perception
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Jeremy Fishel, SynTouch LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2014
* USD 175,813.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to develop a
robotic instrument to provide quantitative characterization of surface
properties that humans can perceive by touch. In contrast to machine vision,
which operates on images&lt;br/&gt;captured passively with video cameras,
"machine touch" requires physical interaction between the robotic sensors and
the object. In fact, tactile signals are affected more by the choice of
exploratory movement than by the properties of the object, making selection and
control of these movements essential. Current generations of robots rely on
primitive contact sensors that are of little use in enabling more human-like
perception, movement, dexterity and reflexes. Robots equipped with more
humanlike tactile perception and intelligent exploratory strategies will be used
to characterize and identify common objects with accuracy and speed similar to
humans. They will be able to learn and continuously improve their performance as
they interact with objects over time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project will be the enabling of advanced,
autonomous functionality in the next generation of robots. Robots need to be
able to perceive the world and interact with the world more like humans in order
to better work alongside us in unstructured environments. Assistive robots for
care of the disabled and the elderly are but one example of how next generation
robotics will improve the quality of life for many. Better understanding of the
haptic properties of consumer products will facilitate development of new
products that ?feel? better to human users and the development of quality
control systems to assure that those products consistently attain those
desirable properties during manufacture. Because these robots employ biomimetic
strategies for haptic perception, their performance can be compared to that of
humans to provide insights into the perceptual and cognitive strategies employed
by the human mind.