* 1345071
* Collaborative Research:  Identification of magnetic sources in the upper mantle
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2015
* Joshua Feinberg, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 12/31/2015
* USD 45,000.00

The view that the upper mantle is universally non-magnetic because it lacks
ferromagnetic minerals and would be too hot to carry a magnetic remanence needs
to be revisited because converging evidence suggests that some magnetic sources
reside at mantle depths. This situation occurs in cold geotherm settings. We
propose to carefully measure the magnetic properties of mantle xenoliths using
new collections of fresh mantle rocks. The magnetic measurements will be
supported by thorough petrologic investigations and by experiments in piston
cylinders replicating the rapid ascent of mantle rocks to the Earth surface. The
results these investigations will most likely transform the interpretation of
data returned by the Swarm mission, deployed in November 2013, which will
provide an unprecedented resolution of the lithospheric magnetic
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our understanding of the internal structure of the
Earth relies on geophysical approaches including for example seismology,
gravimetry and magnetism. The magnetic field at the Earth's surface informs us
about temperature at depth because below the Curie depth, minerals become too
hot to be magnetic. Up to now, we thought that mantle rocks, at depths of about
30 kilometers, did not carry any magnetic minerals, an assumption based on
measurements made in the 1980?s. The proposed research will re-evaluate this
non-magnetic mantle concept and provide a far more accurate knowledge base to
interpret magnetic satellite data. The information deduced from magnetic
satellites provides vital information on regions of the globe where tectonic
plates collide and create abundant seismicity.