* 1345066
* EAGER:  Assessing the Reliability of the Geophysical identification of Early Christian Churchyards and burials in Northern Iceland
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2014
* Gudny Zoega, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Standard Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 07/31/2014
* USD 46,688.00

This is an EAGER project to test the reliability of geophysical reconnaissance
methods to identify buried Christian churchyards and cemeteries in Iceland.

The research will allow the joint Icelandic/US team to evaluate the reliability
of two geophysical methods on five known or suspected early Viking Age
churchyards that are in a variety of geophysical environments. Currently, the
most reliable geophysical method to detect Viking Age Christian cemeteries in
Iceland is GPR. The problem is that for GPR to be effective, it is necessary to
strip off the grass in advance of survey. This is expensive and potentially
destructive to archaeological contexts. The team will employ electromagnetic
(EM) surveying with new multi-sensor instrumentation as an alternative method
for locating preserved walls of churchyards.

Positive results from this unique opportunity to evaluate these geophysical
applications could greatly expand our knowledge of early Christian practices of
the Viking Age. More broadly, many of the innovations, especially in identifying
cemeteries and mapping graves, have applications in other archaeological regions
and periods, as well as other fields (e.g., forensic sciences). The ability to
identify cemeteries and map the distribution graves and possibly to assess
skeletal preservation has obvious value to archaeological investigations,
heritage management efforts, and forensic scientists around the world.