* 1345236
* FIA-NP:  Collaborative Research: Named Data Networking Next Phase (NDN-NP)
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2018
* Christos Papadopoulos, Colorado State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Darleen Fisher
* 04/30/2018
* USD 359,989.00

Named Data Networking (NDN) is a Future Internet Architecture inspired by years
of empirical research into network usage and a growing awareness of unsolved
problems in IP. Its premise is that the Internet is primarily used as an
information distribution network, which is not a good match for IP, and that the
future Internet's "thin waist" should be based on named data rather than
numerically addressed hosts. This proposal continues research started in 2010
under NSF's FIA program. It applies the principal investigators' (PIs)
increasing understanding of NDN opportunities and challenges to two national
priorities--Health IT and Cyber-physical Systems--to further evolve the
architecture in the experimental manner that has proven successful. The research
agenda is organized to translate key results in architecture and security into
library code that guides application development towards native NDN designs. It
simultaneously continues fundamental research into the challenges of global
scalability and opportunities for innovation created by "simply" routing and
forwarding data based on names.

The NDN research agenda includes: 1) Applications--exploring naming and
application design patterns; rendezvous, discovery and bootstrapping; the design
of in-network storage; and use of new synchronization primitives; 2) Security &
trustworthiness--providing basic building blocks of key management, trust
management, and encryption-based access control, and anticipating future
security challenges; 3) Routing and forwarding strategy--developing and
evaluating path-vector, link-state, and hyperbolic options for inter-domain
routing, addressing routing security and trust, and designing fast forwarding
and mobility support; 4) Scalable forwarding--aiming to support real-world
deployment, evaluation and adoption via an operational, scalable forwarding
platform; 5) Libraries & tools--developing reference implementations based on
the team's fundamental results; 6) Social & economic impacts--considering
specific questions of the target environments and broader ones arising in a
"World on NDN." The PIs choose Mobile Health and Enterprise Building Automation
& Management Systems as specific environments to validate the architecture and
drive new research. Domain experts will be 1) Open mHealth, a non-profit
patient-centric ecosystem led by Deborah Estrin (Cornell) and Ida Sim (UCSF);
and 2) UCLA Facilities Management, operators of the second largest Siemens
building monitoring system on the West Coast. To guide research on the security
dimensions of these environments and NDN more generally, the NDN team has
convened a Security Advisory Council to complement its own effort.

Intellectual Merit: NDN builds on lessons learned from the success of IP,
preserving the thin waist, hierarchical naming, and end-to-end principles. The
design recognizes the major shift in the applications communication model, from
the "where" (i.e., the host/location) to the "what" (i.e., the content).
Architecting a communications infrastructure around this shift can radically
simplify application designs, enabling them to communicate directly using
content names they desire and leaving it to the network to figure out how and
from where to retrieve it. NDN also recognizes that the biggest weakness in the
current Internet architecture is lack of security, and incorporates a
fundamental building block to improve security by requiring that all content be
signed.

Broader Impacts: The success of new architectures requires community involvement
and uptake. NDN has built momentum through a commitment to an open source model
that has spurred substantial research activity in both architecture and current
implementation. Project members are often invited to present at "future
Internet" meetings around the world, and the PIs have performed high-visibility
demos of NDN's ability to handle large scale distribution. Industry is also
showing increasing participation. Finally, NDN has significantly impacted
students, generating several Ph.D. theses, related industry internships, and
both graduate and undergraduate classes that can now present a comprehensive
alternative to IP to stimulate discussion of what network architecture design
really means.