* 1345829
* SBIR Phase I:  High Pulse Energy Mid-IR Vertical External Cavity Surface Emitting Lasers (VECSELs)
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,06/30/2014
* Chris Hessenius, TPhotonics Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 06/30/2014
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will address the
need for high pulse energy laser sources operating in the mid-infrared (mid-IR)
spectral region. Currently available lasers sources are limited in their
capabilities. Wavelength selection and maximum output powers are limited, and
efficiency, reliability and costs are also issues. High-power vertical external
cavity surface emitting laser (VECSEL) development which employs multiple chip
arrangements has the potential to reach wavelengths that are not easily
attainable in a very compact package. In addition, the introduction of multiple
gain elements inside the laser cavity provides a means for power scaling and
extreme broadband mid-IR laser tuning. This also makes it possible to improve
upon the conversion efficiency of other parametric oscillator laser sources.
Using a high power doubly-resonant two-color T-cavity VECSEL, efficient
difference frequency conversion will be achieved. High pulse energy in the mid-
IR spectral region will be demonstrated through a novel design in which one of
the VECSEL chips will be pulsed while operating the second color under
continuous wave operation.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is wide ranging due to
the flexibility of the design. The goal of the proposed work is an innovative
approach to the development of a new class of high pulse energy laser sources at
wavelengths that are currently difficult to achieve. In addition to the
application rich mid-IR, the laser design can easily be extended to other
wavelengths in the far-IR, THz, visible, and UV portions of the spectrum. The
approach can have a significant impact in various fields of science and
engineering. The discoveries made within the scope of this program will have a
transformative impact in mid- to far-IR lasers and benefit a number of
disciplines including: laser surgery, dental surgery, dermatology, atmospheric
monitoring, chemical sensing, and a broad range of defense applications
including LADAR and laser range finding. In addition to the technological
impact, the proposed research will cover multiple disciplines in science and
engineering including high energy material properties, semiconductor physics,
nonlinear optics and laser physics which will provide a unique research
opportunity.