* 1345555
* SBIR Phase I:  Biological treatment of orchards to combat fire blight (Erwina amylovora)
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,06/30/2014
* Marcin Filutowicz, AmebaGone Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2014
* USD 149,243.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes to
develop a novel method to combat Erwinia amylovora (Ea), a causative agent of
fire blight. Fire blight has emerged as the most devastating disease of apple
and pear trees worldwide. Many growers apply streptomycin or oxytetracycline
multiple times during bloom and following plant injuries to prevent the growth
of Ea. Resistant strains have been isolated and resistance is expected to
proliferate directly in the human food chain. Here we propose to replace these
antibiotics with the microscopic predators of bacteria, slime molds, which are
benign to humans, animals, and plants. As advancement in agriculture, bacterial
predators represent a new proprietary biocontrol approach. Whereas the proposed
project will focus on reducing orchard carriage of Ea, the general approach
should be extensible to treating agricultural infections and contaminations of
many other species of bacterial pathogens. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project, if successful, will be a novel
method for the treatment bacterial infections in fruit and vegetable crops.
Among fruit crops grown commercially in the U.S., apples and pears rank third in
terms of area in production and utilized value. A pressing issue driving the
need for an alternative to current treatments is the inevitable ban on the use
of clinical antibiotics in agriculture. For organic orchardists, this ban will
take effect in 2014, and will leave a significant gap in the marketplace. From a
timing perspective, this gives agrochemical industry an immediate opportunity to
fill this gap and gain quick acceptance of predator-based new technology.
Furthermore, many agricultural diseases demand the development of fundamentally
new treatments effective against biofilm-encased bacteria, which are refractory
to antibiotics. Alarmingly, there is currently no single treatment that can
efficiently kill biofilms even though the incidence of reoccurring infections
indicate that biofilms exist in orchards throughout the world. Antibiotics
typically kill only growing cells whereas predators we will harness can consume
bacteria whether the bacteria are free-living or biofilm-encased. The $300M
apple/pear market is the first target market for predator-based biocontrol.
Future markets including citrus, grapes, and vegetables, will bring the total
addressable agricultural market alone to &gt;$1B.