* 1345452
* SBIR Phase I:  An Automated Assistant for Mental Health
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,06/30/2014
* Mithun Balakrishna, Lymba Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 06/30/2014
* USD 149,974.00

This SBIR Phase I project proposes to address the challenges medical
professionals face since the signing of The Patient Protection and Affordable
Care Act. Today's mental health therapist must prepare for an increased patient
load as the pool of insured Americans grows, while simultaneously reducing the
overall cost of healthcare. The healthcare delivery process must be streamlined
by eliminating unnecessary tests, procedures, and repeat patient care. This
project will provide therapists tools to: (1) speed up and improve patient
diagnosis, (2) prepare a course of treatment that is likely to yield a fast and
positive patient outcome, and (3) keep informed about scientific findings that
directly impacting their daily work. Deep research issues need to be solved to
parse the technical jargon of medical literature and reconcile that with the
free form narrative typical in therapist session notes. The project will produce
novel methods to transform patient records and medical resources like the
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM) into a medically
tuned semantic graph that is merged with a rich mental health ontology.
Moreover, the project will research advanced text similarity algorithms to align
patient data with DSM disorders, quality treatment plan options, and relevant
research findings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts/ Commercial Potential:
The broader/commercial impact of this project is to deliver an automated medical
assistant to mental health professionals that will give them time to focus on
patient interactions and make healthcare more personal. Government agencies and
insurance companies will benefit as increased efficiency and quality of care
from therapists will lead to lower healthcare costs, especially because mental
health disorders often manifest themselves as general medical conditions. The
World Health Organization reports that mental disorders account for nearly 12%
of the global burden of disease, and that by 2020 these disorders will account
for nearly 15% of disability-adjusted life-years lost to illness. Further
because the burden of mental disorders is maximal in young adults, the most
productive section of the population, improvements to mental health diagnosis
and treatment will significantly impact the American society as a whole. The
patient population will also benefit from lowered personal costs as well as a
lessened societal burden that comes with taking care of the mentally ill.