* 1345682
* SBIR Phase I:  Organic Field Effect Transistor Force Sensor for Touch Surfaces
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,06/30/2014
* Ryan Diestelhorst, NextInput, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 06/30/2014
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project seeks to develop a force
sensitive touch surface technology that will overcome the technical shortcomings
of currently available technologies. The design leverages the thin form factor,
optical transmissivity, and cost advantages of organic printed electronics in a
novel configuration to allow for environmentally stable, active-array touch
surfaces and displays to be produced with scalable manufacturing techniques. The
solution is intended to enable truly force sensitive touch that is low cost and
highly sensitive. It will be operable with any object, including fingernails,
gloves, and styluses, while not being susceptible to environmental factors that
hinder current capacitive technologies, such as dirt and moisture. If
successfully developed it will consume less power than leading technologies, and
will not inherently require special materials such as glass to be used as the
touch surface. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of
this project results from its relevance to a wide array of applications,
including force sensitive buttons for consumer electronics, automotive controls,
and force sensitive displays for fixed and mobile devices. Two decades ago,
touch technology was primarily found within ATMs and point-of-sale systems. More
recently, the technology migrated to other electronic industry verticals,
including one of the largest and certainly the fastest growing - smartphones and
tablets. Consumer demand is driving an explosion of applications in every
vertical. There is increasing demand for low cost, low power, more feature rich
touch solutions. In addition, new user experience benefits such as force
sensitivity are constantly being pursued, yet there is no viable solution yet on
the market. Such a technology would be poised to capture significant market
share from existing technologies in all of these markets.