* 1345647
* SBIR Phase I:  Multilayer Ceramic Electrolyte Membrane (ML-CEM) for a sodium metal-chloride electrochemical cell
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,06/30/2014
* Monika Jansohn, Na4B, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 06/30/2014
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to confirm
the performance of a novel, freestanding, nano-structured, multilayered ceramic
electrolyte membrane (ML-CEM) design. The ML-CEM will be produced from an anodic
aluminum oxide (AAO) membrane in a vapor phase method. The Na+ conductive ML-CEM
has an open-porous á-alumina layer providing the required structural strength,
and a dense, non-porous, nano- to micrometer thick sodium â-alumina layer
allowing facile sodium ion transport. The low thickness of the sodium â-alumina
layer will provide sufficient ion-conductivity for an operation of the sodium-
based electrochemical cell at, or even below, room temperature, and will exhibit
superior ion-conductivity above 200 °C. Therefore, the ML-CEM based
electrochemical cells will exhibit high energy and high power densities and a
wide operating temperature range, making sodium batteries to become a viable
option in many stationary and vehicle energy storage applications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is
that ML-CEM will enable low cost electrochemical cell designs. In a stationary
application distributed, modular and scalable ML-CEM based sodium batteries will
allow electric utilities to shift the power grid operation from peak-power to
system energy. This will lead to an improved utilization of the nation?s power
grid assets, allows the integration of fluctuating renewable energy sources,
enables micro-grid power architecture to improve the stability and reliability
of the electric power distribution, and minimizes the risk of cascading power
outages. Furthermore, the proliferation of affordable, zero-emission electric
vehicles will be supported by high-energy / high-power ML-CEM based batteries.
Their robustness and safety, as well as their high calendar and cycle life are
providing a significant improvement over today?s electric vehicle batteries.