* 1345311
* RAPID: Engineering Damage Assessment in the Aftermath of the 2013 Moore, Oklahoma Tornado
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2013,06/30/2014
* Arthur Cosby, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Kishor Mehta
* 06/30/2014
* USD 19,791.00

This Rapid Research Grant (RAPID) provides funding to collect structural damage
data that was caused by the EF 5 tornado in the city of Moore, Oklahoma on May
20, 2013. The damage path of this tornado overlaps the damage paths of two
previous tornadoes of 1999 and 2003. It would be interesting to see how the
houses reconstructed after the previous tornadoes perform in this tornado. Even
though there are close to 1,000 tornadoes recorded each year, typically less
than 10 tornadoes are rated EF 4 and EF 5. When an EF 5 tornado impacts a city
there is a unique opportunity to document and learn from the building damage.
This tornado damaged two schools, dozens of commercial buildings, and over one
thousand residential structures. RAPID funding provides an opportunity to
document the structural damage before cleanup efforts remove the
debris.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project team will work with other RAPID
grantee teams in the field to improve coverage of the damage area and avoid
duplication. The team of faculty members and students will travel to the damage
site and document failure modes, materials of construction, location of
structures with respect to the center of the path, and debris impacts for each
documented structure. Social media (twitter) will be used to obtain photos and
comments made by citizens. The mining of the social media will enhance damage
documentation at specific locations. The RAPID team will develop contour maps of
EF ratings and wind speeds based on observed Degrees of Damage. These maps will
be compared with past tornado studies to evaluate the similarities and
differences. This comparison will contribute to the understanding of the spatial
characteristics of tornado wind forces on structures. Building failure
progression will be determined in different wind speed zones. The benefits and
challenges of using social media to improve disaster assessment will be
determined.