* 1345163
* CSUSB Center for Materials Science
* EHR,HRD
* 02/01/2014,01/31/2021
* Kimberley Cousins, University Enterprises Corporation at CSUSB
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Santiago
* 01/31/2021
* USD 5,295,321.00

With National Science Foundation support and in response to the Materials Genome
Initiative for Global Competitiveness, California State University San
Bernardino will establish a Center for Materials Science to develop and study
new organic ferroelectric materials. Although inorganic and organic polymeric
ferroelectric materials are widely used, organic single molecule ferroelectrics
have untapped potential for environmentally friendly materials with superior
activity. Many of the known ferroelectrics have shortcomings with regard to
applications, such as cost, toxicity, or limited electronic properties. While
applications are not the main goal of the Center project, the computational
models and experimental results should prove to be valuable tools in designing
materials with desirable properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientific Merit: The
Center consists of a disciplinarily diverse research team whose collective goals
are to develop and study new organic ferroelectric materials, while at the same
time strengthening active research collaborations and personnel exchange between
partner institutions. The Center's systematic search for new organic
ferroelectrics relies on subproject teams in three distinct areas: (1) Theory
and Computation; (2) Synthesis and Structure; and (3) Experimental
Investigation. In the theory/computation subproject, crystallographic databases,
first principles computations, and experience-based intuition will be used to
predict likely candidates. The synthesis/structure team will prepare organic
compounds, grow thin films, and explore polymorphic behavior of the crystalline
materials. The experimental investigation team will then determine ferroelectric
and related piezoelectric properties experimentally, as a function of
temperature, pressure, film thickness, and composition, as appropriate. These
results will be utilized in subsequent iterations to predict the next set of
ferroelectric candidates. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact&lt;br/&gt;Ferroelectricity and the closely related properties
piezoelectricity, pyroelectricity, non-linear and high dielectric constant
properties of materials have broad impacts on an extremely large range of areas.
These include: scientific instrumentation, consumer products, national defense,
medical devices, energy harvesting, energy storage, robotics, and aerospace.
These applications represent billions of dollars to the economy and many high
tech jobs. With its numerous applications, this research provides an excellent
entry point to attract, then retain, encourage and motivate students, including
underrepresented students. The potential for replacing environmentally
unfriendly materials such as one of the leading piezoelectric, lead zirconium
titanate, with more environmentally friendly organic materials should be
particularly appealing. Students will receive a wide range of training on
research grade instrumentation, experience with specific computational packages,
and gain hands-on experience in synthetic organic chemistry and general
laboratory techniques and procedures. The proposed research collaborations will
further enhance the professional development of faculty at CSUSB and the partner
community colleges.