* 1345161
* EAGER: Ultra-Sensitive Resonant MEMS Magnetometers with Internal Thermal-Piezoresistive Amplification
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2015
* Siavash Pourkamali Anaraki, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Mona Zaghloul
* 09/30/2015
* USD 150,608.00

Objective: The objective of this project is to explore the potentials of the
internal thermal piezoresistive quality factor and displacement amplification
effect in silicon resonant microstructures for realization of ultra-high
sensitivity and low noise magnetometers. MEMS magnetometers consisting of
silicon based resonant microstructures with integrated insulated metallic traces
will be designed and fabricated. The performance of the fabricated devices will
be characterized and the effect of internal amplification offered by the
strategically designed silicon structure on sensitivity and noise level of the
magnetometers will be investigated. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
The proposed MEMS magnetometers operate based on harvesting and
&lt;br/&gt;internally amplifying the Lorentz force (force applied to a current
carrying conductor in a magnetic field). Extremely high effective quality
factors (Q) up to ~1000X larger than the intrinsic mechanical Q of the resonator
have been demonstrated using the internal thermal-piezoresistive amplification
effect. It is expected that such high Q values can amplify vibration amplitude
resulting from the Lorentz force without adding to the electronic noise level
leading to superior performance for the proposed sensors. Preliminary analysis
show that noise levels in the pT/Hz1/2 range should be within reach, which is
comparable to that offered by some of the most sophisticated technologies
available. The proposed effort combines the simplicity, small size, and ease/low
cost of fabrication of silicon-based MEMS magnetometers with unprecedentedly
high sensitivities. The potential outcome will be small size, low cost and easy
to use ultra-sensitive magnetometers that circumvent shortcomings of other
existing technologies such as the need for cryogenic cooling, integration of
exotic materials, large size and high power consumption.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Highly sensitive, small size, and easy to
use magnetometers can have transformative effects in various areas including
biology and biomedical engineering, geology and mineral/oil exploration, as well
as surveillance and defense (through wall/underground imaging and target
tracking). For example, arrays of SQUIDs requiring cryogenic cooling are
currently used for mapping brain activity by monitoring small magnetic fields
(tens to thousands of femotTesla) resulting from firing of neurons in the brain.
Small size and convenience offered by the proposed microscale devices can leads
to significant advances in brain mapping and enable development of advanced
portable brain monitoring devices. On the educational front, one postdoctoral
researcher, one PhD level graduate student and up to two undergraduate
researchers will be trained and directly involved in the research activities.
Results from the research activities will serve as interesting course materials
enriching the PIs ongoing courses in MEMS and microsystems. The experience
gained by the PI during the course of this project will provide him with a
highly valuable insight in a new field of research that will be transferred to
current and future students. &lt;br/&gt;