* 1345639
* SBIR Phase I:  Predictive Analytics and Optimization for Crime Reduction and Police Service Improvement
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,09/30/2014
* Stavros Kokkotos, DYNAMIC IDEAS, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 09/30/2014
* USD 150,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project proposes to develop a system that, based on data
analysis of past crimes, forecasts the type, location and timing of probable
future crimes and automatically suggests appropriate police unit deployment. The
proposed research is innovative in two fundamental ways: First, the system will
view crime occurrences and police unit deployment as a holistic problem and
create both a crime forecast and the appropriate resource allocation for maximum
efficiency. Second, recent advances in Robust Optimization will be used to
handle any uncertainties during the resource allocation process and produce a
deployment plan that yields good results under scenarios that deviate from the
forecast or the allocation plan. The system will use state-of-the-art Predictive
Analytics and Robust Optimization in combination or embedded within each other
in order to achieve a much higher degree of effectiveness in crime prevention
and to design optimal unit deployment for time horizons between one and thirty
days. The proposed approach is a substantial improvement over currently
available systems, which forecast crime using predictive analytics and then pass
the results to either a different scheduling system or a human to design the
unit deployment without any consideration for uncertainty or forecast error.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this project is to lower the crime
index of police departments (PDs) by determining a series of locations and times
where crimes of specific types are probable, with an acceptable degree of
certainty, and suggesting deployment of appropriate units. Most PDs do not have
enough resources to deploy in the vicinity of every probable crime; they need
tools to help them select unit deployment by responding to the set of crimes
that will have the most effect on the crime index on aggregate. They are few
such tools available in the market today; most of them concentrate on creating
weekly or monthly predictions, or on tracking known criminals. Some of the more
advanced systems require expensive hardware and well-trained personnel to
operate, putting them beyond the reach of smaller Police Departments. The
proposed system will be highly customizable and capable of connecting with
almost any type of data repository, while being affordable through on site or
hosted access. Therefore, it will improve crime prevention rates, decrease
response time and increase the effectiveness of budget-constrained Police
Departments. In the long term it will also enable strategic unit deployment, and
efficient personnel planning.