* 1345250
* Improving Secondary Organic Aerosol (SOA) Models by Comparison to Chamber and Ambient Data and by Uncertainty and Sensitivity Analysis
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* William Brune, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 06/30/2018
* USD 361,790.00

This project will evaluate and compare models that predict the formation of
secondary organic aerosol (SOA) in ambient air. SOA are formed in the atmosphere
when gas-phase compounds, emitted from human activities and from plants, oxidize
and condense into very small particles. These small particles may affect
climate, air quality, and atmospheric visibility. Improved modeling of SOA
formation will lead to improvements in air quality and climate
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has three primary objectives: (1) to
conduct inter-comparisons of different SOA models and test them against
atmospheric relevant laboratory measurements and atmospheric measurements; (2)
to do a rigorous uncertainty analysis of the models so that the significance of
model-measurement differences can be understood; and (3) to perform a
comprehensive sensitivity analysis to explore the influential model
configurations and/or parameters for the model results of interest, such as
aerosol mass and oxygen to carbon ratio. measurements. Several chemical
mechanisms of SOA formation will be considered, including an explicit gas-phase
inorganic chemistry and the reactions with the SOA precursors, continuous
oxidation, gas-to-particle partitioning, and heterogeneous and condensed-phase
reactions. Model performance will be evaluated by comparisons with laboratory
measurements from the Potential Aerosol Mass (PAM) chambers at both Boston
College and the environmental chamber at the California Institute of Technology,
and by comparisons with ambient field data collected during the Southern Oxidant
&amp; Aerosol Study (SOAS), at a site located in a heavily forested area in
Centreville, AL during June and July in 2013.