* 1345846
* SBIR Phase I:  Cloud-Based Data-Driven Predictive Analytics for Battery Performance
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Tal Sholklapper, Voltaiq, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 12/31/2014
* USD 175,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project represents a
major advance in battery research, combining the use of large, comprehensive
battery datasets with advanced data science techniques and cloud-based software
architectures to bring an unprecedented level of analytical capability to the
problem of modeling battery performance. Past efforts at
developing&amp;#8232;battery performance models have relied upon manufacturers?
performance data and limited single-discharge studies. This innovation applies
contemporary data science techniques to the analysis of a&amp;#8232;large,
normalized set of battery data including raw time-series data and aggregated
per-cycle&amp;#8232;performance from many battery cycling tests, as well as "lab
notebook" data including cell&amp;#8232;composition, dimensions, test methods,
and observations. The result will be the first commercially-available tool for
conducting comprehensive, multi-parameter empirical studies of battery
performance.&amp;#8232;This unique, data-driven analytical capability will
suggest new and promising research paths&amp;#8232;distilled from relationships
hidden in the data, and will help to predict battery performance&amp;#8232;and
lifetime.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial
potential of this project is manifested in its potential to dramatically
increase the pace of product innovation&amp;#8232;and improvement in the battery
sector. Organizations developing new batteries and those integrating batteries
into their products will perform more targeted and effective battery tests,
and&amp;#8232;will gain deeper insights from the data more quickly. Furthermore,
our predictive analytics&amp;#8232;module will become more effective as the
total volume of battery performance data stored in&amp;#8232;the system
increases, further accelerating the pace of development. As this innovation
is&amp;#8232;applicable to the entire spectrum of battery chemistries and
designs, its successful implementation and commercialization will result in
improvements in performance and reliability of batteries&amp;#8232;and battery-
powered devices across a wide range of applications; from smartphones and
tablets, to medical devices, to electric vehicles, and grid-scale energy
storage. Broad adoption of&amp;#8232;this software will accelerate the
development and deployment of energy storage and alternative energy
technologies, promoting economic growth, energy independence, and environmental
benefits. Market research suggests a total addressable market of up to $600M per
year for this battery&amp;#8232;data platform with advance predictive analytics.