* 1345068
* Digital Societies and Social Technologies (DSST) Summer Institute
* CSE,OAC
* 07/15/2013,06/30/2015
* Brian Butler, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Rajiv Ramnath
* 06/30/2015
* USD 43,885.00

This project is an interdisciplinary training workshop designed to bring
together graduate students and established scholars working at the "socio-
technical" interface between computer science, human-computer interaction,
design studies, management information systems, and cyber-social science. Dubbed
the "Digital Societies and Social Technologies Summer Institute," the workshop
contributes to ongoing efforts to build a "community of inquiry and practice"
that can address the mixture of technical, social and organizational challenges
that characterize today's increasingly digital workplaces. In particular, the
2013 DSST Summer Institute focusses on problems that are limiting the
sociotechnical community's ability to build coherent interdisciplinary
dialogues, develop collaborative research agendas, and nurture new generations
of emerging scholars. The 2013 Institute will also equip participants with the
cyberinfrastructure concepts, theories and tools needed to enlist computational
and big-data research methods in pursuit of new and transformative agendas in
sociotechnical design science. NSF funding allows 25 doctoral students to
participate in the DSST Summer Institute program and become better integrated
into the emerging DSST community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Today's emerging
information and communication technologies (ICTs) promise significant advances
across many domains of social and scientific interest; however, these
technologies stand at an uncomfortable intersection of multiple scholarly and
policy fields, "useful to many but central to none." The DSST Summer Institute
seeks to convene and reinforce a nascent community of social scientists,
computer scientists, design researchers, and computational methods and data
specialists, to begin building the missing intellectual and institutional
infrastructure for sustained scholarship in this crucial but underdeveloped no-
man's-land. Beyond raising awareness of advances in tools and techniques, the
DSST Summer Institute will also develop interdisciplinary networks of
sociotechnical scholars focused on critical ICT challenges and on realizing the
transformative potential of emerging computational methods and big data
resources within the ICT studies domain. In addition, the workshops will also
serve an educational purpose, providing graduate students and other early-career
researchers with training, feedback, and opportunities to build collegial and
mentorship ties beyond their home departments. Moreover, beyond these direct
contributions to strengthening the community for sociotechnical ICT Studies, the
Summer Institute will also contribute to the infrastructure for computational
and data-enabled science and engineering more generally, by enhancing
understanding of the continuities and transformations that occur when work
processes -- including scientific work practices -- move from physical to
virtual settings.