* 1345012
* Graduate Readiness and Access in Mathematics (GRAM) Program
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2020
* Angel Pineda Fortin, CSU Fullerton Auxiliary Services Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 08/31/2020
* USD 600,146.00

According to the American Mathematical Society, of the 1644 PhDs in mathematics
awarded in 2012, just 80 were awarded to Hispanics. Of those, only 13 were
awarded to Hispanic women. California State University, Fullerton (CSUF) intends
to address the disproportionately low rate of graduate-level success from a
variety of underrepresented groups indicated by these and other statistics by
implementing a program of comprehensive preparation for undergraduate students
aspiring to graduate study in mathematics, the Graduate Readiness and Access in
Mathematics (GRAM) program. In addition to the students supported directly, GRAM
will impact the larger CSUF community by providing the faculty with a
sustainable institutional framework in which to support graduate school
ambitions of CSUF students who are beyond the reach of direct GRAM funding. GRAM
will also provide a model for other institutions, particularly Hispanic-serving
institutions, for preparing their students to succeed in graduate
school.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The GRAM program will consist of several
components: (a) a Pre-GRAM program designed to create awareness of research
opportunities and graduate school, (b) rigorous content preparation aimed at
mathematical readiness for graduate studies, (c) undergraduate research, (d)
training for the general and subject Graduate Record Examinations, (e) training
and development of problem-solving skills, (f) participation in a variety of
relevant professional conferences, (g) cultural and family support, (h)
financial support for GRAM Scholars to decrease their work outside of academic
activities, and (i) professional development that includes guidance on graduate
school decisions, time and stress management, collaboration and networking
skills, and skills tied to writing, reading, discussing, and exploring
mathematics effectively. The undergraduate research projects that will be
supported will span various fields of mathematics and mathematics education.
Projects will deal with topics such as interpreting algebraic relations in terms
of curvature invariants, characterizing elements in semigroups and groups that
possess kth roots under a given operation, modeling human vision in detecting
tumors using images from magnetic resonance imaging, using biomimetic pattern
recognition with hyper-dimensional planes for cancer screening, statistical
validation of a cognitive test for multiple sclerosis, and measuring the
educational impact of supplemental instruction classes on students and leaders.
This project is supported jointly by the Division of Mathematical Sciences and
Office of Multidisciplinary Activities within the Directorate for Mathematical
and Physical Sciences and the Divisions of Undergraduate Education and Human
Resource Development within the Directorate for Education and Human Resources.