* 1345594
* Group Travel for U.S. Participants in the XVIII ISA World Congress of Sociology, Yokohama, Japan, July 13-19, 2014
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2015
* Sally Hillsman, American Sociological Assoc
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 12/31/2015
* USD 63,250.00

SES-1345594 Sally Hillsman American Sociological Association

The International Sociological Association (ISA), the major international
organization of sociologists, hosts The World Congress meetings every four
years. The meeting is the most important opportunity for U.S. sociologists to
exchange ideas and scholarship, develop personal and institutional contacts, and
promote collaborations on an international scale. The theme of the VIIIth
Congress is "Facing an Unequal World: Challenges for Global Sociology," and
features sessions focusing on inequalities in different social contexts and
situations in an increasingly interconnected, interdependent, and globalized
world. The importance of social media, consequences of the economic crisis of
2008, impacts of natural/environmental disasters such as the earthquake in
Japan, and the influence of social movements--from the "Arab Spring," to the
"occupy movements"-- are illustrative of themes of sessions will be held at the
Congress. The Congress is therefore particularly valuable given the need to
promote international collaborations on challenges arising from such worldwide
social problems, global transformations, and environmental concerns that
transcend national The World Congress meeting consists of hundreds of sessions,
exhibits, and other events, and draws approximately 5,000 participants from
around the world. Travel grants to support transportation of U.S. sociologists
ensures a strong presence of U.S. scholars in this important venue and permits
continued growth of international exchange and collaboration in sociology. The
selection process for travel support will include a peer-reviewed assessment of
applications, managed by the American Sociological Association, to ensure a
presence at the World Congress of junior scholars and sociologists
underrepresented in international scholarly meetings.

Broader Impacts

Sociology has the capacity to contribute valuable insights on many pressing
global issues. The Travel Support program provides an opportunity for scholars
with a worldwide perspective to present their research at a major international
conference. In administering the travel grant, the American Sociological
Association places great emphasis on encouraging young scholars,
underrepresented minorities, and women to apply for travel support. Support for
U.S. sociologists thus advances the scholarship of those who might not otherwise
have an opportunity to attend an international meeting. In addition to
benefiting individual scholars, U.S. involvement contributes more generally to
the advancement of sociological knowledge worldwide, to the internationalization
of science, and to facilitating processes that ensure that the scientific
enterprise itself builds upon the many contexts in which it is carried out, and
that it improves the lives of people around the world.