* 1345470
* SBIR Phase I:  Preventing surgical wound infections in high-risk abdominal surgery
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,06/30/2014
* Jonathan Coe, Prescient Surgical
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 06/30/2014
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project seeks to conduct
technical feasibility research and pre-clinical testing of a novel technology
designed to prevent one of the most frequent, morbid, and costly hospital-
acquired infections: surgical wound infection. The technology is an innovative
surgical tool that provides a comprehensive anti-contamination strategy for the
wound that is also user-friendly for the surgeon. This device has the potential
to be a transformative innovation in the quality of surgical care, particularly
in the 3.5 million patients undergoing high-risk abdominal-gastrointestinal (GI)
surgery in whom wound infections are the most common. This Phase I project
proposes three main objectives. First, the design and engineering of the
device?s critical anti-infective mechanism will be finalized using quantitative
computer modeling and benchtop testing, and then validated qualitatively with
surgeon-users in a human cadaver. Second, an initial batch of sterilized
prototypes will be built under appropriate design controls. Third, these
prototypes will be tested for safety and technical efficacy in a large animal
surgical model. If these objectives are met, Phase II activities will include
finalization of manufacturing processes, initiation of clinical trials in human
subjects, and application for FDA regulatory
clearance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial
potential of this project aligns with a major shift in healthcare to improve the
quality of patient care. At a cost of over $1.5B and 600,000 extra hospital days
in the US alone, surgical wound infection in high-risk abdominal surgery
patients is a major healthcare burden. In addition, providers and hospitals face
greater scrutiny on their wound infection rates today, and the sweeping changes
in healthcare reform have incentivized these critical stakeholders to invest in
preventative solutions. However, current solutions have been shown to be
insufficient, and the large existing strategic companies in the surgical device
space have no compelling products on the market. The proposed technology enjoys
a competitive advantage in that it operates in a relatively open competitive
landscape, and its unique mechanism of action provides a comprehensive wound
protection strategy. Thus, this technology has the potential to make a
significant worldwide impact on wound infection, both from a healthcare quality
and commercialization standpoint. The initial market for this technology is in
colorectal surgery; at a highly-competitive $300 price point, this translates to
an initial target market of $500 million. Ample expansion opportunities to other
abdominal operations raise the total potential market to $1 billion.