* 1345381
* EAGER: Multi-scale material and dynamic thermo-fluid computational models and controls for sustainable buildings using efficient energy harvesting materials
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Krishna Rajan, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Kerstin Mukerji
* 08/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

The proposal was submitted as an EAGER grant; it seeks funding for a US-Turkey
Collaborative research initiative. The application was entitled, ? Multi-scale
material and dynamic thermo-fluid computational models and controls for
sustainable buildings using efficient energy harvesting materials,? submitted by
Ulrike Passe from Iowa State University. This one-year grant proposes a
comprehensive numerical, analytical, and experimental investigation of the domed
Harran houses located in Turkey, with the goal of improving fundamental
understanding of how these domed structures lead to improved comfort conditions
through passive means. Experimental measurements will be carried out in Turkey
on some of these homes, and these data will be used to help develop a
computational fluid dynamics (CFD) model. Reduced-order models will be developed
in order to implement a proactive control system, and phase-change materials
(PCMs) will be incorporated into the building. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This US-
Turkey collaborative effort could potentially have a transformative impact on
building design in hot arid climates of the Middle East and southwestern US,
thus contributing transformative knowledge to engineering of sustainable high
performance buildings through dynamic BIM. The PIs also propose an array of
outreach activities, including undergraduate students, community college
students, and high school students.