* 1345108
* Collaborative Research: Statistical Physics of Fault Behavior - Dynamic Friction, Strain Localization, Comminution, Heat Transfer, and Compaction
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Ahmed Elbanna, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 07/31/2017
* USD 78,000.00

Earthquakes, landslides, volcanoes, and other natural disasters are costly
public reminders that geophysical processes underlying the beauty of landscapes
and coastlines are also capable of massive destruction through the sudden
release of stored energy. The dynamical instabilities responsible for the onset
and ensuing propagation of these events are linked to fundamental
physics?friction, fracture, heating, and compaction-- of granular materials
subject to extreme geophysical conditions present in earthquake faults,
hillsides, and volcanoes. This project aims to develop quantitative, predictive
models of granular materials under stress. The physics-based approach enables
the project to span scales in a manner that is inaccessible based on previous
phenomenological methods. While granular materials are ubiquitous, in both
nature and technology, the fundamental physics of these systems is not well
understood. Development of a precise, physical description for these materials,
motivated by geophysical variables and laboratory observables, will contribute
to development of predictive models for natural phenomena, such as earthquakes
and landslides, as well as technological processes, including granular flow,
transportation, jamming, and packing, that arise in food, pharmaceutical, and
construction industries. The incomplete understanding of friction, deformation,
and failure in these systems limits progress in manufacturing technologies as
well as forecasting natural hazards. Integrating perspectives from mechanics,
statistical physics, civil engineering, and geophysics provides a wide range of
scientific and educational opportunities, with impact on natural hazards policy
and preparedness as well as technical training of the workforce. Central to the
project is development of parallel pipelines at the sponsored institutions,
aimed at broadening and supporting participation of underrepresented groups in
STEM fields. Activities include K-12 outreach, collaboration with local
community colleges (Santa Barbara City College and Parkland College in
Champaign), and scientific, educational, and professional mentoring of
undergraduate and graduate students.

This project establishes a quantitative, predictive theoretical framework, based
on non-equilibrium statistical thermodynamics, for modeling the influence of
grain breakage, temperature variations, and grain shape on the frictional
response of sheared gouge layers spanning a wide range of velocities and normal
stresses. The theoretical framework is validated by quantitative fits to
experimental data on sand and fault gouge obtained in the rock mechanics and
geophysics communities. Target investigations include, but are not limited to
the following: strain localization patterns (Riedel, boundary, Y-band) at
laboratory and fault scales and partitioning of slip between these different
modes; dynamics of grain breakage and its role in fault weakening and the
evolution of fault zone fabric; effects of thermally-varying material properties
and flash processes at the grain scale on transient and steady state frictional
response; effect of grain angularity on volume changes and rheology of sheared
gouge layers. The project links quantitative physical parameters to
phenomenological rate-and-state laws involving porosity, temperature, pore fluid
pressure, and friction. Microscopic mechanisms underlying macroscopic dynamic
processes, including stick slip, and dynamic triggering will be identified.