* 1345567
* SBIR Phase I:  Advertising Sales and Traffic Optimization: Difficult Customer-Requested Optimization Constraints and Scalability on Real Data
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,06/30/2014
* Tuomas Sandholm, Optimized Markets, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 06/30/2014
* USD 150,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project proposes to develop a new optimization engine that
supports important allocation constraints requested by potential customers, and
make it scalable using novel techniques and real customer data. Determining who
buys what items from whom under rich expressiveness is a provably hard
optimization problem that requires sophisticated algorithms. The PI?' academic
group has developed technology for novel tree search / integer programming as
well as automated problem (re)formulation, and they have adapted it to address
the advertising market's needs. Proposed work includes developing new
optimization techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader/commercial impact
involves a significant efficiency improvement - i.e., improvement in the
allocation that benefits both buyers and sellers - in a huge industry. The US TV
ad market is $75 billion annually. Experiences from deploying approaches similar
to that proposed here into other markets suggest 12% - 41% efficiency
improvements. The efficiency gains will significantly enhance US
competitiveness. The structured, optimized market begets a fairer playing field
and broader access - also for new entrants. Consumers also benefit because they
will see more relevant ads rather than having their time and attention taken by
irrelevant ones. The on-ramp to the advertising market is a single-seller,
multi-buyer setting. Later the footprint can be generalized to expressive
exchanges. The approach and technology also apply to other markets such as those
for electricity and pollution rights. The proposed optimization technology
applies to applications beyond markets also. The company has a plan for
disseminating the results broadly via academic outlets, courses, industrial
contacts, and government contacts. They will also plan to engage minorities and
undergraduates. The effort describes a symbiotic relationship between an
innovation ecosystem and the proposed project.