* 1345813
* SBIR Phase I:  Autonomous Integration of EMR Information for Patient-Centric Open API Access
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,06/30/2014
* Anil Sethi, Gliimpse LLC
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 06/30/2014
* USD 149,818.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes to
develop a tool for autonomous capture, translation, and integration of
proprietary clinical information from Electronic Medical records into a standard
public format. The project addresses ongoing healthcare regulations such as the
PPACA which require doctors to provide patient access to medical data through
electronic means, as well as efficiently share with other providers. Due to the
nature of existing Electronic Medical Record systems, data sharing is difficult
and discouraged. . Further an Open API will be provided to allow authorized
third parties to access such data. Research will focus on data capture, parsing,
and machine learning techniques to ensure accuracy and performance. It is
expected that multiple methods will be evaluated and at least one method will be
implemented in a prototype system.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will enhance the
capability of patients to control their own medical data, its sharing, who has
access, and analysis by hospitals and research institutions for ongoing medical
research. By placing control of the patient?s data in the hands of the patient,
they can choose to keep or share any or all medical data to any provider, or for
research purposes. The rapid extraction and integration of data from multiple
sources and provision of an open API will remove medical data from the control
of vendors with no economic incentive to ensure data sharing. By allowing a
single platform for integration, interrogation, and sharing, research and other
software platforms can be built on top of the API to enhance medical research,
patient awareness, and physician awareness of all data sources, including
hospitals, other doctors, third party applications, and the growing use of
?Quantified Self? measurement devices. Significant increases in efficiency for
provider use and reduced expenditures on custom coded EMR solutions are
anticipated, eliminating the requirement for millions of dollars of consulting,
and improved patient care through efficient use of doctor time and provision of
relevant information.