* 1345502
* SBIR Phase I:  Regenerative Ionic Freeze Suppression for Thermally Bound Energy Storage Systems
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,06/30/2014
* Russell Muren, Rebound Technologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2014
* USD 141,507.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will investigate
an energy storage technique utilizing water as the storage material in an ionic,
time delayed, freeze-point-suppression refrigeration cycle. The project will
demonstrate A) 70% Round-Trip-Efficiency on a 2kW system prototype utilizing
diurnal ambient temperature swing and B) commercial feasibility of load shifting
energy storage with &lt; 3-year payback. Successful integration within low
temperature refrigeration architectures requires reducing membrane distillation
feed temperature and liquid-to-solid thermal regeneration equipment costs,
technical obstacles demanding membrane material coatings and advanced additive
manufacturing research. More specifically, the project team will advance air-gap
membrane technologies by enabling wide temperature module operation via new
membrane and condenser surface coatings, while improving liquid-to-solid thermal
regeneration utilizing a single, 3D printed heat exchanger designed and
optimized for sub-0C applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project provides utilities peak demand
relief, retail stores reduced freezer operating costs and regulators safer
refrigerants. Unfortunately, no state-of-the-art system simultaneously addresses
all these issues. Industrial/commercial energy storage is unaffordable,
refrigeration costs account for 60% of a retail store?s electricity bills and
equipment manufactures are scrambling to design around toxic ammonia and high
pressure, high cost CO2. This energy storage technology provides load-shifting
services and a 45% reduction in commercial freezer electrical purchases with a
3-year payback without large government incentives using safer, near ambient,
materials.