* 1345920
* SBIR Phase I:  Production of high-value chemicals using industrial yeast hosts
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,06/30/2014
* Jeffrey Dietrich, Lygos Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2014
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes to
develop a metabolic engineering and synthetic biology toolkit for a scalable,
industrial yeast host. Currently, the vast majority of synthetic biology tools
are directed toward engineering E. coli or S. cerevisiae, model laboratory
organisms that are often poorly suited for industrial fermentations.
Furthermore, there is an absence of available synthetic biology tools for those
hosts that are well suited for industrial fermentations. This research addresses
this problem through the development of a foundational set of synthetic biology
tools in an industrially tractable, but under researched yeast strain. The
research objectives include construction and characterization of a series of
expression vectors that facilitate transfer of genetic material into host cells,
construction of a genetic library designed to perturb host metabolism and
redirect carbon flux toward production of target small-molecules, and
demonstration of an approach to reduce expression of competing metabolic
pathways. Proof-of-principle application of the tools will be used to
demonstrate improvements in malonic acid biosynthesis in engineered
yeast.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader/commercial impacts of the proposed
project, if successful, will be technology that enables genetic modification and
engineering of a robust, industrial yeast host, removing significant technical
barriers that have traditionally inhibited both commercial and academic
research. In addition, the industrial yeast host genetic toolkit may accelerate
research and development on, and improve the commercial economics of, a range
bio-chemicals with over $30B in aggregate market value. The vast majority of
these products are currently produced petrochemically, but there are potential
cost and environmental advantages if they can be produced biologically. The
technology will first be applied to commercialize malonic acid, a high-value
specialty chemical currently derived petrochemically.