* 1345777
* SBIR Phase I:  Dynamic Infared Filter of Vanadium Oxide Window Films for Improved Energy Efficiency
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Brian Schultz, Dimien Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 12/31/2014
* USD 164,348.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase 1 project focuses on
commercialization of stimuli responsive metal-insulator transitions in binary
and ternary vanadium oxides. The remarkable tunability of the transition upon
incorporation of substitutional and/or interstitial dopant ions has filled a key
technological gap for their deployment as a dynamic infrared filter in thermally
switchable laminates for fenestration (windows, doors, and skylights) and
automobile glass. Much of the solar heat gain in structures occurs from the
transmission of infrared energy (heat) through poorly insulating glass units.
The stimuli responsive window laminates have several unique features to improve
insulating glass units including: thermally switchable heat-blocking to heat-
transmitting metal-insulator phase changes (or vice versa) without a substantial
change in visible transmittance, adjustment of the transition temperature to
meet the needs of different climatic regions, and incorporation of the
nanomaterials into a flexible polymer matrix for high-end roll-to-roll
retrofittable window laminates. The combination of this unique feature set
enables our stimuli responsive window laminates to mitigate air-conditioning
costs during warmer months while allowing the sun?s natural solar energy to warm
interior spaces during cooler months without adversely affecting visible
transparency.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is in using switchable
window laminates to address critical needs in energy inefficient and outdated
buildings, where more than 85% of buildings that exist today will exist in 20
years. This represents a relatively underutilized served market of size of $3.4
billion in the U.S. Much of the recent focus on energy efficiency relates to new
buildings and deep renovations; yet the overwhelmingly poor energy efficiency of
outdated buildings necessitates a facile low-cost retrofittable solution to
reduce energy consumption and carbon dioxide emissions in the U.S. Our stimuli
responsive laminates address this need and will contribute to U.S.
competitiveness in green building materials and energy efficiency. The long term
society impact will be more energy efficient buildings with a reduced carbon
footprint, particularly in existing buildings.