* 1345887
* SBIR Phase I:  Autonomous Telescoping Actuators For Distributed-Control Robotic Platforms
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2014
* John McEntee, onCue Automation
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 12/31/2014
* USD 149,349.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will enable
development of a family of ?smart? automation elements that can be interlinked
to provide robotics for a wide range of purposes at a significantly lower cost
than current solutions. The concept uses autonomous telescoping struts and
interconnecting hubs that can be readily assembled into smart mechanisms. The
struts include a novel compact transmission called a ball rotor that is capable
of very high mechanical advantages in a single stage. Each strut has an
independent, programmable, control system that communicates with the other
struts it is linked to over an embedded network providing a multitasking control
system for the robot?s programmed motions. The new device will be more capable
than existing alternatives and less expensive because it is simpler. This
project will test the viability of the concept by producing and testing
functioning prototypes of the basic components involved in the technology. The
proposed research focuses on understanding the performance of the struts. These
will be tested, measured and modeled to ensure that the ranges of useful working
speeds and loads are known, stresses are sustainable, and material limitations
are understood ? all necessary to ensure a dependable working
device.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential
of this project is tied to versatility, ease of programming, greater
capabilities and (projected) significantly lower costs of this novel automation
solution. We expect early adopters to include automation suppliers (ease of
assembling customized mechanisms, and lower costs), manufacturing (readily
assembled simpler automation for productivity boosts), and the academic market
(students re-use autonomous struts in different configurations). The lower cost
will also enable applications in many activities that are currently shut out of
automation by the expense and need for specialist knowledge. Our vision is to
trigger the development of a vast range of useful, smart mechanisms by making
the basic components inexpensive and user-friendly. This will parallel the
impact of PCs when they evolved from, expensive, specialized mainframes into the
devices that the general public relies on daily. Democratizing access to
robotics is crucial to increasing the number of minds that apply robotic
solutions in non-traditional areas, opening new markets. It could preserve an
economic edge for the US, especially in a global race-to-automate. Lower-cost,
and easily implemented robotics will improve US competitiveness vs. low-cost
foreign labor. This is key to improving manufacturing potential in the US, and
creating new higher value jobs.