* 1345232
* iCREDITS: interdisciplinary Center of Research Excellence in Design of Intelligent Technologies for Smartgrids
* EDU,EES
* 02/01/2014,12/31/2020
* Satishkumar Ranade, New Mexico State University
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Santiago
* 12/31/2020
* USD 4,999,721.00

With National Science Foundation support, New Mexico State University will
establish the interdisciplinary Center of Research Excellence in Design of
Intelligent Technologies for Smartgrids (iCREDITS). The vision of iCREDITS is to
obtain sustainable generation capacity by shifting the paradigm from power
delivery to energy delivery, using smartgrid concepts. In an energy delivery
system, energy is viewed as a commodity, which can be produced, stored, and
exchanged. This paradigm will lead to better economic sustainability due to more
efficient generation, transmission and usage. This vision accommodates the
creation of small microgrids, larger customer-driven microgrids in a
distribution feeder and, ultimately, the smartgrid,which includes the
generation, transmission, and distribution of the entire power system. The
research focus of iCREDITS is to develop the fundamental science and engineering
necessary for the energy delivery paradigm. The realization of the smartgrid
vision requires addressing a second fundamental problem: the dramatic shortage
of smartgrids workforce, exacerbated by the lack of diversity. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will
articulate four research strands, addressing the core components of a modern
smartgrid architecture; iCREDITS will strive to combine the innovations within
the research strands to advance the broad science and engineering of smartgrids.
The challenge addressed by iCREDITS is to investigate the fundamental science in
power systems, communication systems, disturbance modeling, and agent-based
coordination mechanisms and their interactions to enable the energy-delivery
paradigm. The iCREDITS educational initiatives effort will provide comprehensive
pathways, starting in the K-12 system and continuing to the doctoral level. The
center's educational models are interdisciplinary and designed to serve a
student population that is diverse in academic and cultural
backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research agenda is transformative and focused on making deep contributions to
the general field of smartgrids - a field that has profound impact on the U.S.
economy and the sustainability of the nation's energy infrastructure. Project
activities are designed with&lt;br/&gt;strong components of outreach and
education, to enhance the participation of women and other underrepresented
groups in smartgrids. iCREDITS will address the issues of underrepresentation by
expanding the research and training pipeline and introducing specialized
mentoring and retention mechanisms. iCREDITS will infuse smartgrids expertise in
a range of academic programs, enhancing the competency of New Mexico State
University.