* 1345664
* SBIR Phase I:  High Efficiency - Low Cost Hybrid Photovoltaic-Thermoelectric Cells
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Hajrah Quddusi, HybridaSol LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2014
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will explore the
feasibility of fabricating and optimizing a thermoelectric (TE) device suitable
for integration into a photovoltaic (PV) cell to increase the performance and
lifetime of the PV cell. The TE device can be used to cool and heat the PV cell,
effectively increasing the PV efficiency in real-world conditions. The power
output of crystalline silicon PV cells decreases 0.4-0.5% for every degree
Celsius of increased temperature. In most applications, this leads to a typical
loss of about 20% in energy production. Furthermore, the single greatest
contributor to the physical end-of-life for any cell is prolonged operation at
high temperatures. Therefore, thermal management is an important consideration
for any crystalline PV system. TE devices are reversible, have no moving parts,
require essentially no maintenance, should last for the lifetime of the PV
system and can run directly off the direct current (DC) power generated by the
PV array. The ability to manufacture TE inks and optimize TE materials with
near-state-of-the-art efficiencies will be demonstrated, and working TE devices
will be fabricated to demonstrate their functionality.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is very significant to
the rapidly growing market for PV modules and more important, to the increased
efficiency (and decreased emissions) of worldwide energy production. The
combination of custom capability, large size, and cost effectiveness will drive
a sizeable market for bottom-up TE and TE/PV devices, which can be scaled in
capabilities and costs to meet the needs of product developers, as well as
volume manufacturers and utilities. Advantages of the controlled ink-jet
printing method of manufacturing thermoelectric elements over conventional
methods include: ability to control the physical properties of the materials
during the fabrication, capability to achieve high compaction density of the 3-D
structure using nanoparticles, reduced costs, and reduced fabrication times. The
proposed effort will increase the body of knowledge and advance technology in
the areas of solid-state physics and chemistry, ink chemistry, microfluidics,
inkjet print deposition, and inkjet printer design. The results of this effort
will also greatly increase knowledge of long-term cell degradation processes in
PV systems, thereby improving reliability and economics of this very large
component of future energy supply.