* 1345922
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of a Platform for Rapid "Plug and Play" Chemo-enzymatic Conjugation of Bio-therapeutics
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Ramesh Baliga, Extend Biopharma
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2014
* USD 179,336.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes to
develop a platform technology utilizing directed evolution to engineer
transpeptidases (TPases) that will recognize sequences within native antibodies,
and conjugate any small molecule, peptide or protein moiety of interest through
a peptide bond. Current approaches for production of Antibody Drug Conjugates
(ADCs) either produce mixtures that are hard to manufacture and characterize, or
use technology for site-specific conjugation that necessitates remaking the
antibody of interest after inserting potentially immunogenic peptide tags or
non-natural amino-acids. In pre-clinical research, this approach will allow
"plug and play" conjugation of several different antibodies with cytotoxin(s) of
interest, allowing rapid identification of the best combination(s). Furthermore,
in a manufacturing setting, these variant TPases will allow rapid production of
ADCs labeled site-specifically with the cytotoxin of interest at a defined
stoichiometry, starting with cGMP manufactured antibodies. This will
dramatically reduce the time and cost of ADC manufacturing and characterization,
and provide more homogenous, better-characterized, and safer products to
patients.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project, if successful, will be
novel applications for drug delivery as well as biotherapeutics. Due to the
remarkable recent success of ADCs in the clinic, technologies for rapid and
site-specific labeling of antibodies have a large market and are sought by
companies discovering ADCs as well as CMOs manufacturing ADCs. Moreover, with
the cost of a single course of treatment with ADCs escalating to >$100,000,
there is an urgent need to find technologies that are able to meet this growing
demand without increasing costs for payors. Beyond ADCs, site-specific labeling
with our designer TPases will allow generation of companion diagnostics for
antibody therapeutics to enable effective stratification of patient populations
as well as imaging of tumor boundaries in surgical settings. In addition, the
ability to conjugate proteins without modification or with minimal modification,
will also allow the creation of immunotoxins/immunoenzymes where antibodies are
tethered to potent protein toxins or enzymes that act catalytically within
target cells. Lastly, the ability to make what are effectively designer protein
ligases will allow the development of a toolbox of reagents, not unlike
restriction enzymes for DNA manipulations, which will yield a valuable
construction kit for the field of protein engineering.