* 1345690
* SBIR Phase I:  Multi-dimensional Cardiogram Device for Diagnosing Valvular Heart Diseases
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,06/30/2014
* Kaustubh Kale, AventuSoft L.L.C.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2014
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop a
novel device for the non-invasive assessment of valvular heart disease. The
intellectual merits of this device include the development of a high-performance
system in a single, low-power compact package that is easy-to-use, and has a
small transducer array footprint. The device uses a novel multi-transducer
framework combined with biologically-inspired auditory scene analysis based
signal processing for a portable and cost-effective solution. The Phase I will
consist of development of prototype hardware and software for a portable device.
The device will provide physicians with multiple dimensions of information from
the heart signal to diagnose heart disease based on the mitral, tricuspid,
aortic and pulmonary valve sounds, enabling earlier detection and close
outpatient follow up. Physicians rely on auscultation and evaluation of risk
factors since access to cardiologists and certain diagnostic modalities are not
always available or practical. The goal is to meet this important need for a
device that can enable non-cardiologist physicians and healthcare professionals
to perform examinations for heart disease thath are more detailed than possible
with stethoscope auscultation. The proposed technology improves the diagnostic
accuracy for valvular heart disease. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project includes development of a patented
device to facilitate early detection and to improve diagnostic accuracy of
valvular heart disease. Valvular heart disease is perhaps the next cardiac
epidemic, as over the past 50 years, a steady rise in life expectancy has led to
progressively increasing frequency of degeneration. Valvular heart disease is
associated with significant morbidity and mortality, and treatment, particularly
by valve surgery, is expensive. Furthermore, research concerning the
epidemiology, pathophysiology and clinical management of heart disease is
limited. Many technologies have emerged to assist the diagnosis such as the
electrocardiogram, magnetic resonance imaging, and cardiac catheterization, and
the 2-D echocardiogram. Existing 2-D echocardiogram instruments have been
inadequate tools for screening as they require significant support staff and
infrastructure. Considering the cost, risks, and availability of these
diagnostic tools, cardiac auscultation remains an important part of the initial
investigative process for diagnosis of valvular heart disease. The societal
impact of the proposed technology is significant as a new diagnostic modality
will be made available. It is a step up from current technology that does not
exist today, and opens the door to numerous commercial possibilities.