* 1345569
* SBIR Phase I:  Educating Entrepreneurs to Find, Evaluate, License and Commercialize Federal Research
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,06/30/2014
* Virginia Kirk, Scale2Market, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 06/30/2014
* USD 150,000.00

This SBIR project will determine the feasibility of developing innovative highly
adaptive e-learning/hybrid modules for teaching technology transfer and
commercialization skills to entrepreneurs throughout the country. These modules
will be based upon a hugely successful instructor-led regional program and
feedback from collaborating academic, federal, institutional and national
distribution partners. The objective is to increase the participation by
entrepreneurs and small tech businesses throughout the country, in the licensing
of federal research for the purpose of developing successful, marketable
products. The latest learning science including adaptive learning methodologies,
emerging 3-D/gaming educational technologies, and the firm's years of
entrepreneurial and technology transfer experience, and nationwide distribution
partnerships will be used to embed these customized technology transfer
e-learning modules into entrepreneurship courses offered by various entities
throughout the country.

The broader/commercial impact is significant. According to the National
Institute of Standards and Technology and the Association of Technology
Managers, the federal government spends approximately $250B annually on
scientific research - yet very little of it which is intended for commercial use
- is ever licensed, especially by smaller businesses. There is compelling
evidence that most technology entrepreneurs, not already affiliated with a
university or laboratory, are unaware of and do not know how to participate in
cooperative research and technology licensing opportunities with federally
funded research institutions. Yet, entrepreneurs and small businesses are in
constant search of innovation to help them start or grow their businesses, and
serve their customers. Very few resources are available to small businesses and
entrepreneurs to bridge this gap. This indicates there is a critical national
need for a cost effective learning system that appeals to the fast-paced profit
oriented perspectives of entrepreneurs and small tech firms to teach them how to
leverage this vast federal resource. The challenge is to craft an e-learning
system with the most effective blend of interactivity, instructor involvement
and learning community support, for this very demanding, diverse audience,
especially those in sparsely populated areas. The objective of this initiative
is to advance knowledge and understanding among entrepreneurs, entrepreneur
support organizations and federal research laboratories regarding the challenges
and nuances of the scientific research/licensing/product development continuum
and the important interdependent and evolving roles of each entity. Ultimately,
this project will benefit our country's innovation economy and help federal
agencies fulfill their societal mission through increased licensing activity by
the entrepreneurial community.