* 1345844
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel approach to the oral delivery of biologically active peptide analogs
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,07/31/2014
* Scott Shandler, Longevity Biotech, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 07/31/2014
* USD 155,000.00

Project Abstract for the general public&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This Small
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project is motivated by fundamental
questions about the way drug molecules are processed in the human body. Drug
candidates cannot address a human disease unless they reach the appropriate
sites within the body and then persist in those sites. The proposed research
focuses on a particular class of bioactive compounds called "peptides." Peptides
can act in powerful and favorable ways within the body, with high specificity of
action (which minimizes "side effects"), but they are subject to very rapid
destruction after administration. This weakness of peptides requires that they
be injected regularly, but peptide drugs would be much more useful if they could
be taken orally. This SBIR Phase I project examines unique peptide-like
molecules that are designed to retain the favorable pharmaceutical action of
peptides themselves but to resist degradation mechanisms within the body that
rapidly destroy peptides. The stomach is the most destructive site for peptides,
and this project aims to generate peptide-like molecules that are sufficiently
robust to survive the stomach and reach the small intestine, where they can be
absorbed. Achieving these molecular design goals would have high intellectual
merit in addition to advancing drug design. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is significant. Current
peptide-based drugs constitute important tools in human healthcare, and
development of new peptide-based drugs represents a growing proportion of the
pharmaceutical research effort in the U.S. and worldwide. Several current
peptide drugs, addressing widespread diseases such as type 2 diabetes (T2DM) and
osteoporosis, have sales in excess of $1 billion. These drugs must be delivered
by injection. If new drugs featuring the same health benefits became available
in pill form, the convenience of orally delivered drugs would rapidly capture
most of the market. Moreover, the high stability engendered by our new design
strategy would enable the development of drugs for diseases that currently
cannot be addressed. Thus, the commercial potential of this project is quite
high. Orally delivered replacements for currently injectable drugs would have a
substantial broader impact because they would enhance patient compliance.
Inadequate treatment of T2DM for example, leads to many adverse health
consequences that degrade productivity and quality of life for patients.
Increased compliance resulting from a generalized ability to deliver peptide
drugs in pill form would vastly improve outcomes for patients, including the
specific patients populations targeted by our current programs.