* 1345487
* SBIR Phase I:  Playing with Statistics
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,06/30/2014
* Frank Hughes, Tietronix Software, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 06/30/2014
* USD 149,909.00

This SBIR Phase I project proposes to develop and implement interactive Web-
based games, apps, and corresponding investigative laboratory modules. These
labs are created to effectively teach statistical thinking and the process of
scientific inquiry to undergraduate students. These materials will consist of
one- or two-day activities designed for high school and introductory college
courses as well as more complex projects geared toward more advanced courses.
The intellectual merit of this proposal is to contribute to the scholarship of
statistics education by being among the first to fully utilize technology to
develop interactive, inquiry-based, and interdisciplinary materials designed for
students with strong quantitative skills and interests. This project will
develop a new model of educational material that deepens the statistical
knowledge of students by providing realistic research problems that encourage
students to follow a complete process of statistical analysis at multiple stages
of their academic career. By training students how to properly collect data,
determine an appropriate technique for analysis, use technology, perform the
analysis, make inferences, interpret and present the results. This project will
encourage students early in their studies to experience the role of a research
scientist and to understand how the field of statistics helps advance scientific
knowledge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader/commercial impact of this proposal
will be the creation of new educational models that could dramatically impact
the direction of statistics education. These game-based labs can allow for
individualized research questions and just-in-time feedback that students
recognize as directly related to the goals within their game. Unlike standard
class activities where all students are working to get the same answer, through
technology these interactive games easily allow students to choose what factors
to evaluate and have input in the research design. Thus students conduct
research in which the outcome is not known (even to the course instructor).
These labs will include detailed instructor resources and will easily fit into
existing high school and undergraduate statistics and science courses. By making
students grapple with intriguing real-world problems that demonstrate the
intellectual content and broad applicability of statistics as a disciple, these
materials encourage students to consider a career in statistics or to
incorporate statistical thinking into any career.