* 1345112
* Mineral Physics Studies of Elasticity, Phonon, and Rheology at Pressure-Temperature Conditions of the Earth's Deep Interior
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/2014,07/31/2017
* Ho-kwang Mao, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 07/31/2017
* USD 404,999.00

The mineralogy of the Earth's lower mantle, which comprises the largest fraction
of our planet (&gt;55% by volume), was previously regarded as simple and
monotonous. An iron-magnesium silicate with the perovskite structure was thought
to be the stable mineral unchanging over the enormous pressure and depth range
some 400 to 1,800 miles (660 to 2,900 kilometers) below the Earth's surface.
With prior NSF grant support, the PI's team made a surprising discovery: at the
conditions of the deep lower mantle, the iron-magnesium silicate decomposes into
a pure magnesium silicate and a previously unknown Fe-rich silicate mineral with
entirely new properties. The next challenge in the present grant is, therefore,
to investigate how the new minerals respond to seismic waves and how they deform
under compression. The team will use a battery of novel probes for
characterization of these properties in-situ under the high pressures and
temperatures generated in their laboratory. The results will provide the key for
deciphering the seismological information and gain fundamental understanding of
the deep Earth interior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Focused research on the frontier
of the deep lower mantle is proposed. Very recently, the perovskite phase of
(Mg,Fe)SiO3 was found to disproportionate to an Fe-free MgSiO3 pv and a new Fe-
rich hexagonal silicate (H-phase) at the pressure-temperature (P-T) conditions
corresponding to the bottom ~1000 km, representing an important, surprising
discovery. In the present proposal, the observation of disproportionation and H
phase will be further explored and their exact P-T boundaries and physical
properties will be investigated. The newly developed multigrain crystallography
technique will be applied to P-V-T-x studies in the multiphase region that
perovskite, H-phase, and/or post-perovskite coexist. Synchrotron MÃ¶ssbauer
spectroscopy, x-ray emission spectroscopy, and nuclear resonant inelastic x-ray
scattering will be used to probe the Fe2+/Fe3+ ratio, spin state, and phonon
density of state, respectively, for the H-phase in-situ under high P-T. Radial
x-ray diffraction and the newly developed Bragg coherent diffraction imaging
method will be developed to study lattice preferred orientation and shape-
preferred orientation as possible sources of seismic anisotropy in the D" layer.
Results from the present study will contribute to fundamental understanding the
seismic complexities of the deep lower mantle.