* 1345227
* Workshop: Uncovering Transport Barriers in Geophysical Flows; Banff International Research Station (BIRS), Banff, Alberta; 22 to 27 September 2013
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2014
* Thomas Peacock, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Massimo Ruzzene
* 08/31/2014
* USD 17,458.00

The objective of this award is to support an international workshop at the Banff
International Research Station (BIRS) on "Uncovering Transport Barriers in
Geophysical Flows". The methods covered by the workshop include the topics of
Lagrangian Coherent Structures (LCSs), set-theoretical approaches to Lagrangian
coherence, probabilistic methods, and Lagrangian indicators motivated by ergodic
theory. The goal is to bring together researchers with expertise in a variety of
techniques, find common ground, and thereby develop a coordinated approach to
the problem of geophysical transport. This interaction will inspire new
theoretical research and advance the development of practical tools for real
world application.

The need to develop robust mathematical methods to identify the key dynamic
structures that act as the hidden skeleton of transport in complex geophysical
flows has never been more pressing, given their role in organizing climate
processes (e.g. algal blooms, ozone transport) and environmental disasters (e.g.
Deepwater Horizon oil spill, Icelandic volcanic ash cloud, Fukushima nuclear
disaster). New tools that emerge as a result of this workshop have the potential
to profoundly influence decision making strategies for the ocean, including such
scenarios as the deployment of clean up equipment during an oil spill or the
focus regions for a search and rescue operation. The outcomes of this workshop
will be summarized in a 10-page summary document and distributed to government
agencies and industry. Junior faculty and postdoctoral researchers will interact
with leading faculty, developing a future pool of talent in this rapidly
advancing and globally important research topic.