* 1345228
* ABI Workshop: COMBINE 2014 4 day Workshop and support for students, young scientists and SBGN members to attend the workshop at the Health Science Campus, USC, Los Angeles, CA.
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Huaiyu Mi, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 08/31/2016
* USD 43,600.00

The COmputational Modeling in BIology NEtwork (COMBINE) is an initiative to
coordinate the development of the various community standards and formats for
computational models, in Systems Biology and related fields. The COMBINE
Workshop goals are to allow researchers in various pathway standard efforts
(SBGN, SBML, BioPAX, CellML, SED-ML, etc.) to gather and exchange ideas, report
progress, discuss interoperability between standards, and plan for future
synergistic development. In past versions of the workshop, integration and
inter-exchange of data between different standards have been discussed and
implemented in different software tools and pathway/model databases. As the only
graphical standard in the initiative, SBGN (Systems Biology Graphical Notation)
defines a standard for visual representation of biological pathways and models.
SBGN must be interoperable with the other standards to be
effective.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of COMBINE workshop is to bring
scientists and developers in the standardizing efforts together for
collaborative and synergistic development of pathway and model standards. With
an ever growing amount of experimental data, better high-throughput
technologies, and increasingly complex data models, computer and software have
revolutionized the way bioscience research is conducted. Standards that work
together cohesively will transform the way biological knowledge is communicated,
not only among the research community, but also between humans and computers.
The workshop talks and presentations will be freely available on the internet to
the public and researchers.