* 1345209
* HBCU-RISE Hampton University: Advanced Physical Modeling and Simulation for 21st Century Scientists
* EDU,EES
* 03/01/2014,02/28/2018
* Nicholas Heavens, Hampton University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Santiago
* 02/28/2018
* USD 999,950.00

With National Science Foundation support, Hampton University will build a self-
sustaining High Performance Computing center. Building on Hampton University's
strength in atmospheric sensing, the institution will develop a complementary
modeling and data analysis capability through the acquisition of a large,
parallel computer cluster. The proposed infrastructure will advance research in
Polar Stratospheric Clouds (potential harbingers of climate change), Jet Stream
Dynamics, Dust Transport, Long-term Atmospheric Evolution, Atmospheric Chemistry
and Parallel Algorithms. In addition, the proposed infrastructure will enable
the development of high-resolution, high-fidelity physical models and data
analysis tools capable of ingesting very large and heterogeneous data sets.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;Research goals include
computational fluid dynamics models of the Antarctic Circumpolar Jetstream to be
integrated with analysis of multi-satellite, multi-instrument datasets, analysis
of the planetary boundary layer for comparison with LIDAR data, line-by-line
radiative transfer models for interpreting limb sounding data, and parallel
algorithm development taking advantage of structured matrices.&lt;br/&gt;In
addition to providing new insights into Earth's Polar Regions, study of the
dynamics of Earth's Antarctic Circumpolar Jetstream will be extended to jet
streams on other planets. The new computing cluster will allow researchers to
explore dynamical effects that could not be incorporated into previous
simulations. Evolution of atmospheres on terrestrial planets will also be
investigated by focusing on the set of feedbacks identified within the mantle:
the effects of water and mantle temperature on volcanism and lithospheric
stresses (and hence subduction). The other feedback of interest is the influence
of the surface temperature on the mantle temperature which then influences all
the mantle fluxes. Proposed computational resources will also enable project
researchers to run the Mars Weather Research and Forecasting model, which is
capable of performing simulations at the necessary scales
for&lt;br/&gt;parameterization development. This work will help constrain the
conditions under which dust-driven convection occurs on Mars and greatly improve
our understanding of their dynamics once they
evolve.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:&lt;br/&gt;The high-performance
computing platform and student pipeline to be established by this project will
benefit society through improved understanding of the atmosphere and climate,
through development of more effective observing and modeling techniques, and
through the training of a diverse workforce expertise in advanced physical
modeling methods. The proposed computational resource will allow researchers to
propose more advanced modeling and analysis efforts, incorporate more detailed
physical models, increase coverage and resolution, and explore wider ranges of
parameter space than are possible now.