* 1345490
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel Utilization of Fly Ash using a Sustainable Process
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,06/30/2014
* Jia Liu, Novoreach Technologies LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 06/30/2014
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop a novel and
sustainable process to utilize industrial waste materials and energy to prepare
high value commercial structural materials. Fly ash from coal power plants will
be formulated and reacted with flue gas to develop proppant materials for
hydraulic fracturing in oil and gas exploration. The use of fly ash will not
only reduce the environmental impact of fly ash disposal but also eliminate the
need to mine and transport a large quantity of ceramic raw materials to proppant
production plants. Utilization of waste energy from flue gas will also enable a
sustainable process to produce proppants without the need of high temperature
ceramic processing. Therefore, the combined use of fly ash and flue gas will
enable the production of low-cost and high-strength proppants for oil and gas
exploration.

The broader impacts/commercial potential will be the potential to provide a
sustainable and low-cost process to utilize coal power plant wastes to produce
high strength structural materials. These high strength materials can be used as
proppants for hydraulic fracturing in oil and gas exploration. The global
proppant market for oil and gas exploration is expected to reach $7 billion by
2017 with a 10.75% compound annual growth rate. The success of the proposed work
could significantly reduce the landfill requirements for disposal of fly ash,
and the resulting impact on the environment. Finally, the utilization of flue
gas treatment to replace traditional high-temperature ceramic material
processing will reduce the level of global greenhouse gas emissions.