* 1345510
* SBIR Phase I:  Broadband High-Speed RF Spectrum Processor via Intelligent Adaptive Compressive Sensing and Parallel Processing FPGAs
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,06/30/2014
* David Mycue, Kalos Technologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2014
* USD 149,967.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to study and
demonstrate the feasibility of an innovative broadband, high-speed digital radio
frequency (RF) spectrum processor for cognitive radio frequency and dynamic
spectrum access network research and development via intelligent adaptive
compressive sensing and parallel processing FPGAs. With recent advances in
cognitive radio frequency technologies, there is a strong need for new wireless
test, measurement and validation equipment with novel capabilities that are not
available in current products. The research objective is to develop a spectrum
processor that can perform real-time RF spectrum analysis on digitized data
streams with ultra-wide bandwidth and has the capability of operating for
cognitive radio frequency and dynamic spectrum access systems. Specifically, it
takes advantage of the intelligent adaptive compressive sensing technology to
significantly reduce the computational load while preserving the fidelity of
spectrum analysis. Anticipated technical results include wide instantaneous
bandwidth, integration of spectrum analysis and intelligent RF sensing, real
time analysis capability, preliminary RF testing and
demonstration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of
this project is the development of a commercial broadband, high-speed digital
radio frequency spectrum processor that will be used in academic, military,
homeland security and industrial research laboratories worldwide with
applications spanning the wireless communication, radio and television, GPS and
other navigation systems. The success of this project will provide novel
features to existing products in the market and has the commercial potential is
substantial. The development of this technology has also important societal
implications due to the wide range of scientific and industrial topics that this
technology can be applied.