* 1345499
* Preparing Mathematical Sciences Students for Business, Industry, and Government Careers (Pre-BIG)
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2013,03/31/2018
* Reza Malek-Madani, Mathematical Association of America
* Continuing Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 03/31/2018
* USD 2,057,514.00

The PreBIG program will provide mathematical sciences faculty with tools and
training to help them better prepare students for business, industry, and
government (BIG) careers and will provide mathematical sciences students with an
opportunity to conduct research on problems related to BIG. To accomplish this,
the PIs will produce a set of training videos, conduct summer training workshops
for faculty, organize a semester-long course and competition for undergraduate
students, organize a summer recognition conference for participating
undergraduate students, and secure support from BIG entities. The program
includes a strong undergraduate research component since student participation
in research has been shown to be effective in improving student success in
graduating with a STEM (science, technology, engineering, or mathematics)
degree. The undergraduate students will be mentored so that they develop skills
that will help them to succeed in a career in STEM, including knowledge of
career opportunities, experience in working on problems from BIG organizations,
and experience in developing effective writing and oral presentation skills. The
MAA's focus on supporting underrepresented groups in the mathematical sciences
will be reflected in this program as well. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In business,
industry, and government, there is a tremendous demand for STEM graduates. Yet,
in the mathematical sciences, many students and faculty are unaware of the
numerous career opportunities in these sectors, and faculty may not know how to
adequately prepare students for STEM careers outside academia. To help remedy
this situation, we propose a program to better prepare students in the
mathematical sciences to succeed in careers in business, industry, and
government (BIG). This program will:&lt;br/&gt;a) Increase awareness among
mathematical sciences faculty and undergraduate majors of non-academic career
options and related internship opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;b) Facilitate
connections among mathematical sciences faculty and people working in BIG in the
same geographic region.&lt;br/&gt;c) Offer undergraduate students research
opportunities focused on real-world BIG problems.&lt;br/&gt;d) Provide training
for undergraduate students and faculty in successful approaches to BIG problems
along with requisite technical and communications skills.&lt;br/&gt;e) Require
less and less external funding as time goes on.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is jointly supported by the Division of Mathematical Sciences and the
Office of Multidisciplinary Activities within NSF's Directorate for Mathematical
and Physical Sciences.