* 1345087
* Experimental simulation of earthquake rupture processes
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* David Lockner, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 07/31/2018
* USD 250,000.00

An earthquake occurs when a fault in the earth crust ruptures abruptly. The rock
blocks that bound the fault, slip for tiny distance in small earthquakes, and up
to a few meters in large events. During this slip, the fault weakens and the
weakening provides energy to continue the earthquake rupture. Obviously, this is
a complex process in which the mechanical properties of the fault drastically
change within seconds. Classical experimental approaches to explore these
processes are conducted at constant velocity or at very slow velocity; neither
of these conditions is relevant to the rupture of natural earthquakes. We
propose a new experimental approach that is anticipated to reveal key parameters
that are relevant to earthquakes. These experiments will utilize the unique
capabilities of energy supply and power control of our earthquake laboratory in
the University of Oklahoma. The impact of these capacities was demonstrated in
the preliminary work that succeeded in simulations of fault behavior during
earthquakes up to magnitude M=8 (similar to 1906 San Francisco earthquake). Why
are such experiments important? First, in general, better understanding of
earthquake processes is essential for the reduction of seismic hazard. Second,
this study is particularly important for the calculations of seismic ground
shaking, which are used for building structural design. These calculations are
based on the mechanical behavior of faults during earthquakes, and more accurate
and relevant calculations require better knowledge of this behavior.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Theoretical models suggest that earthquake rupture is a
complex process with non-trivial evolution of kinematic and dynamic properties
(e.g., Tinti et al. 2005). Recent experiments that simulated the velocity
history of actual earthquakes (e.g., Sone and Shimamoto, 2009; Fukuyama and
Mizoguchi, 2010; Liao, Chang and Reches, in revision for EPSL) show that
constitutive relations which were determined in low-velocity, short-distance
friction experiments do not necessarily hold for variable, high slip-velocity of
natural earthquakes. The present objective is to simulate the earthquake rupture
process by loading experimental faults similarly to earthquake loading, and to
derive the constitutive relation at these conditions. The experiments will be
conducted with a high-speed rotary shear apparatus that applies frictional
sliding along rock blocks under slip-velocity up to 1 m/s, normal stress up to
30 MPa, and large slip distance. This apparatus has two unique capabilities: (1)
Loading the experimental fault by a finite amount of energy (up to 10^7 J/m^2)
that is stored in a flywheel (Chang et al., 2012); and (2) A real-time feedback
system that controls the power-density applied on the fault (power-density =
slip velocity * shear-stress). These methods allow the application of any
loading history to reveal the fault response under transient earthquake loading.
The preliminary results of both methods show strong similarities to theoretical
models of fault behavior in terms of the evolution of fault strength (weakening
and strengthening), slip velocity, energy dissipation, and rise-time. We will
link the observed constitutive relations to the mechanisms of fault weakening,
and for this purpose, we will characterize the fault properties with
ultramicroscopic methods (AFM, XRD, SEM, and TEM).