* 1345896
* SBIR Phase I:  Expressing bacterial luciferase in zebrafish as an innovative new tool for data-intensive, higher-throughput drug discovery
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Dan Morrison, 490 BioTech Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2014
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes to
develop self-generated bioluminescence in zebrafish to create improved models
for new drug discovery, therapeutic testing, and biomedical disease imaging.
Zebrafish share many common anatomical, developmental, and physiological
features with humans, including disease pathologies and drug metabolism effects,
and serve as ideal models for understanding how drugs and other chemicals
facilitate disease management as well as cause harm through unidentified side-
effects. The objectives of this research effort are to express the bacterial
luciferase genes in zebrafish to create autonomously bioluminescent zebrafish
models capable of delineating the biological and metabolic effects of human/drug
interactions. The self-generation of bioluminescence in zebrafish is anticipated
to enable higher-throughput screening assays to generate data in real time,
faster, and in larger quantities than previously possible, thereby accelerating
the pace of new drug discovery while reducing associated
costs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project, if successful, will be to improve pharmaceutical drug discovery and
efficacy testing, and to facilitate better human and animal disease management.
Small and rapidly growing zebrafish function to reduce space and maintenance
requirements, thus lowering the costs associated with pharmaceutical research
and new drug discovery while decreasing the industry's reliance on animals for
laboratory testing. Scientific and technological understanding in the biomedical
fields will be enhanced due to massively data-rich higher-throughput screening
for drug action and disease therapies. Ancillary to these applications will be
similar zebrafish screening strategies relevant to the detection and
surveillance of chemical contaminants in the environment for the assurance of
clean and safe water to better meet growing societal needs.