* 1345003
* Collaborative Research:   The time averaged field initiative: addressing a critical data gap
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2019
* Lisa Tauxe, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 04/30/2019
* USD 253,000.00

Paleomagnetic data play an important role in a variety of geophysical studies of
the Earth, including plate tectonic reconstructions, magnetostratigraphy, and
studies of the behavior of the ancient geomagnetic field (which we call paleo-
geomagnetism). Ever since its inception, the key assumption in many
paleomagnetic studies has been that the average direction of the paleomagnetic
field corresponds to one that would have been produced by a geocentric axial
dipole (GAD), and that the dip of the magnetic field from the horizontal plane
provides data of sufficient accuracy to enable their use in plate
reconstructions. This proposal will enhance the underlying data that go into
time averaged field models, which assess the degree to which the geomagnetic
field can be considered "GAD". What is required are data sets with more than 100
sampling sites from all over the globe. To be of most value the data sets would
have both directional and intensity data and have excellent age control. The
quality required for meaningful interpretation of the data mean that there are
very few places on Earth that have adequate coverage. The task at hand is
daunting and must be attacked one study at a time. We propose here to exploit
the potential of the volcanic fields of Israel, for which there is an enormous
amount of preliminary data in the form of both paleomagnetic directions and K-Ar
and 40Ar/39Ar dates. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal concerns the
understanding of one of the most important physical properties of planet Earth,
its magnetic field. Magnetic fields are vectors with both direction and
strength. While obtaining ancient field directions is relatively straight-
forward, extracting accurate ancient field strength information is not. We
propose here to attempt to obtain the full vector information and couple it with
accurate age information for a 4-D look at the ancient magnetic field as
recorded in the volcanics of Israel. This work can contribute to the
understanding of many fundamental processes, including the motions of tectonic
plates, the role of the inner core in controlling the geomagnetic field, and
establishing the average strength of the magnetic field to place recent
observations in perspective. Constraints on the geomagnetic field are important
to those who study the dynamical processes in Earth?s deep interior. Also, it
will serve as the doctoral dissertation project of a graduate student.