* 1345533
* SBIR Phase I:  A Personalized Search Engine for Educational Resources
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Manuel Reyes, Predictive Technologies Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 12/31/2014
* USD 140,745.00

This SBIR Phase I project proposes to support the development of a web-based,
mobile-friendly search engine that optimally matches educational content and
lesson plans available on the Internet with a student's needs and unique
learning goals. The project will provide the optimal resources given the
profiles, academic history and other variables collected from the intended users
of those resources. The project seeks to answer the following questions: 1) How
to successfully characterize and define attributes of educational content and
lesson plans found on the internet; 2) How to successfully characterize and
define attributes of students; and 3) How to optimally match educational content
and lesson plans to the students and teachers that seek to use it. A model for
characterizing lesson plans, educational content and student profiles will be
conducted with the support of teachers and partners. Research results will
support the development of a search engine that provides links to individual
educational resources and lessons plans, optimized to the individual needs of
the users.

The broader/commercial impact of the project will potentially have a large
impact on society. It will save teachers from wasting valuable time on finding
resources and will enable them to find more effective teaching and learning
tools and materials to use in their classrooms that fit the individual needs of
their pupils. Students will be able to directly access materials and
technologies that have been created to address their specific needs, enabling
and empowering them to improve their educational performance. Underserved
populations will particularly benefit, as they will be able to find content that
fits their need at no cost. Schools will be able to use their limited financial
resources more efficiently by focusing professional development hours on more
practical tasks and will be able to acquire better technologies and educational
content that is free of charge on the Internet. In summary, the project will
help uncover the potential of the Internet as an efficient support system for
schools, teachers and parents. Finally, the project has potential for
significant commercial value. Revenue will originate from optimally matching the
large number of firms selling educational content and technology with the
schools and teachers that need them.