* 1345969
* SBIR Phase I:  A Question of Numbers: Numeracy, Learning, and Learning about Learning
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Brent Milne, Simbulus Inc
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 12/31/2014
* USD 171,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project proposes to determine the feasibility of new software
implementations of formative assessment (FA) techniques for mathematics
instruction. Tablet devices such as the iPad have an enormous potential to
facilitate revolutionary change in education, but such potential is heavily
dependent on the availability of appropriate software and services. The proposed
activities will research the extent to which classroom FA techniques can be
applied or enhanced when the teacher's role is augmented by a platform for
computer aided instruction. They will seek to create adaptive learning
environments that go beyond current state-of-the-art systems and that apply the
adaptivity to free-form content delivered as instructional video segments and
highly interactive problems, and to do so while maintaining a flow of content
that feels natural. The proposed activities also have the potential to provide
new tools for the analysis of effective techniques in mathematics education and
interventions. The ability to model student understanding and analyze the
learning process will lead to the creation of new learning analytics tools and
enable additional research into effective practices for the teaching and
learning of mathematics.

The potential broader impacts of the proposed activities include improved
student access to mathematics; the increased participation of underrepresented
groups in Science Technology Engineering and Mathematics (STEM); and improved
STEM education through informed teacher practice and educator development. The
proposed activities directly address mathematics education at a critical point
in the curriculum: pre-algebra readiness, as set against the widely differing
levels of mathematical fluency that emerge out of the elementary grades. Without
a solid facility with pre-algebra mathematics, many subjects that are essential
to participation in the modern world become difficult or impossible to master
and academic confidence and commitment erode. More than any other subject,
mathematical learning is cumulative, and as students fall behind their
classmates, new material becomes less and less comprehensible and through this
feedback they face an ever-widening gap to their peers. Formative assessment
practices have been well-established as effective in closing these gaps and
informing teacher decision making. It is by establishing toolkits with novel,
software-based, formative assessment and helping to drive educator adoption of
new formative assessment techniques that the proposed research may deliver these
broader impacts. By addressing key customer needs, the project will create
significant new commercial value within the educational market.