* 1345473
* SBIR Phase I:  Measurement and Control of Mass and Velocity Rates in Bulk Solids Distribution Systems
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2014
* John Stencel, Tribo Flow Separations, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2014
* USD 179,999.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project demonstrates the
feasibility of using a new, non-invasive vibroacoustic method that
simultaneously measures solids and air flow rates within highly-branched
pneumatic conveyance piping. The method determines characteristic vibrations of
the piping that is directly related to solids and gas flow, and acoustic
emission, within the piping; it is measured via the attachment of accelerometers
onto the outside of the piping. Currently, no inexpensive, non-invasive and
wireless system is commercially available that can be used to measure and then
control solids and gas flow rates in highly-branched piping typical of
industrial settings. In all cases, this situation leads to inefficiencies in
materials use and distribution, wasted energy, non-optimized process operation
and higher operating costs. The research objectives focus on determining
vibroacoustic intensities and associated frequencies between 50-10,000 Hz that
will define method sensitivity and repeatability, its potential as a self-
standardizing and stand-alone approach, and the technical requirements for
creating a commercial process control instrument. Because the vibroacoustic
measurements will be accomplished at an industrial site where significant
equipment and process noise is typical, the anticipated technical results will
create a solid foundation and enhance method credibility for subsequent
demonstration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of
this project is in wireless process control instrumentation (PCI) that enhances
process efficiencies, and in the scientific understanding of non-invasive
measurements of solids and gas flows within highly-branched pneumatic conveyance
systems. By controlling solids conveyance in these systems, materials usage
efficiencies are increased, and product qualities and process performances are
raised. As an example, successfully implementing a vibroacoustic PCI at the
industrial site at which the vibroacoustic data are to be acquired could
decrease its materials usage by up to 40% with a concomitant cost savings of
$640,000/yr. Within US industries mandated to install emission equipment, the
cost reductions offered by the vibroacoustic method are $384 million per year,
and commercial sales of the PCI could reach $155 million. The cost savings and
business created would beneficially impact society through decreased energy
consumption for manufacturing, transporting and using solid reagents; decreased
electrical generation costs; improved environmental performance; decreased
emissions of greenhouse gases; and, decreased consumer costs. Furthermore,
increased efficiencies in the control of bulk solids delivery using pneumatic
conveyance is needed for commodities and high-value products produced by
industry that are either consumed or used by, and impact, every person in the
US.