* 1345718
* SBIR Phase I:  Developing a personality and usage-based user model for an advanced personalized learning system for pre-collegiate and remedial mathematics
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Smita Bakshi, Zyante Inc
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 12/31/2014
* USD 179,112.00

This SBIR Phase 1 project proposes to demonstrate the feasibility of an advanced
personalized learning system for pre-collegiate and remedial Algebra, with
future extension to other scientific and mathematical disciplines. The project
aims to model learning as a complex dynamics system, and to develop a user-model
that incorporates student profile data with a detailed and large set of markers
on usage and performance collected from an analytics engine. These markers can
be derived from a student's learning and social activities, such as her
interaction with various types of learning resources, participation on question
and answer forums and so on. This model then guides a recommender system to
select appropriate resources from a learning catalog based on the student's
unique learning path. Whereas, the project uses open source recommender
algorithms, the intellectual merit lies in developing a user model, identifying
the specific markers that impact learning, automatically reconfiguring the
learning material, and in demonstrating its viability for algebra learners. This
model will be built leveraging some of the latest infrastructures in education
technology including an authoring and delivery framework, a learning catalog of
10 million curated learning resources, and the latest advances in data-analytics
and information filtering systems.

The broader/commercial impact lies in using the proposed technology to replace
textbooks and other less-advanced learning systems, not only in mathematics, but
also in other STEM disciplines, making it easier, faster and more affordable for
students to learn. To an extent, it will level the playing field by providing
equal access to a personalized 1-on-1 type of experience, even for those
students who don't have the opportunity to get high quality instruction and
mentorship today. It will significantly impact students who today struggle with
mathematics and STEM subjects, by providing alternate and more relevant ways for
them to visualize and learn. Additionally, Zyante's technology and expanded
services will enable colleges/universities to offer high-quality online courses
and successfully handle larger enrollments. All this will ultimately improve
national outcomes and provide a better-trained workforce in disciplines needed
to drive the economic success of the US. For these reasons, it is important that
the proposed technology be readily commercialized.