* 1345570
* NSF EAGER Grant: A Biocultural Pilot Study of Coping with Food Insecurity in an Urban U.S. Setting
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2015
* Edgar Amador, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2015
* USD 24,861.00

This Early-Concept grant (EAGER) submission proposes to examine human
adaptability through a biocultural pilot study on how individuals/households
(HHs) make decisions when coping with challenging circumstances such as food
insecurity (FI). An additional aim is to better understand the directional
relationship among FI, coping strategies, and physical and mental health. Using
mixed methods (qualitative and quantitative), the objectives of this study are
to 1) Collect and analyze data on coping strategies and explore the relationship
between an individual's cultural knowledge, their socio-political circumstances,
and choice of coping strategy in response to FI; 2) Collect and analyze data on
FI, nutritional status and mental health; 3) Document behavioral accommodation
(short-term responses with potentially long-term consequences) according to food
security status; and 4) Discover the factors that lead to the selection of
specific coping strategies as challenges are encountered and determine to what
extent culture and circumstance influence behavior. A survey will be
administered to 100 adult participants in HHs with children from Tampa Bay,
Florida. The survey will be re-administered to a subsample of 10 food insecure
participants/HHs and ethnographic interviews along with a food shop-along will
be conducted. The data will be analyzed to answer questions about human
adaptability, whether food insecurity can be used as an index of accommodation,
and whether FI is related to physical and mental health and in what direction.
Syndemic theory will be employed to examine the synergism between mental and
physical health in relation to individual coping.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact of this study is that it will produce a data on human
adaptability, political economic circumstances, and physical and mental health.
This data can be used to test hypothesis about the relationship between these
variables and will be included in a re-submission of an NSF Senior grant
proposal. The PI and co-PIs plan on making the findings finding available
through a website that will be linked to a department webpage. Further, the
results will be disseminated through more traditional routes such as
presentations at conferences, peer-reviewed publications, and presentations to
local community groups and agencies. Finally, this study builds capacity through
the training two graduate students.