* 1345966
* SBIR Phase I:  Enhancing photobioreactor performance for algal cultivation through a novel nano-scale thin film material
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Jacob Bertrand, Wave Tech LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2014
* USD 179,999.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project, if successful,
will demonstrate the application of filtered light to increase the productivity
of large scale microalgal cultivation. Traditionally, algae growth has depended
on natural solar radiation to be economically viable. However, natural sunlight
is not optimized to promote growth and contains spectra (such as UV, or IR) that
are detrimental to algal cells. Special lighting sources such as laser and LED
to boost beneficial wavelengths to increase algal growth is possible but cost
prohibitive. This project utilizes cost effective thin-film material to
selectively transmit optimal light spectra from the sunlight to algal cultures.
The plan is to apply multiple customized filters to algae cultivation and
measure the impact on cell growth and morphology, chemical production,
bioreactor performance. The goal of the project is to show decreased energy
costs and increased system productivity.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will be improving
productivity and economics of photosynthetic systems, such as algae and
terrestrial horticulture. This project will lead to better understanding of the
influence of targeted light on algae and could lead to novel processes for
producing fuel and chemicals. Furthermore, increased efficiency of algae growth
systems for producing commercially useful products, such as fuel and other
chemicals, can lead to economic and environmental benefits. Increased light
utilization efficiency introduces cost savings. These improvements lower
barriers to entry in the algae sector, which could increase activity in this
field. In addition to being beneficial for algal growth, the light filtering
technology pioneered in this project could be applied to other plant growth
industries, further fueling the worldwide boom in protective agriculture. These
wide applications also will promote the advanced manufacturing of similar
specialty materials for use in other fields.