* 1345936
* SBIR Phase I:  Sulfcrete
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2014
* paul kalb, Green Sulfcrete LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2014
* USD 174,890.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will research the pilot-
and commercial-scale production of a new form of high-performance, low-carbon,
durable sulfur polymer concrete. It uses waste sulfur generated from oil and gas
refineries and up-cycles this waste as the key ingredient for concrete. Invented
by Brookhaven National Laboratory and its international partners, the innovative
technology uses a patent pending process with byproduct organic materials as
well as fillers and a proprietary mixing process to produce an advanced, new
clean form of durable concrete at a commercially competitive cost. The product
has many practical applications for civil infrastructure, such as pre-cast
pipes, roads, pavers, sea walls, and refinery caps. The research conducted in
this project will evaluate the microstructure of the new material to better
understand its mechanical performance. The Phase I effort will also conduct
initial scale-up testing with industrial partners to prove out the potential of
this material to be fabricated within existing production methodologies.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project can be seen clearly in
the environmental benefits of the sulfur polymer concrete material. Waste sulfur
stockpiles exceed 21 million metric tons, and with increased regulatory controls
over the environmental dangers of waste sulfur and concrete production, this
material represents a disruptive technology which removes sulfur from waste
streams while generating a small fraction of the greenhouse gases emitted in the
production of conventional Portland concrete cement. Up to 16% of the $18.5
billion dollar pre-cast concrete market in North America could be impacted, not
to mention markets in China and other rapidly developing countries. The product
has many other wide-ranging commercial and societal advantages: (1) it uses zero
water for production; (2) it has superior strength, resistance to corrosion, and
durability versus conventional concrete; (3) it can extend the useful life of
concrete infrastructure due to its excellent bonding; (4) it is well-suited to
extremes of hot, cold, and dry weather; and (4) it has faster setting than
conventional concrete, setting within hours.