* 1345795
* Collaborative Research:  ImageQuest: Citizens Advancing Biology with Calibrated Imaging and Validated Analysis
* BIO,DEB
* 06/10/2013,09/30/2015
* Ruth West, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* David Mindell
* 09/30/2015
* USD 57,614.00

Washington University, the University of Arizona, University of California San
Diego, and the University of Vermont are awarded collaborative grants to develop
tools that support deeper integration of citizen scientists with a broader range
of biological imaging projects. Our specific aims are to develop tools (1) to
make it easier for volunteers with smart phones to capture calibrated imagery
supporting quantitative data measurements, (2) to facilitate volunteer
contributions to image analysis tasks with better interfaces and formal methods
to validate and create consensus estimates from many responses, and (3) to
foster long-term motivation and engagement within virtual communities through
online environments that combine aesthetics, social networking and visualization
tools. These tools will have an initial focus on problem domains including
monitoring of urban re-forestation efforts and analysis of 3D biological and
neurological imaging data at many different scales. It will produce a set of
smart phone and web apps that will be available to the broader biological
research community that require calibrated image capture and analysis, and will
create an experimental web portal to engage virtual communities of volunteers
and scientists collaborating to work on imaging
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ImageQuest project will make it simpler for
volunteers and scientists to engage in a much broader set of biological imaging
research. Providing tools which enhance a volunteers ability to capture and
analyze images relieves a technical burden on biologists trying to develop
citizen science approaches. Making these tools smarter and more interactive
encourages volunteers to contribute meaningfully to novel research questions,
and building a virtual community around the volunteers and the scientists helps
to recruit, motivate and retain long term participation of the public in
scientific research.