* 1345173
* Characterization of Biomolecular Response to Environmental Stress
* EDU,EES
* 03/15/2014,02/29/2020
* Hyun-Min Hwang, Texas Southern University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Santiago
* 02/29/2020
* USD 991,206.00

Platinum group elements derived from automobile catalytic converters have
increased in roadside soil, plants, and air. However, little is known about the
mechanism of platinum group elements toxicity and its impact on living
organisms. With National Science Foundation support, Texas Southern University
will initiate a research program that integrates systems biology, genomics,
proteomics, and bio-informatics approaches to develop computer models capable of
characterizing stress responses in eukaryotic cells as well as understand how
environmental toxicants impact bacterial members of the gut microbiota. The
project will employ a multidisciplinary team to educate graduate, undergraduate,
and rising high school students, expand and strengthen the existing Ph.D.
program in Environmental Toxicology, facilitate the professional development of
junior faculty, and enhance the institution's research
infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;The proposed
activity will contribute to the current knowledge of environmental exposure to
patinum group elements and vanadium and associated biomolecular effects and
potential health risks. An array of new technologies and innovative approaches
in molecular biology, nanotechnology, and computer modeling will be employed to
assess exposure to patinum group elements and vanadium, and study environmental
stress responses in eukaryotic cells and gut microbiota. The proposed research
will (1) assess the exposure to platinum group elements and vanadium in nano-
size atmospheric particulate matter and associated health risk, (2) examine the
effect of platinum group elements and vanadium on transcription factors, MAP
kinases and pro-inflammatory cytokines in human lung epithelial cells and use
computer models to predict the pathways and characterize various responses to
platinum group elements in eukaryotic cells, and (3) characterize platinum group
elements and vanadium exposure to representative prokaryotic members of the gut
microbiota and develop a microbial biosensor for human
disease.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;The results of this
investigation will be employed to develop predictive computer models for
biomolecular pathways involved and advanced potential risk prediction tools that
can help environmental quality managers make informed decisions in developing
more efficient management strategies. In addition, by examining common affected
pathways in microbes and eukaryotic cells, simple biological biosensors may be
developed for the assessment of the effects of these pollutants on humans. The
project combines education and research efforts to prepare high-caliber doctoral
scientists in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics related fields
by strengthening and expanding the existing Ph.D. program in Environmental
Toxicology. By training African-American and other minority undergraduate and
graduate students in emerging areas of environmental biology, biomaterials
science, bio-engineering, and synthetic biology, the institution will continue
to increase the numbers of well-prepared minority professionals engaged in
research, teaching, and management, and develop the STEM workforce. Project
activities will strengthen the institution's research infrastructure and promote
innovative partnerships within scientific communities, enhance basic biology
research, technology development/transfers and commercialization.