* 1345675
* SBIR Phase I:  Joining of Dissimilar Materials Using Rivet-Weld Technology
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,09/30/2014
* Tae Hyung Kim, Optimal Process Technologies, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 09/30/2014
* USD 179,070.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will establish
the technical feasibility and demonstrate the commercial potential of a new
rivet-weld technology for joining dissimilar materials in manufacturing light
weight vehicle structures for sustainable transportation. Reducing vehicle
weight has been a primary goal of the automotive and aircraft manufacturers in
order to improve fuel efficiency and reduce pollution. An effective approach to
weight reduction is to create optimized multi-material structures by tailoring
different materials to the specific areas of a structure according to their
properties. The challenge in producing such multi-material structures lies in
materials joining since traditional welding techniques cannot be applied to
joining such dissimilar materials due to limitations of weldability. A hybrid
technology that combines the advantages of self-piercing riveting and resistance
spot welding was invented. The intellectual merits of the project are (1) a new
joining technology to enable the joining of aluminum to high strength steels and
the creation of innovation joint configurations such as sheet to tube joining,
(2) computational method for optimizing the rivet designs tailored for the
specific material and joint configurations, and (3) algorithms for controlling
the rivet-weld process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project is to enable design and construction
of light weight structures such as automotive bodies. It has been established
that every 10% reduction in vehicle weight will result in an improvement in fuel
efficiency between 6~8%. With the increasing interest in full electric and
hybrid electric vehicles, reduced vehicle weight will translate to smaller
batteries and longer driving range for each charge. All these will lead to
reduced energy consumptions and emissions. In addition, the rivet-weld
technology will allow manufacturers to produce multi-material structure using
existing assembly plant infrastructure. The rivet weld machines can be adopted
onto welding robots or stationary machines on the assembly lines with minimum
reconfiguration.