* 1345294
* SBIR Phase I:  Declarative Platform for Software-defined Networking Applications
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Harjot Gill, Gencore Systems LLC
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 12/31/2014
* USD 179,999.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to develop a
software-based networking platform that allows computer networks to run more
efficiently and to protect against cyber-attacks. The proposed declarative
platform will enable network operators to rapidly create and compose new packet-
processing functionality within software-based appliances, coordinate the
distributed collection of network resources (e.g. routers and servers), and
create rich Software-Defined Networking (SDN) applications on top of the
platform to solve critical problems in network security, where real-time
analytics and dynamic network reconfiguration are essential. The proposed work
will result in a declarative SDN platform, and an SDN application that provides
real-time threat detection and mitigation against network security
attacks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project results from the creation of an active network defense mechanism that
can adapt quickly to new cyber-attacks. The proposed work addresses the next
significant market for SDN technology: the development of applications that can
leverage the SDN infrastructure in the telecommunications and enterprise market.
The declarative platform will make it significantly easier to customize and
deploy new SDN applications, and has wide applicability in network security,
traffic analytics, and network traffic optimizations.