* 1345584
* SBIR Phase I:  Antimicrobial and Antibiofilm Microfilm Wound Dressings
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Ankit Agarwal, Imbed Biosciences Inc
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2014
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase 1 project will result in
the design of materials for a unique microfilm dressing that synergistically
employ antimicrobial and antibiofilm agents at the onset of wound treatment and
immobilizes them on wound surface for sustained intimate contact. Microbial
colonization can lead to chronic wound infections, where topical antimicrobials
and antibiotics become ineffective because bacteria live in biofilms. Approaches
that combine the management of biofilms and microbial burden together at the
beginning of wound treatment have the potential to substantially advance healing
of wounds. Phase 1 research will result in the design of materials for microfilm
dressing that provide an initial burst release of antibiofilm gallium that
disperse biofilms and sensitize microbes in biofilms to antimicrobials, followed
by a prolonged sustained release of non-toxic levels of silver that kill
bacteria and prevent recolonization. Together, the two approaches of localized
immobilization and sensitization of bacteria with gallium, would significantly
reduce the amount of silver required to kill bacteria in acute and chronic
infections, reducing tissue toxicity. Results of this feasibility study will
advance scientific understanding on synergy in strategic pairing of
antimicrobial and antibiofilm agents that can be used for various surgical
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial
potential of this project is to directly impact treatment plans for both acute
and chronic wounds in hospitals through the development of a new therapeutic
approach applicable at the onset of wound treatment. The new approach employing
microfilm dressings would prevent the initiation of bacterial colonization of
damaged tissues where development of biofilms can cause failure of therapy, loss
of limbs and death. The engineering design of microfilm dressings facilitates
their conformal contact to the wound-bed at the nanoscale level, increasing the
efficacy of localized antimicrobial agents 10-100 fold on wound surface.
Moreover, synergistic application of antibiofilm and antimicrobial agents
sensitize microbes in biofilms to significantly low concentrations of
antimicrobials. Resulting microfilm dressings will be applicable in combination
with any secondary dressing and will reduce the frequency of dressing changes,
expanding their use to broader clinical indications. It will provide a cost-
effective and efficient alternative to expensive antimicrobial dressings and
significantly reduce treatment costs by reducing incidence of infections.
Emerging fundamental concepts of managing wound bioburden would be generalizable
to various clinical applications such as gastro-intestinal defects and hernia
surgical mesh, where microbial infections are a serious problem, promising a
broad clinical, social and economic impact.