* 1345708
* SBIR Phase I:  Teaching Cell Biology with Multimedia Apps that Use Tactile Instruction
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Robert Levine, ArchieMD, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 12/31/2014
* USD 183,478.00

This SBIR Phase I project proposes to develop a series of mobile device (iPad,
iPhone, Android device) Apps targeted at teaching fundamentals of cell biology
to high school and college level students. The program will be designed to
increase student interest and enthusiasm for science, with a resulting increase
in academic achievement. Traditional lectures and textbooks are poorly suited
for inquiry-based exploration of complex science concepts and thus leave
students with a fragmented knowledge and little sense of the creative
achievements of science, its universality, and its inherent logic and
consistency. Furthermore, existing biology education computer simulations for
mobile devices waste the power of the platform by using its tactile capabilities
to answer multiple choice questions or select a "next" button. The proposed apps
effectively utilize the tactile capabilities of mobile devices to facilitate in-
depth processing of the information being presented and thus will fully utilize
the power of the mobile device platform to enrich the learning experience. The
apps will integrate instructive animations, truly interactive exercises that
stimulate active learning, and built-in assessment tools to provide high
fidelity instruction. By utilizing novel tactile learning techniques, the apps
will enhance knowledge gain and move beyond traditional multimedia instruction.

The broader/commercial impact of these efforts is to help increase U.S. student
interest and achievement in science, which is essential if the U.S. is to remain
a global leader in the science-based innovation economy. According to the
National Science Board, large majorities of 4th, 8th and 12th graders were not
proficient in the knowledge and skills taught at their grade level in the U.S.
in 2009. And while the average science literacy score of U.S. 15-year-olds
improved slightly in 2009 from 2006, the U.S. score was lower than the score of
12 out of 33 other OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development)
nations participating in the assessment. Furthermore, the U.S. had a 77%
graduation rate in 2008, earning a rank of 18 out of 25 OECD countries for which
graduation rate data were available. These learning deficiencies extend into
college and beyond, which will impact the future of the robust U.S. life
science-based industry. Additionally, an understanding of cell biology is
important to the general population because familiarity with cell biology and an
understanding of how advances in this field will affect health, personal and
societal issues is becoming increasingly important to health literacy.