* 1345747
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Analysis of Materials From the Elandsfontein Site
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Frances Forrest, CUNY Graduate School University Center
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2014
* USD 13,205.00

Acheulean technology was used for well over 1 million years of hominin
evolutionary history, yet the behaviors of the hominin species that produced
Acheulean tools remain poorly understood. Important events in human evolution
occurred during this time span, including the extinction of Homo erectus in
Africa, and the appearance of more derived form(s) of Middle Pleistocene
hominins (frequently termed Homo rhodesiensis or Homo heidelbergensis).
Acheulean sites with artifacts and associated fossils in primary context are
rare, and as a result, our undertstanding of hominin subsistence remains
incomplete. It has been hypothesized that Acheulean hominins demonstrated
increased predatory behavior and consumed more animal tissue than their Oldowan
producing predecessors. Carnivory in Oldowan hominins has been examined
extensively and a large body of taphonomic and zooarchaeological research has
been established. Despite the importance of the transition from the Oldowan to
the Acheulean, the vast majority of studies that investigate Acheulean hominin
behavior have focused on the better represented artifact sample. Ms. Forrest's
research will help expand the investigations of Acheulean hominin behavioral
ecology in South Africa in a way that is comparable to similar studies in East
Africa, and will give us a more complete understanding of hominin lifeways
during this important time in human evolution.

The Acheulean stone tool industry represents an important shift from the small
core and flake dominated Oldowan industry to the manufacture of large bifacial
cutting tools. Despite the significance of this transition, relatively little is
known about the hominins that manufactured Acheulean tools. The vast majority of
studies that investigate Acheulean hominin behavior have focused on artifact
technology, as most African Acheulean sites lack well preserved faunal remains
in primary association with artifacts. Knowledge of Acheulean hominin foraging
behavior is especially poor in South Africa, making it difficult to create a
holistic picture of Acheulean lifeways across the continent. The proposed
research will reconstruct the taphonomic history and paleoenvironmental context
of recently excavated ca. 800 thousand year old (Ka) Acheulean faunal remains
from Elandsfontein, Western Cape, South Africa to begin addressing under-
investigated aspects of Acheulean hominin behavioral ecology. Though Acheulean
deposits at Elandsfontein have been studied in the past, much of that material
was collected unsystematically from deflation surfaces and does not reflect a
true archeological assemblage. Observations based on newly excavated samples
reveal a pattern of carcass accumulation and modification that differs
significantly from interpretations based on previously collected material,
including higher frequencies of hominin damage to bones than noted in the past.
By providing new data on an in-situ Acheulean site from South Africa, this study
will address a significant geographic bias in our understanding of Acheulean
hominin behavior.

This study will positively impact science by supporting a female student.
Through international research, the Co-PI will be able to demonstrate techniques
for collecting morphological data such as 3D geometric morphometrics, which will
increase global scientific knowledge. Ms. Forrest will also be collaborating
with individuals from international universities and museums thus promoting
further relationships between American and South African researchers. The
analyses will make use of materials that are generally not suitable for other
types of study, such as fragmented mandibles and long bones, thus increasing the
value of museum collections. Finally, a field course sponsored by the University
of Cape Town will provide an opportunity to teach these skills to South African
students from ethnic groups that have traditionally been underrepresented in the
sciences.