* 1345169
* CREST Center for Water and the Environment
* EHR,HRD
* 03/15/2014,03/31/2021
* Bruce Thomson, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Santiago
* 03/31/2021
* USD 5,365,576.00

The University of New Mexico CREST Center for Water and the Environment will
investigate technological solutions to problems with water and the environment,
and will focus on water problems in arid environments and in times of drought,
including those associated with deteriorating watersheds, climate change, water
needs for energy development, and technologies to address these challenges.
These issues are critical to the Southwestern U.S. but also have global
importance. This center will attract underrepresented minorities into STEM
careers. Recruitment, retention, and graduation of underrepresented minorities
are an integral feature of the Center. Innovative programs in this Center will
include construction of a water technology demonstration trailer with hands-on
water activities for K-12 students, a water competition, recruiting at regional
minority-serving colleges and junior colleges, as well as mentoring and tutoring
programs. The research component is organized around four topics: watershed
processes, water treatment technologies, water/energy interactions, and research
integration. The Watershed Subproject focuses on how watershed management
affects hydrologic processes, ecosystem services, and the consequent quantity
and quality of water available to downstream users. The Treatment Technology
Subproject investigates technologies for the removal of nutrients, trace
pollutants, and emerging contaminants to minimize anthropogenic impacts to water
supplies and maximize use of impaired and low-quality waters for different uses.
The Water/Energy Subproject examines water resource impacts from oil, gas, and
uranium development and identifies strategies to minimize them. These three
topics are intrinsically related because of the hydrologic connection of surface
and ground water resources, and the need to protect, conserve, and put every
drop to beneficial use. These relationships will be investigated in the fourth
topic, the Research Integration Subproject. This topic will develop strategies
to support decision-making processes by considering uncertainty, social,
economic, policy and legal factors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit:&lt;br/&gt;This Center will generate significant new knowledge about the
management and treatment of water in arid and semi-arid environments. It will
have regional and global consequences as climate change and population growth
cause a decrease in water supplies. Greater understanding of the impacts of
historical watershed management practices and the effect of improved watershed
management strategies will increase runoff and improve quality. Improved
biological and physical-chemical treatment technologies allow improvements in
quality and reductions in cost and energy that will permit use and/or reuse of
low quality water. Development of energy resources is important to the economy
but impacts water resources. New technologies will reduce these impacts and
decrease the costs. Simultaneous consideration of the social, economic, and
cultural consequences of watersheds, treatment, and energy development is
critical to permit community involvement in management
decisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;This Center will
focus on the recruitment, training, and graduation of underrepresented minority
students. These activities will create a pipeline of new STEM professionals to
address the water problems of the future. This Center will have beneficial
impacts on a global scale by developing technologies and strategies for managing
water in arid regions. It will produce regional benefits by increasing supplies
through improved watershed management strategies. It will facilitate economic
development of energy resources by minimizing water resource impacts. The
research results will be disseminated broadly through a website, peer-reviewed
technical literature, national conference presentations, and in venues and
formats accessible to water professionals to improve water management decisions.