* 1345915
* SBIR Phase I:  Ethylene Sensor for Monitoring Produce Ripeness and Reducing Spoilage of Food
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,06/30/2014
* Jan Schnorr, C2Sense LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2014
* USD 145,500.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to develop a
commercially viable, highly portable, and cost-effective electronic gas sensor
chip for detecting the plant hormone ethylene. Measuring ethylene allows an
estimate of fruit ripeness and the sensor chips can thus be utilized to guide
decisions that lead to a reduction in waste and spoilage of produce in
agriculture, storage, transportation, and distribution. This approach has three
key innovations. (1) The technology is scalable, cost-effective, and the sensor
output is a simple resistance measurement. The sensor is a paper-based
chemiresistive sensor chip (the size of a business card). Metal electrodes form
a circuit with single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs) specially functionalized
to selectively detect ethylene gas in a complex chemical environment. (2) Novel
solid-state sensing material formulations for ethylene detection will be
developed. This biomimetic approach enables detection of ethylene in real-world
confounding conditions at concentrations below 1 ppm at 10x-100x lower cost than
current solutions. (3) Mass production and rapid prototyping are proposed
through a modular, rapid, scalable, and solvent-free manufacturing method. This
innovative, but simple manufacturing method is analogous to drawing with pencil
on paper.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project is the reduction of produce wasted by spoilage that results in losses of
ca. $20BN per year. Innovative strategies are needed for reducing produce
spoilage including selling at peak ripeness, or promptly removing spoiled
produce from the supply chain to avoid cross-contamination. Measuring ethylene
is key to food supply chain management to aid in these efforts. Current methods
for detecting ethylene, are cumbersome, expensive, complex, and/or do not meet
other necessary performance requirements for large scale implementation.
Traditional laboratory level sensing methods such as photoacoustic spectroscopy
or gas chromatography are used to measure ethylene. The required instruments
are, however, bulky, expensive and require trained personnel. Handheld ethylene
sensors (typically electrochemical) have recently become available, but their
prices of ca. $1,000 are prohibitively expensive for most food sensing
applications. As a result, companies in food production, storage, transport, and
retail, are interested in the ethylene sensors. Additionally, sensor companies
(general and in the food sector) who do not have ethylene sensing capabilities
are very interested in ethylene sensing technology.