* 1345472
* U.S.-Based Students Travel Support for the ACM SIGSPATIAL 2013
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2014
* Craig Knoblock, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 07/31/2014
* USD 30,000.00

This award provides travel support for 25-30 U.S.-based graduate and
undergraduate students to participate in the 21th ACM SIGSPATIAL GIS 2013
Conference, held in Orlando, FL, USA, November 5-8, 2013
(http://sigspatial2013.sigspatial.org). The ACM SIGSPATIAL GIS conference has
established itself as the world's premier conference to foster research in the
areas of Spatial Data and Analysis and Geographic Information Systems (GIS). The
conference provides a forum for original research contributions covering all
conceptual, design, and implementation aspects of GIS ranging from applications,
user interfaces, and visualization to storage management and indexing issues. It
brings together researchers, developers, users, and practitioners carrying out
research and development in novel systems based on geospatial data and
knowledge, and fostering interdisciplinary discussions and research in all
aspects of GIS. It is the premier annual event of the ACM Special Interest Group
on Spatial Information (ACM SIGSPATIAL). The conference seeks to continuously
advance the state of-the-art in spatial data management and spatial data
analysis and broaden its impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The participation of U.S.
graduate and undergraduate students results in the intellectual simulation of
young minds to pursue advanced research and development activities in an area
that has huge technical and societal impact. The students greatly benefit from
attending this conference, as they are able to partake in the current state-of-
the-art in the area of geospatial systems and applications, present their work,
and potentially make connections for research collaborations and research
mentoring. The total number of ACM SIGSPATIAL GIS participants in the past has
been in excess of 300 participants, with a majority of the participants from the
U.S., followed by Europe and Asia. A strong representation of U.S.-based
graduate students at ACM SIGSPATIAL GIS is useful in maintaining U.S.
competitiveness in the important research areas crucial for U.S. infrastructures
and applications that critically depend on geo-referenced information.
Applications of spatial and geographical information contribute to a wide-array
of societal contexts: improving the lives of ordinary citizens through advanced
transportation applications, increasing the security of the nation through
better intelligence gathering using geospatial knowledge, and developing
applications that will have a positive impact on the global environment.
Educating and training the next generation of scientists, engineers, and
practitioners in the area of spatial and geographical information systems will
have a significant impact and will enhance the continuation of the competitive
edge of the United States in this important area.