* 1345402
* SBIR Phase I:  Far-Plane: Beyond Boundaries
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,07/31/2014
* Robert Brown, Triad Interactive Media
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 07/31/2014
* USD 155,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project proposes to adapt a proven research-based leadership
model to a youth audience and merges it with an online interactive game
environment to teach leadership to high school students. The empirically tested
model developed by a global leader in corporate, military, and education
training uses three basic strategies and six practices to expand perspectives
and collaborative problem-solving. The result will be a highly effective
leadership program that engages 21st-century learners and provides them with the
skills to build respect across boundaries, resolve conflict, and achieve
transformation. Far-Plane: Beyond Boundaries is a single-player online action-
adventure, narrative-based game where the player becomes the game's hero. Video
lessons within game metaphor introduce players to the leadership model; fast-
paced mini-games assess understanding; and role-playing games challenge the
player's ability to apply skills in context. The experience culminates in a
facilitator-led synchronous debriefing exercise in which students work
collaboratively with peers in other locations to apply what they have learned
in-game to real-world discussions. An administrative dashboard provides real-
time performance data. The game is scalable, accessible, and designed for repeat
playability. The Phase I prototype will be tested as a global collaboration
exercise with high schoolers in the U.S. and China. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader/commercialization impact of Far-Plane: Beyond Boundaries lies in the
unique adaptation of a proven research-based leadership model into a single-
player online adventure role-playing game for high schoolers. The leadership
model has been successfully tested with corporate, military, and education
leaders globally. There are currently no comparable leadership programs for
youth in the market that link a highly engaging asynchronous online video game
learning experience with a facilitator-led synchronous debriefing exercise. This
innovative design structure makes it possible to bring young people together
from around the globe, a unique opportunity to expand perspectives and
collaborative problem solving around a shared learning experience. Far-Plane's s
scalable online design is conducive to distribution through multiple channels
and to competitive pricing structures, and the program will be accessible on
both Web and mobile platforms. The product will be marketed to youth
organizations and schools across the globe through the non-profit leadership
organization's large distribution center for programs and products and its
extensive network of affiliates. Far-Plane has the potential to serve large
national and international audiences very quickly. A strong revenue stream is
projected from product sales.