* 1345082
* Collaborative Research: Developing a Three-Dimensional Seismic Reference Earth Model (REM-3D) in Collaboration with the Community
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2021
* Vedran Lekic, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Hearn
* 06/30/2021
* USD 344,911.00

Elastic properties of the Earth's interior (e.g. density, rigidity,
compressibility, etc.) vary with location due to changes in temperature,
pressure, composition, and flow. In the 20th century, Earth scientists have used
seismic waves emitted by earthquakes and explosions to develop models of how
Earth properties vary with depth. Community reference models that grew out of
these efforts have proven indispensable in earthquake location, imaging of
interior structure, understanding material properties under extreme conditions,
and as a reference in other fields, such as particle physics and astronomy. Over
the past three decades, more sophisticated efforts by seismologists across the
globe have yielded several generations of models of how properties vary not only
with depth, but also laterally. Yet, though these three-dimensional (3D) models
exhibit compelling similarities at large scales, differences in the methodology,
representation of structure, and dataset upon which they are based, have
prevented the creation of 3D community reference models. The investigators
propose to overcome these challenges by compiling, reconciling, and distributing
a long period reference seismic dataset, from which they will construct a 3D
seismic reference model (REM-3D) for the Earth's mantle. As a community
reference model and with fully quantified uncertainties and tradeoffs, REM-3D
will facilitate Earth imaging studies, earthquake characterization, inferences
on temperature and composition in the deep interior, and be of improved utility
to emerging scientific endeavors, such as neutrino geoscience. The investigators
will set up community working groups that will serve to advise during the
process of reference model and dataset development, and will organize a workshop
to assess progress, evaluate model and dataset performance, identify avenues for
improvement, and recommend strategies for maximizing model adoption in and
utility for the deep Earth community. To this end, the investigators have
solicited input from seismologists, mineral physicists, geodynamics, and
geochemists from around the United States and internationally.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators propose to develop a three-dimensional
seismic reference model (REM-3D) for the Earth's mantle, parameterized in terms
of shear wavespeed (Vs), compressional wavespeed (Vp), density (&amp;#961;), and
the 3 additional parameters representing radial anisotropy. Two versions of the
model will be developed to explicitly fit the comprehensive, community-
contributed long period seismic dataset, one parameterized in terms of spherical
harmonics, and the other as canonical profiles corresponding to major geographic
provinces. Furthermore, they will compile, reconcile, and distribute a long
period reference seismic dataset, including surface wave dispersion
measurements, long period absolute and differential body wave measurements, and
free oscillation frequencies / attenuation / and splitting. Unlike previous
reference models of Earth structure, REM-3D will have fully quantified. The
investigators will also create online tools for model distribution and for
predicting various seismic observables, including full waveforms, as well as
tools designed primarily to enable mineral physicists and geodynamicists a
straightforward way of (in)validating test models against this reference model
or directly against the reference dataset. Finally, the investigators will set
up community working groups and organize workshops that will advise on and
evaluate model and dataset performance, identify avenues for improvement, and
recommend strategies for maximizing model adoption in and utility for the deep
Earth community. REM-3D will benefit the broader scientific community by
facilitating: 1. Mineralogical and thermo-chemical interpretation of seismic
velocities and density; 2. Identification of anomalous / atypical structures in
the Earth's mantle; 3. Comparison of global and regional tomographic models; 4.
Seismic waveform interpretation, such as the identification of particular
seismic phases; 5. Inversion for 3D Earth structure requires a starting or
background model; 6. Earthquake source characterization using long period data.
The construction of a community-contributed reference dataset will make possible
the identification of anomalous seismic wave travel times, surface wave
dispersion, normal mode splitting, and waveform features. Furthermore, the tools
for predicting seismic observables from input structures that we will create
will enable direct evaluation of potential velocity structures predicted by
mineral physics and geodynamics experiments and calculations.