* 1345662
* SBIR Phase I:  Project to Create a Machine Intelligence-based System for Innovative Organizations to Assess, Manage and License Intellectual Property
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Nicole Davis, Enclavix, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 12/31/2014
* USD 150,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project proposes to help unleash America's stock of
intellectual property, converting ideas into products, services and therapies to
benefit humanity. Using advanced machine-intelligence techniques, semantic-
networking technologies and semantic-based visualization to extract meaning and
context from the current, relatively unstructured data set of issued patents
stands to significantly enhance the nation's understanding of intellectual
property that has been developed and, importantly, the relationships between
patents and instances of newly-developed intellectual property. The proposed
system could help identify other areas of innovation as well as areas where
innovations have been underutilized. The stock of underutilized IP in America,
and around the world, represents a significant loss of value to society. The
system will also help to fuel future innovations by identifying open areas for
innovation. An important benefit of the system is to make more widely known the
opportunities for Federally funded, university-developed technologies to be
licensed and put to use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader/commercial impact of
this project will be to enhance Innovation in America. Spending on R&amp;D and
patent protection is significant and growing. Global annual R&amp;D spending
totaled over $1.333 Trillion in 2011 and annual U.S. spending on R&amp;D was
roughly 32% of the global total at $427 billion and is estimated at $436 billion
for 2012. Innovative organizations investing in R&amp;D invest roughly 3-4% of
their R&amp;D budget on patent expenses to protect that IP with an estimated
U.S. IP expenditure of $17.44 billion in 2012. As part of this total,
approximately 10% or $1.74B will be spent on the IP Information category that
covers information about intellectual property. Of this category, an estimated
20% of the IP Information budget will be spent with Online IP Services, accessed
specifically online, up from approximately 5% in 2003, resulting in a target
market of $348.8 million for Online IP Services tools in 2012. This project, by
enabling innovative organizations to visualize the context and competitive
landscape of their intellectual property, will enable better choices and make it
easier for IP to be licensed to enhance innovation in America.