* 1345927
* SBIR Phase I:  An Integrated Search, Analytics, and Imaging (SAI) Platform for Clinical Decision Support and Mobile Health
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Roger Chylla, HealthMyne, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2014
* USD 179,999.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I Project proposes to
develop and deliver to health care enterprises a next generation imaging,
analytics, and search solution that meets not only the current needs of multi-
enterprise medical image viewing, but satisfies emerging demands related to
clinical decision support and mobile health. The project addresses one of the
?Big Data? problems of medical imaging, i.e. providing access anywhere within
the healthcare enterprise to large studies, advanced imaging tools, and image-
based analytics across a spectrum of devices from powerful personal computers to
mobile devices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of
this project is to translate novel research using quantitative imaging
biomarkers into actual clinical practice. Medical imaging is commonly used for
cancer screening, treatment planning, and monitoring but the results that come
from purely qualitative interpretations of these images are not always
definitive. Recent progress has shown that high-throughput extraction and
analysis of advanced quantitative imaging features from medical images
(?radiomics?) can be used to increase the accuracy and confidence of cancer
screening in certain cases. The goals of this project are to incorporate these
analytics into a commercially available system for medical image display and
distribution which is necessary for widespread clinical adoption. These advances
will enable health care providers to lower costs associated with unnecessary
follow up exams as well as to improve patient outcomes through identification of
tumors that are more likely to be resistant to treatment and to more efficiently
and accurately monitor the response to treatment using medical imaging.