* 1345804
* SBIR Phase I:  Manufacturing High Performance Natural Fiber Composites for Structural Applications
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Ralph Johnson, CetoTech, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2014
* USD 149,988.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is to demonstrate the
feasibility of manufacturing high-strength and low-density natural fiber
composites for structural applications in the construction and automotive
industries using a preform compression molding process. The mechanical
performance of current natural fiber composites is limited to non-load-bearing
components in structures due to poor fiber/matrix interface and short fiber
length limited by conventional manufacturing processes. To address this issue,
this project will investigate an innovative high-throughput preform compression
molding process using an air-laying deposition technique. The technical result
of this program will enable the production of a new class of green composites to
create sustainable building materials and light weight fuel efficient vehicles.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is to produce natural
fiber composites with adequate mechanical properties for structural applications
in the construction and automotive industries for sustainable building materials
and energy efficient vehicles. It is expected that high performance and less
expensive natural fiber composite will quickly gain a considerable market share
in the $20 billion building materials market and $162 million automotive
interior panels market. In addition, this new class of sustainable composites
will provide multiple broader impacts including 1) significant weight reductions
for more fuel-efficient vehicles; 2) improved water- and UV-resistance over
conventional materials for green buildings that optimize the indoor
environmental quality with lower maintenance costs; 3) stronger building
materials and safer vehicle panels due to the high vibration damping and impact
resistance of these composites; 4) the use of renewable resources for
sustainable materials production to achieve energy and environmental efficiency;
and 5) potential Leadership in Energy & Environmental Design (LEED) credits
and/or tax rebates to end users.