* 1345692
* SBIR Phase I:  Coextruded Polymer Multilayer Optical Data Storage Medium
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Christopher Ryan, Folio Photonics LLC
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 12/31/2014
* USD 179,996.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project describes a
structured polymer material with the potential to significantly increase density
and capacity of optical data storage and its translation to market solution,
disrupting and opening new markets based on its low cost, portability, low
latency, low energy consumption, and long lifetime. The innovation is a
multilayer film, fabricated in a continuous roll-to-roll co-extrusion process to
produce hundreds of meters of material that can be cut and assembled in to
common disc format. The scope of work in this proposal complements significant
scientific progress that has already been made to translate the innovation into
commercially viable product. The proposal outlines detailed examination of the
film uniformity, stability and longevity as well as optimization of the writing
process, and creation of disc prototypes for characterization and customer
evaluation. We anticipate making technical breakthroughs that show outstanding
lifetime and storage capacity in a first-generation device.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project addresses the need for
inexpensive, long-lasting archival data storage is increasing exponentially in
the ?Big Data? age. Magnetic tape has been a widely used archival medium due to
its low energy usage and large capacity, but suffers from limited lifetime, high
cost, and slow access speeds. Magnetic hard drives, while fast and high
capacity, are considerably more expensive, consume large amounts of energy, and
still suffer from limited lifetime. A one terabyte (1TB) optical disc would be a
compelling solution, combining low cost with high density, long life, and low
energy consumption, and would disruptive to the archival storage market. The
fast access time of optical data storage relative to magnetic tape could open
new markets by bringing passive archiving into nearline access. Applications in
healthcare, security, personal data storage, and media distribution suggest a
considerably larger potential. This innovation also enables a reduction in
energy usage, and can be the key to unlock increasingly important green storage
technologies as data generation continues to grow.