* 1345739
* SBIR Phase I:  Radiolucent Ultrasound Device for Real-Time Volumetric Guidance of Radiation Therapy
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Jeff Schlosser, SoniTrack Systems, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2014
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project seeks to develop
a novel ultrasound device for improving the precision of radiation therapy
delivery for cancer treatment. In external beam radiation therapy (EBRT), highly
potent radiation doses with minimal treatment margins must be precisely
delivered to maximize chances of local tumor control and minimize toxicity of
surrounding healthy tissue. Such delivery is predicated on systems that can
accurately track and correct for real-time anatomy motion during radiation
treatment. The proposed device is an integral part of a larger system for
guiding radiation beams using real-time ultrasound image information. The
project team will fabricate the proposed device and assess its feasibility by
evaluating ultrasound performance metrics in phantoms, severity of artifacts in
CT images, imaging performance during direct radiation exposure, and ability to
account for device density in the beam planning process. If successful, the
proposed research will result in a new low-cost imaging device that provides
unprecedented real-time soft-tissue EBRT guidance at 2.5 mm accuracy without
imposing any restrictions on existing planning and delivery practices.

The boarder impact/commercial potential of this project is to achieve the ?holy
grail? of EBRT: real-time imaging and tumor motion management during beam
delivery without fiducial markers. EBRT is used to treat over half of all cancer
patients worldwide. The current ?gold standard? solution for EBRT guidance
relies on tracking of implanted fiducial markers using x-ray images, but
limitations including marker migration, additional ionizing radiation exposure,
and implantation morbidity severely limit its utility. In terms of clinical
benefit, the guidance approach in this proposal has significant potential to
reduce healthy tissue toxicity and increase local tumor control rates while
eliminating marker implantation and extra ionizing radiation exposure. Imaging
technology developed in this SBIR can also apply to ultra-low cost, portable 4D
imaging for field diagnosis, multi-modality diagnostic imaging, and guidance for
other medical interventions outside radiation therapy.