* 1345240
* SBIR Phase I:  Practical On-Machine Inspection Equipment (PROMISE) for Metal Deposition Processes
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Todd Sparks, Product Innovation and Engineering, L.L.C.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 12/31/2014
* USD 179,999.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will research and
develop an innovative Practical On-Machine Inspection Equipment (PROMISE) for
metal deposition processes. PROMISE will be a cost-effective and robust in-situ
inspection system for direct metal deposition processes. Direct metal deposition
processes are a very promising technology to rapidly fabricate or repair fully
dense metal parts. These processes use a high power energy source to deposit
metal materials layer by layer. The objective of this Phase I research project
is to explore the feasibility of developing PROMISE to cost-effectively conduct
in-situ inspection for the deposition of each layer so that immediate action can
be carried out before the subsequent layer is deposited. The PROMISE enabling
technologies include a cost-effective melt pool sensor, melt pool modeling, and
innovative sensor system design. With proper processing and control of the
sensor data, melt pool conditions can be effectively captured. With advanced
melt pool modeling, we can fully understand the thermal behavior of laser-
material interactions. Through integration with our path planning system, we can
have a complete and a robust sensor system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact/commercial potential of this project will lead to dramatic
improvement in part consistency and robustness due to process monitoring and
control, thus greatly reducing process certification efforts. Insufficient
automation in the in-situ inspection process is the biggest hurdle in achieving
robustness and consistency in part quality. This quality issue is detrimental as
a defect in the middle section of the deposition will spoil the entire part due
to high performance requirements. This proposed technology will greatly reduce
the operational complexity of metal deposition machines which will lessen the
skill required for operators. This proposed project will then greatly broaden
the scope of metal deposition applications and provide a significant impact to
the design and manufacturing society. This technology can be used for many rapid
prototyping and rapid manufacturing processes, as well as mold and die repair,
and other manufacturing processes involving a high energy source, such as
welding, cladding, plasma, thermal spray, ion beam techniques, etc.