* 1345906
* SBIR Phase I:  The Multivariate Optical Element Technology Platform for Fluorochrome Discrimination
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Ryan Priore, Cirtemo Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2014
* USD 179,797.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes to
develop a novel Multivariate Optical Element (MOE) technology platform for
fluorescence biomarker applications with superior spectroscopic discrimination
performance as compared to traditional bandpass filter techniques. Life science
assays utilizing fluorescence for discrimination employ a non-trivial
compensation strategy for detecting more than one biomarker at a time using
optical bandpass filters. The MOE platform combines the data collection and
processing steps of a traditional multivariate chemical analysis into a single
step via an all-optical computing technology with little to no moving parts as
well as exhibits a multiplexing advantage as compared to optical bandpass
filters. This optical regression can offer real-time measurements with
relatively high signal-to-noise ratio that realize the advantages of multiplexed
detection and pattern recognition in a simple optical instrument. The objectives
of this research are two-fold: design and fabrication of a compressed detection
MOE filter set for detecting multiple fluorescent biomarkers simultaneously with
strong spectroscopic interference as well as comparing the detection performance
of the MOE sensor with traditional optical bandpass filter methodologies. It is
anticipated that the sensitivity and specificity of an MOE detection mechanism
will be superior to bandpass filter detection of fluorescent biomarkers.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project, if successful, will be
a novel technology that will provide an optical detection platform for
fluorescence biomarker applications with superior spectroscopic discrimination
performance as compared to current bandpass filter techniques. The success of a
commercial fluorescent diagnostic assay is dependent on the selection of a
fluorescent biomarker; due to the broad nature of fluorescence biomarker
emission profiles, only a small number of fluorescence biomarkers may be
discriminated from each other as a function of excitation source. The
specificity advantage of MOE-based sensors will allow fluorescent biomarkers
that were once incapable of discrimination from one another via optical bandpass
filters to be employed in a common assay panel. As more discrete biomarkers may
be detected simultaneously, more specific diagnostic assay panels may be
constructed. A simplified MOE-based sensor may ultimately reduce the requirement
for highly trained operators as well as move certain life science applications
like disease prognostication from the laboratory to the point of care.