* 1345136
* Towards a data-based and physics-based model of interseismic and seismic behavior of Main Himalayan Thrust
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2014,02/28/2017
* Jean-Philippe Avouac, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 02/28/2017
* USD 492,488.00

The Himalaya stands out as the major threat with respect to seismic hazard in
central Asia where it puts at risk the dense population and economies of several
countries. The project will contribute important information regarding seismic
activity in that area and, more generally, will advance methods regarding the
use of geodetic measurements in seismic hazard
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent and historical earthquakes in the Himalaya
fall way short of balancing the rate at which interseismic strain is currently
accumulating in the Himalaya. Thus we have a very incomplete view of how
interseismic strain is released by transient seismic, and possibly, aseismic
slip on the Main Himalayan Thrust fault. The long term objective of this project
is the development of a dynamic model and the acquisition of appropriate data to
validate and calibrate the model that will allow assessing the full range of
possible earthquake scenarios in the Himalaya and their probability of
occurrence. To achieve that goal we propose (1) to keep on monitoring and
improve the modeling of interseismic coupling on the MHT, (2) use dynamic
modeling to evaluate the fault frictional properties needed to account for the
observed pattern of interseismic coupling, the sensitivity of seismicity to
secular and seasonal stress build up an (3) use dynamic models to test how the
statistics of small earthquakes triggered by stress build up at downdip edge of
the locked portion of the MHT can be used to constrain the statistics of the
very large events rupturing the whole locked zone (4) constrain the viscous
properties of the crust based on the geodetically measured deformation induced
by surface load variations measured from the GRACE gravimetric satellite
mission.