* 1345135
* Deciphering the Origin of Intra-Plate Volcanism in the Pacific Northwest Using Geodynamic Models with Data Assimilation
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2019
* Lijun Liu, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Raterron
* 04/30/2019
* USD 300,000.00

We propose to investigate the origin of the intra-plate volcanic province in
Pacific Northwest, with features including the mid-Miocene Steens-Columbia River
flood basalt and subsequent Yellowstone and Newberry hotspot tracks. Possible
mechanisms we will test include a mantle plume originating from the core-mantle
boundary, and volcanism from shallow mantle processes such as slab-driven
upwelling flow. Besides geological observations, we emphasize on better
constraining deep mantle dynamics including the pattern of mantle flow and the
nature of slow seismic anomalies beneath the Pacific Northwest. Our approach is
4-D geodynamic modeling with data assimilation, which involves both high-
resolution forward subduction simulations and adjoint convection calculations
reconstructing past mantle states. Important model constraints come from the
much improved mantle structure revealed by USArray and the well understood
Cenozoic subduction history beneath western North America.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal attempts to solve for a long-debated issue
in the scientific community: formation of volcanisms far away from active
tectonic plate boundaries. The Pacific Northwest represents an ideal study
region due to the existence of such volcanisms as the voluminous eruption of
Columbia River flood basalt ~16 million years ago and the ongoing Yellowstone-
Newberry hotspot volcanoes. Origin of these volcanic events has remained elusive
because of our poor understanding on the configuration of deep mantle where
these volcanisms originate. Now with the USArray seismic experiment finally
delineating a 3-dimentional picture of the sub-continental mantle, a better
understanding on the formation the Pacific Northwest volcanism becomes possible.
To solve this apparently complex problem, we will rely on sophisticated
numerical models based on powerful supercomputers. These models will take into
account not only surface geologic records, but also the mantle structures
underneath, and most importantly the time-evolution of the system since the
remote past. Scientifically, the proposed work has impacts on almost every field
of solid Earth research. Another important implication of this research is to
improve knowledge on the formation of natural hazards and their effects on
climate and environment.