* 1345387
* SBIR Phase I:  Aerosol-Assisted Water-Vapor Air Conditioner
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,09/30/2014
* Amir Naqwi, MSP Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 09/30/2014
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is aimed at utilizing
aerosol technology to solve heat transfer problems in small-scale air
conditioning systems, thus enabling the use of water as a refrigerant in small-
scale units for domestic and automobile applications. A water-based air
conditioning system must operate under vacuum, thus raising concerns of air
leaking into the system. Also, the presence of water in a system is associated
with the risk of corrosion. Further, the proposed system requires design and
development of a special compressor. These issues are addressed in this project
and viable solutions are proposed. Advancements in the pertinent technologies
are now enabling realization of water-based air conditioning systems. This
project underlines the importance of revisiting the conventional technologies
with the new tools developed for the advanced technologies. The anticipated
outcome of this Phase I project is a fully functional lab prototype of a water-
based air conditioning system with a capacity of 0.25 ton. A successful Phase I
project will enable development of field prototypes for domestic and automobile
applications in the Phase II project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project encompasses all air conditioning
applications; in particular, the markets of newly built homes and new
automobiles. The domestic US market for these two businesses is $5B/year, with
potentially 10 times this market on a worldwide basis. Annual revenue
expectations exceed $100 million. Besides offering a significant commercial
opportunity, the proposed product will have a positive impact on the environment
by reducing the use of existing refrigerants that have a high global warming
potential, when released into the atmosphere. Production of the existing
refrigerants involves multiple steps starting with extraction of chemicals like
methane and sodium chloride from the natural environment. Various steps in
production of the conventional refrigerants are often energy-intensive and
produce hazardous waste. On the other hand, water is abundantly available in the
anticipated global marketplace and its purification is a relatively
straightforward process. Hence, the proposed approach will enable a new,
substantial and sustainable technology.