* 1345146
* PolarTREC - Teachers and Researchers Exploring and Collaborating
* GEO,OPP
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2016
* Susan Fox, Arctic Research Consortium of the U.S.
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 03/31/2016
* USD 697,102.00

This project is a teacher professional development program advancing Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Math (STEM) education by improving teacher content
knowledge and instructional practices through Teacher Research Experiences (TRE)
in the Arctic and Antarctic. Teachers spend three to six weeks participating in
hands-on research in the polar regions and sharing their experiences with
diverse audiences via PolarConnect real-time webinars, online multimedia
journals, and interactive forums in the PolarTREC Virtual Base Camp. Teachers
report significant improvements in their knowledge of the polar regions and
ability to teach science concepts. Researchers report that PolarTREC outreach is
an essential bridge between their science and the public. This project leverages
cutting-edge science and global changes taking place in the polar regions, and
is broadly disseminating activities and products to students, educators,
researchers, and the public; sustaining the widespread interest in the polar
regions that was generated during the International Polar
Year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit :&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit
of PolarTREC lies in its integration of research and education through a
uniquely comprehensive approach to TREs. PolarTREC contributes to STEM education
and pedagogy through an innovative TRE model conceived and organized according
to best practices such as pre-research training, mentoring, support for
classroom transfer, and long-term access to resources and professional networks.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts :&lt;br/&gt;Although a limited number of
teachers participate in a field experience, those selected represent ethnic,
economic, and geographic diversity and are well connected within their schools,
communities, and professions. Participants are exemplary teacher-leaders in
their schools, districts, states, and in professional organizations. PolarTREC
is providing a professional development experience for at least 14 teachers
including 2 community college professionals. 20 PolarConnect live events
facilitating dialogue between nearly 8,000 international participants and polar
researchers are planned, and 28 new polar related lesson plans are being
disseminated. Discussions on current education and science issues are being
broadcast and archived with participants reached via media and online
interactions.