* 1345449
* III: Travel Fellowships for Students from U.S. Universities to Attend ISWC 2013
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2014
* Krzysztof Janowicz, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2014
* USD 20,000.00

Semantic technologies, are beginning to play increasingly important roles across
a broad range of applications. There is an urgent need for advanced training
graduate students to conduct research in this area and prepare for academic or
industrial careers.

Participation in premier research conferences in the area is an essential
element of such training. This project provides funds to subsidize the travel
expenses of 10-15 students at U.S. universities to attend the 2013 International
Semantic Web Conference (ISWC) which will be held October 21-25, 2013 in Sydney,
Australia.

ISWC is a premier international conference which offers a venue for presentation
of rigorously peer-reviewed research results in Semantic Web and allied areas.
The conference includes two events specially targeted to graduate students: The
ISWC doctoral consortium offers an opportunity for doctoral students to present
their work and receive feedback and mentoring. The ISWC Career Mentoring lunch
provides an informal setting for students to discuss all issues pertaining to
research careers with senior researchers in the community, and to establish
long-term mentoring ties.

Broader impacts of the project include: Enhanced opportunities for training and
mentoring of US-based graduate students in Semantic Web and related areas,
broadening the particiation of students from groups (women and minorities) that
are currently under-represented in Computer Science in general, and Semantic Web
in particular.