* 1345790
* CNIC: U.S.-Denmark Collaboration on Strategies to Improve Efficiency and Reliability in Microgrids
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/2013,11/30/2014
* Euzeli dos Santos, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 11/30/2014
* USD 48,259.00

Through this project development effort, a small research team from Indiana
University-Purdue University Indianapolis (IUPUI) will initiate cooperative
research with Danish partners from the Institute of Energy Technology at Aalborg
University. Together, the U.S.-Danish team will examine challenges associated
with microgrid and power converter architectures that affect current efficiency
and reliability. Their approach involves modeling, simulating and experimentally
validating newly proposed architectures with arrangements of two- and four-phase
microgrids and interfacing power converters. The U.S. team's strengths in
modeling and simulation of microgrids and converters complement the Danish
partners' expertise in renewable energy systems, power electronics and energy
efficiency. With the goal of reducing energy losses while increasing system
efficiency, they will start by designing a proof-of-concept setup to emulate an
actual microgrid system. The team hopes that their two-phase and four-phase
designs will provide a new choice of two ways to move power, either through
line-to-line connection or through phase voltages, making it possible to reduce
complexity and expense compared to conventional systems requiring larger voltage
changes. Specifically, the researchers plan to develop, analyze and validate
several designs to demonstrate the advantages, through simulation, design, and
experimental tests. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This developmental project fulfills
the program objective of catalyzing new international collaboration to advance
engineering research on next-generation microgrids for power distribution
systems. Preliminary results also are expected to improve our understanding of
the potential for new fault tolerant power electronics converters that operate
after a fault occurs. If successful, this research could lead to increases in
system efficiency with less cost to society and the environment. The ultimate
goal is to help build a new electric power distribution system capable of
handling more renewable energy sources and more rechargeable cars, at minimum
cost and without loss of reliability. Broader impacts also include contributions
to the future training of U.S. students, through the preparation of a new IUPUI
course, "Microgrid Systems," and by providing one participating Indiana
University graduate student with first hand, early career international research
experience at Aalborg University in a growing engineering field.