* 1345593
* SBIR Phase I:  Non-templated Enzymatic Synthesis of Polydeoxynucleotides
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,06/30/2014
* J. William Efcavitch, Molecular Assembly LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2014
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I proposal requests funding
to develop a novel technology for the controlled non-templated enzymatic
synthesis of single strand DNA molecules for use in molecular, systems, and
synthetic biology applications. When implemented, this technology represents the
most significant change to the way that oligodeoxynucleotides and
polydeoxynucleotides have been produced since the introduction of the
phosphoramidite mediated solid support method in 1981. The new process will
relieve the bottle necks in molecular and synthetic biology workflows by
reducing costs, increasing the lengths of DNA directly synthesized by 10x to
50x, reducing turnaround times from weeks and months to days, and eliminating
production of tons of toxic wastes. A unique enzyme will be used that catalyzes
the rapid polymerization of deoxynucleotides without need of a template
molecule. The project will create novel analogs that are suitable enzymatic
substrates and allow the stepwise addition of nucleotides mimicking the gold
standard chemical synthesis method but in a simpler and aqueous enzymatic
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project, if successful, will be to create a next generation approach to DNA
synthesis. Such capabilities will not only enhance current research, but will
enable evolving multidisciplinary research areas such as biomedicine, computer
science, nano-optoelectronics, and bionanotechnology. Research utilizing DNA
nanostructures for drug delivery and single cell in-vivo analysis is evolving.
DNA is being used as an information storage medium and for computing itself.
Engineers are investigating gene circuits as biological analogs of electronic
components such as oscillators and transistors. This most interesting, complex
and biologically important molecule surely has many applications that cannot yet
be imagined. Just as the first generation DNA synthesis technology enabled a new
era of biotechnology 25 years ago, the capabilities presented here will enable a
new generation of biological applications and potentially provide for society's
future needs.