* 1345296
* SBIR Phase I:  Ultra-High-Efficiency Thermal Interface Materials Based on Self-Aligned Graphene Fillers
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,06/30/2014
* Jacqueline Renteria, Quantum Seed LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 06/30/2014
* USD 149,960.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project aims at demonstration of
a revolutionary new thermal interface material (TIM) and innovative technology
for TIM dispersion in industrial environments. Efficient thermal management is
one of the most important requirements for further progress in semiconductor and
communications technologies. Growing densities of dissipated heat require new
types of TIMs for heat removal from devices and chip packages. Strong
enhancement of the thermal conductivity will be achieved via a novel
functionalization of graphene flakes, which act as fillers in the TIM matrix.
Graphene has the highest thermal conductivity of any known material. The project
will lead to a better understanding of thermal transport in complex composites
with graphene fillers and clarify the effect of nanoparticle surface
functionalization on thermal coupling between the filler and matrix. The
project's intellectual contributions will go beyond thermal management and
impact other fields that unitize nanostructures for increased functionality and
performance of advanced materials. It is expected that the graphene-enhanced
TIMs to be developed will have the thermal conductivity values exceeding those
of the commercially available TIMs by an order of magnitude.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project originates from the
crucial importance of creating a more efficient TIM with the potential for a
revolutionary advancement in thermal management. The proposed graphene-enhanced
technology is expected to produce a transformative change in the $500 million
TIM market. Better heat removal enabled by functionalized graphene fillers will
produce a lasting positive effect on the electronic and automotive industries,
communications, photovoltaic energy generation, and aerospace and defense
sectors. The proposed technology surpasses the competition by offering much
stronger enhancement in thermal conductivity with a corresponding reduction in
thermal resistance, and an industrially feasible TIM dispersion process.
Finally, the availability of superior, cost-effective TIMs will help to preserve
domestic technological leadership in the strategically important areas of
information processing and communications.