* 1345571
* SBIR Phase I:  Revolutionary Process for Producing Primary Iron and Ferrochromium
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Robert Hyers, Boston Electrometallurgical Inc
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 12/31/2014
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will focus on developing
a cheaper, more energy efficient route to production of important metals
including iron and ferrochromium. Economical separation of these metals from
their ores by molten oxide electrolysis (MOE) is enabled by the recent invention
of an inert anode material. The essential next step in understanding the
behavior of the new inert anode in MOE is longer-duration testing than was
possible in the laboratory cell. This test can only be achieved at a larger
scale. Achieving this scale-up requires the generation, refinement, and
validation of new models. The results of this Phase I project will accelerate
innovation in MOE; in addition to the technical objectives in of this proposal,
the tools and knowledge created will be applicable to faster screening of new
target alloys, faster modifications to the MOE cells, and better definition of
the requirements of flexible MOE reactors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact / commercial potential of this project is to advance the state of
knowledge and industrial practice toward cleaner, cheaper, greener steel and
stainless steel. Molten oxide electrolysis with an inert anode has been
demonstrated at the laboratory scale to produce low-carbon iron and ferroalloys,
which are the basis of many high-performance steels. The current low-carbon
metals sell at a premium. Published cost models show that both the capital and
operating cost of MOE will be lower than competing technologies already in the
marketplace. Furthermore, MOE can reduce the environmental impact of primary
metallurgy with today?s electricity, and produce even greater gains with
renewable energy. In summary, MOE will produce primary metals of higher quality
at a lower cost and with lower environmental impact than current methods.