* 1345247
* Understanding Biotic Response to Environmental Change in Tropical Ecosystems Through a Place-Based Context
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2022
* Donald Price, University of Hawaii at Hilo
* Continuing Grant
* Luis Cubano
* 06/30/2022
* USD 5,199,655.00

With National Science Foundation support, the University of Hawaii Hilo (UHH)
will further develop the Center for Tropical Conservation Biology and
Environmental Science (TCBES) and pursue research focused on enhancing the
understanding of biotic response to environmental change in tropical ecosystems
through a place-based context. The Center integrates detailed ecological,
evolutionary, and genomic research with bioinformatics analysis and Geographic
Information Systems modeling. The center will train the next generation of
scientists and professionals, particularly from Native Hawaiian and Pacific
Islander communities, with the interdisciplinary perspective that is required to
both study and effectively steward the spectacular yet fragile ecosystems found
throughout the region. The Center will become a fully established, self-
sustaining locus of research and training and grow a first-of-its-kind Ph.D.
program in TCBES fields, capable of advancing state-of-the-art research and
training in evolution, ecology and genomics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit:&lt;br/&gt;The Center will focus on three synergistic research themes: 1)
organismal response to environmental change: this project will examine the
short- and long-term responses of key organisms to a range of environmental
conditions, both steady and fluctuating, and will incorporate those results into
models of landscape-level response to climate change; 2) behavioral responses to
environmental change: this project will use emerging genetic and acoustic tools
to examine the effect of anthropogenic change on important social behaviors in
animals ranging from arthropods to whales; 3) dynamic interactions between
symbioses and environment: this project will explore adaptations of the
mutualism-pathogenesis-parasitism continuum in multiple symbiotic systems.
Integration of next-generation DNA sequencing and bioinformatics analysis in
each of the research areas will allow unprecedented insight into the molecular
basis of biotic responses to environmental change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;This CREST Center project will expand on regional and
national partnerships developed by Center faculty in the areas of ecology,
evolution, and genetics to generate a diverse, technologically and
scientifically literate workforce to meet the growing need for sound management
of Hawaii's fragile natural resources. This work is expected to: (1) advance
faculty to a nationally competitive level in applying genomic tools to predict
organismal responses to climate change and other environmental challenges; (2)
produce Ph.D.- level scientists who will be able to apply these concepts and
techniques in a culturally relevant context; and (3) elucidate the impacts
climate change will have on the geographic ranges and social and symbiotic
interactions of species in Hawaii and the broader&lt;br/&gt;Pacific region.
Center researchers will launch bioinformatics and bioacoustics laboratories in
association with established genetic, analytical and spatial data analysis core
research facilities to further enhance Hawaii's capacity to train
technologically-proficient scientists who can address the conservation
challenges facing the state and Pacific region.