* 1345968
* SBIR Phase I:  Single shot coded Photo-Refraction to Measure High-Order Aberrations as a Low-Cost Add-On for Smart Phones
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,06/30/2014
* Vitor Pamplona, EyeNetra Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 06/30/2014
* USD 149,116.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is integral to the
success of an award-­winning self-­test diagnostic technology that measures
refractive errors and detects higher-order aberrations of the human eye. A total
of 4.2 billion people worldwide require corrective eyewear; of these, 2.5
billion lack access to proper care. This project will support the research and
development of a coded photorefraction system device on a mobile platform. The
goal is to achieve objective self-­diagnosis of myopia, hyperopia, astigmatism,
and select higher-­order aberrations at a fraction of the cost of today's
dominant technologies with uncompromised precision and great ease-of-use. The
proposed solution captures an image from behind the patient's retina and
leverages image-processing techniques to compute the results. The original
pattern is projected from a light source and will appear deformed with respect
to each patient's individual vision needs. A sensor captures this deformity and
translates the matrix into a refractive error measurement and higher-order
diagnosis. When this portable hardware add-on is paired with a smartphone
application, the anticipated result is personalized vision care that is
accessible and affordable to anyone from anywhere at any time.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is to ultimately empower
patients and raise eye health awareness. This innovation not only serves as a
comprehensive platform for personalized vision care, but also delivers an end-
to-end solution with on-demand access to healthcare providers and fulfillment
channels. Vision loss carries significant societal stigma and inhibits equal
opportunity. Furthermore, higher-­order aberrations are increasingly believed to
negatively impact the eye's visual performance (in addition to refractive
errors). The global cost of vision loss in 2010 was nearly $3 trillion. However,
the origin of this problem does not lie in the hardware supply chain, as
eyeglass manufacturers are currently achieving average production costs of
$3/unit. Instead, today's diagnostic tools (no matter how optically advanced)
are absurdly expensive and cumbersome, require clinical training to operate, and
fail to leverage the power of modern-day mobile computing. This project will
help to realize a world where patients can curate their own eye care experience
(i.e. measure refractive error, diagnose higher-order aberrations, review past
test history, connect to eye doctors, and purchase eyewear). In particular, this
project will serve as a pivotal step towards accelerating the company's overall
commercial endeavor and optimizing market positioning.