* 1345249
* FIA-NP: Collaborative Research: Deployment-Driven Evaluation and Evolution of the eXpressive Internet Architecture
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2018
* Aditya Akella, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Cooperative Agreement
* Darleen Fisher
* 04/30/2018
* USD 417,001.00

The eXpressive Internet Architecture (XIA) project aims to design, evaluate, and
realize a future network architecture that provides inherent trustworthiness,
supports long-term evolution of network use models and network technology, and
addresses adoption through careful design of APIs and reasoned analysis of
interactions (or tussle points) between multiple stakeholders. XIA offers
intrinsic security by offering each entity the ability to unilaterally validate
that it is communicating with the correct counterparties. XIA admits new usage
models to evolve through the use of flexible addresses. This architectural
flexibility also exposes new features, for example, enabling users to trade-off
maintaining anonymity against maximizing efficiency in content retrieval. To
date, the XIA team has developed an initial architecture; built prototype
implementations of the XIA data plane, network protocol stack, and secure
unicast communication using Scalability, Control and Isolation On next-
generation Networks (SCION); engaged in a wide range of basic networking and
security research; and investigated questions raised by future Internet
architecture research.

In the next phase of research on XIA, principal investigators (PIs) advance the
original vision of XIA by deepening the ongoing research thrusts, driven in part
by research questions exposed during the initial investigation. The research
agenda also includes an increased emphasis on control protocols based on a
unified control plane architecture. The research will be driven through two
network deployments that challenge the architectural framework: a vehicular
network deployment in the city of Pittsburgh, and a video delivery environment
spanning the U.S. These deployments also leverage and deepen the work on secure
network operations, including providing a highly available infrastructure and
secure authentication mechanisms. Finally, these deployments necessitate further
research on building a robust XIA network, and establish best practices for
using the XIA architecture, including support for mobility and a rich session
layer. The research will continue to be informed by issues of deployability and
economic viability, and to consider XIA as perceived by end users. The plan
therefore includes research on governance, economic implications of high
availability, and user studies that investigate the interplay between privacy,
transparency and user control. Finally, the PIs will develop methods for
performing a comparative evaluation of future Internet architectures. This
evaluation methodology includes a definition of evaluation criteria, a
discussion of the importance of direct and indirect evaluation, and evaluation
using the XIA network environments and other use cases.

Intellectual Merit: The intellectual merit of the proposed work is an ambitious
study of the effectiveness of a new architectural framework, evaluated in the
context of two challenging network environments. The cross-cutting expertise of
the team enables broad and deep investigation, starting from specification and
implementation of many key network and security building blocks, up to
application-specific methods delivering innovative solutions in the vehicular
and video delivery environments. The evaluation spans multiple disciplines,
ranging from low-level performance evaluation to reasoning about incentive-
compatibility and economic benefits of the PIs' approach to a quantification of
user experience.

Broader Impacts: The project will establish a framework for evaluating network
architectures that will be broadly applicable to FIA research. The PIs propose a
variety of education and outreach activities to accompany the proposed research.
Educational activities include new courses on clean-slate network design, and
teaching and internship activities for under-represented and high school
students. Broader outreach activity also includes a plan to involve and inform
policymakers on the health of the current and future Internet led by a PI who
formerly served at the FCC.