* 1345834
* SBIR Phase I:  Pilot-Scale Production of Stereoblock Polypropylene (sbPP) Thermoplastic Elastomers
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Jonathan Reeds, Precision Polyolefins, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 12/31/2014
* USD 179,999.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project seeks to demonstrate
successful pilot&#8208;scale production of stereoblock polypropene (sbPP)
thermoplastic elastomers that can be produced, in programmed fashion, over an
unlimited range of different fundamental forms by virtue of the ability to exert
external control over the relative rates of reversible processes that are
competitive with the rate of propagation. The research effort will involve
investigation into the rate of these processes in order to develop a
commercially viable procedure for the production of sbPP materials. The
anticipated result is that commercially relevant volumes (> 1 kiloton)of sbPP
thermoplastic elastomers can be produced with tailored physical properties as
technologically viable replacements for existing commercial materials. The
broader impact/commercial potential of this project is that the
large-­&#8208;scale (>1 kiloton) production of sbPP thermoplastic elastomers as
technological replacements for existing commercial materials will serve to
capitalize on the increased availability of inexpensive propylene monomer that
is the product of a recent shift by the petrochemical industry from crude oil to
abundant North American natural gas. This shift has contributed significantly to
increased cost volatility and global shortages of crude oil derived higher
carbon-­numbered monomers that have been historically utilized for the
commercial production of thermoplastic elastomers. Successful realization of the
stated goals of this project will serve to deliver, with high chemical
efficiency, a variety of different grades of high purity sbPP materials with
tailored properties that can be transformational for the adhesives, film-
packaging and medical markets. The procedures developed during this project will
also facilitate future commercial production of a wider range of propylene based
polymers utilizing the same catalyst technology. Society will further benefit
from the introduction of a more environmentally benign andsustainable chemical
technology that provides an alternative to current commercial thermoplastic
elastomers.