* 1345439
* SBIR Phase I:  An Ergosemantic Analogy Problem Solving Platform
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,06/30/2014
* Anthony McCaffrey, Innovation Accelerator, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 06/30/2014
* USD 149,436.00

This SBIR Phase I project proposes to develop a novel software platform for
conducting analogous search to enhance innovation. The technology is based on
the observation that as much as 90% of new innovations are really adaptations of
existing solutions. Currently, engineers responsible for innovating new products
generally rely on basic brainstorming tools and a hit or miss strategy. This
makes innovation more art than science. Analogy Finder is designed to address
this problem. It is based on patent pending semantic search technology that
locates highly relevant patents containing adaptable ideas for unsolved
problems. The technology, originally developed under NSF funding at the
University of Massachusetts, enables engineers and scientists to move beyond
keyword search and instead conduct analogous search to identify relevant
technologies and solutions from other disciplines. The proposed phase I project
will enhance the relevancy of analogous search results, while developing a suite
of benchmark metrics to measure improvement. The objectives of the project are
to implement two ways to group search results and one way to order search
results by a semantic uniqueness metric, and to complete the indexing of all
digitized patents of the U.S. Patent database.

The broader/commercial impact of this technology will be seen by companies that
are actively engaging in and investing in their R&D process to increase
innovation. Obvious industries benefiting from the technology include
automotive, electronics, aerospace, defense, energy, infrastructure and chemical
where they rely heavily on engineering design. The new technology fulfills a
distinct and crucial need for the industry. According to a 2007 McKinsey study,
70% of Corporate Leaders say innovation is among their top three priorities for
driving growth, indicating a prime opportunity for our technology. But as
outlined in the Booze & Allen 2012 report, few companies have perfected the
innovation process. According to the survey, 46% of respondents said their
companies are only marginally effective or average at generating commercially
viable ideas and few succeed at innovation without having an established process
that is followed in a disciplined fashion. Adding science to the art of
innovation will greatly increase the discovery of new, innovative solutions for
a myriad of engineering problems. When a company can more accurately predict the
time needed to solve a problem it will allow them to save time, innovate faster
and speed the time to market for new and innovative products.