* 1345744
* SBIR Phase I:  Screencasting as a Means to Enable, Develop, and Document Student Proficiency with Science and Engineering Practices
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,06/30/2014
* Scott Stuckey, Inquiry Technologies, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 06/30/2014
* USD 153,500.00

This SBIR Phase I project proposes to design and develop an educational,
curriculum-agnostic student-based screencasting software tool integrated with
teacher assessment to support improved student mastery of complex STEM concepts.
Though the tool has potential for use in all grade levels, but middle school
(when students tend to lose interest in STEM subjects) is critical for
demonstrating Phase I feasibility, to prove that the instructional screencasting
components function independently, can be integrated to be used as a student-
and inquiry-based instructional tool in the classroom setting while integrating
a teacher's student-assessment component. Current screencast platforms are
limited to stand-alone online tutorials or screen captures that are presented in
lecture format from a teacher perspective. These devices do not support the
synergistic action of student-created screencasts with formative teacher
assessment. The Intellectual Merit of this tool implemented in educational
settings is to promote learner-centered mastery of science concepts, as students
actively prepare, edit and submit screencasts, gather and synthesize
information, and integrate knowledge with critical thinking skills. This
screencasting tool is expected to enhance comprehension, reading/writing skills,
and inquiry behavior for STEM activities, while enabling teachers to effectively
track student progress and provide assessment feedback on student screencasts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader/commercial impact for the screencasting tool
includes significant benefits for currently underrepresented and disadvantaged
groups, because the Phase I/II design and development includes features such as
text-to-speech, closed captioning, image tags, screen magnification, onscreen
help, online documentation, voice commands, and screen reader. The tool will
provide adaptive support to all students, including students who are struggling
to read, write, or think about complex science concepts. Its curricular design
flexibility (adaptable to any paper- or electronic-based curriculum) increases
its benefit to an educational system burdened with balancing increasing costs
and decreasing budgets. Implementation of the Common Core Standards, currently
adopted by 45 states, will place an even greater burden on school districts to
meet the requirements for greater levels of critical thinking and reasoning
activities for students within highly interactive learning environments. This
new software is expected to gain significant market share in the K-12
educational learning/assessment market, with strong potential for the company to
partner with one of the large three educational companies that together control
over 60% of this market. A strong market growth rate of 8% through 2010
demonstrates that school districts are motivated to acquire effective technology
tools to help them meet annual performance targets.