* 1345226
* FIA-NP: Collaborative Research: The Next-Phase MobilityFirst Project - From Architecture and Protocol Design to Advanced Services and Trial Deployments
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2018
* Zhuoqing Mao, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Cooperative Agreement
* Darleen Fisher
* 04/30/2018
* USD 349,992.00

The Next-Phase MobilityFirst (MF) project aims to have a major impact on the
architecture of the future Internet by re-architecting it to address the needs
of emerging mobile platforms and applications. Adoption of technologies arising
from this project may be expected to provide improved efficiency, security and
robustness that would benefit both network operators and end-users of the
Internet. This project, originally funded as a collaborative research effort
under the NSF Future Internet Architecture (FIA) program (2010-13) in which the
MF architecture was designed over the past 3 years, is centered on a new name-
based service layer which serves as the narrow-waist of the protocol; this name-
based services layer makes it possible to build advanced mobility-centric
services in a flexible manner while also improving security and privacy
properties. The architecture incorporates novel storage-aware routing techniques
which provide significant improvements in mobile network capacity and
functionality. The next phase of the MobilityFirst project is aimed at making
the transition from early-stage architecture and prototyping to advanced real-
world services and trial network deployments. The research and experimental
trials agenda is aimed at validating and refining the core name service,
routing, security and management components of the MF architecture, while also
responding to emerging trends in network technology and services such as the
cellular mobile data explosion, the growth of content, the emergence of cloud
computing, and software-defined network (SDN) technology.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This project includes several research thrusts
aimed at transitioning the MobilityFirst architecture to advanced services and
field deployable technology. These include: (1) advanced name-based network
services and development of enhanced global name service (GNS) technology; (2)
network security and privacy designs and enhancements; (3) design of advanced
content services; (4) application of MobilityFirst protocols to next-generation
mobile cloud computing; (5) design of advanced context-aware services; (6)
technical and economic study of cellular-Internet convergence; (7) software-
defined network (SDN) ready protocol design; and (8) technology platforms,
router implementation and deployment strategies. These research thrusts will be
informed by three distinct real-world network environment trials: a "mobile data
services" trial with a wireless ISP (5Nines) in Madison; WI; a "content
production and delivery network" trial involving several public broadcasting
stations in Pennsylvania connected by a greenfield optical network called
PennREN; and a "context-aware public service" weather emergency notification
system (CASA) with end-users in the Dallas/Fort Worth area. These network
environment trials are the centerpiece of the proposed project, and are expected
to provide a firm basis for validation of the MobilityFirst protocol stack and
its usefulness for developing advanced mobile, content, context and cloud
applications, while also advancing the technology to the field-deployment stage.
Expected outcomes from the project include research results on security,
privacy, content/context/cloud services and SDN; MobilityFirst protocol stack
software revisions; router technology implementations; multiple real-world trial
deployments of the technology; and experimentally supported evaluations of the
architecture. This project is a collaborative effort involving Rutgers, UMass,
MIT, Duke, U Michigan, U Wisconsin, and U Nebraska with the participation of
several industrial research and network environment trial
partners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The MobilityFirst project will
have impact as a new approach to a future Internet that by design addresses
mobility and mobile platforms, and as an enabler of new mobile Internet
applications of social value such as context-aware emergency notification
services. The release of open source protocol software may be expected to help
to stimulate further experimental research on future Internet architectures
across the networking community. The project also contributes to education and
training in the key areas of Internet and mobile network technology.