* 1345503
* SBIR Phase I:  Method and Apparatus Development for making Activated Coke Breeze
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,06/30/2014
* Michael Barkdoll, Forest Vue Research, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 06/30/2014
* USD 148,606.00

This Small Business Innovative Research Phase I project addresses a new cost-
effective, environmentally friendly process for producing activated carbon (AC).
Prior experimentation conducted by the principal investigator has demonstrated
that it is possible to produce AC in small laboratory batches using a new low-
cost raw material - coke breeze. This Phase I project will extend that
understanding and test the process at larger scale and in a more industrially-
relevant scenario. This research represents a critical intermediate step towards
the production of AC in commercial quantities. The proposed approach is counter-
intuitive and demonstrating its feasibility will constitute a technological
breakthrough, because prior attempts to convert coke breeze to AC have been
unsuccessful.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is substantial since the
current U.S. market for AC is large and is predicted to grow at a 10% annual
rate to reach 650,000 metric tons by 2016. This growth is precipitated in large
part by recent Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) regulations concerning
emissions from coal fired power plants and drinking water standards. Application
of the new technology will decrease raw material costs by two-thirds and
production costs 40 percent versus competing materials. The availability of
lower cost, higher quality AC will permit its wider application with significant
societal benefits. The environmental implications of this new technology are
equally important. It is anticipated that use of the new technology and the
alternate raw material will reduce greenhouse gas emissions from manufacturing
by 40-50%, and will virtually eliminate the release of toxic airborne emissions.