* 1345864
* SBIR Phase I:  Adaptive Learning System for Early Childhood Education from Birth to Kindergarten (eB2K)
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,06/30/2014
* Michael Dunaway, The Aethena Group, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 06/30/2014
* USD 149,993.00

This SBIR Phase I project proposes to develop an adaptive learning system for
early childhood care and education to aid parents and childcare providers in
fostering the development of young children and assist them in preparing
children for academic success beginning in kindergarten. The system will
establish an interactive learning environment - delivered via smartphone,
tablet, laptop or desktop computer - to provide caregivers with a virtual
teaching partner and mentor that is accessible at any time or place.
Additionally, the system will enable the formation of social networks among
parents and caregivers, build awareness of local childcare resources, and
provide access to professional childcare and pediatric services. The project
will develop a technology framework for data collection through smart devices
and interactive educational programs to advance the use of learning analytics in
early childhood education. This capability will enable longitudinal collection
of data on early childhood development and learning across large populations and
demographics to refine current understanding and methodologies, enhance
professional knowledge among childcare providers, and inform a new generation of
childcare and family support services.

The broader/commercial impact is the project's potential to addresses the lack
of infrastructure to deliver quality early childhood care and education that is
accessible and affordable to all families. Research has indicated only a
minority of parents with pre-kindergarten age children gain access to services
that could ensure their children enter school fully ready to learn as determined
by kindergarten entry assessments. This need is particularly acute in
underserved communities that lack resources to support positive parenting skills
and quality early childhood experiences. National studies have consistently
demonstrated the benefits to society of early childhood education in improved
high school and college graduation rates, reduced juvenile crime, greater adult
productivity, enhanced wage-earning potential, and increased tax revenues. To
address this shortfall in capacity, this project will identify educational
content appropriate for delivery via information technologies and develop an
adaptive learning system to aid parents and caregivers in establishing effective
learning environments for their young children. The widespread availability of
mobile digital devices and the trajectory of future development and use,
particularly among young parents and caregivers' present an opportunity for
innovation in early childhood care and education that will greatly enhance
access to knowledge of parenting skills and child development.