* 1345610
* SBIR Phase I:  Fast Switching Electrochromic Window
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Damoder Reddy, ARGIL, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 12/31/2014
* USD 179,999.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop
scalable solution processed techniques to create unique fast switching
electrochromic layers. The novel electrochromic layers will be initially
examined for compatibility and performance then subsequently used to construct
solid state fast switching windows. Systematic characterization of the solid
state electrochromic device will establish which components in the system limit
performance. Upon successful fabrication, the company expects to achieve
enhanced light transmission modulation at fast switching speed s for automotive
applications.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will be to address
automotive applications in improve light/heat control into the automobile and
enhance user comfort by replacing existing automotive glass with dynamic
automotive glass. Economic and environmental benefits of using dynamic windows
in automotives are clear: increasing miles per gallon by reducing air
conditioning load with enhance light/heat management. Increasing fuel efficiency
by 3 miles per gallon will decrease oil consumption by one million barrels of
oil per day. It is estimated that replacing standard automotive sunroof glass
with dynamic sunroof glass will increase fuel efficiency by 3 miles per gallon
during summer time. If all the glass in an automobile are replaced with dynamic
glass then the impact will be much larger resulting in decrease in oil
consumption by several millions of barrels per day. Still, current dynamic
window technologies have not reached their market potential due to their high
cost. The electrochromic windows are based innovative materials and device
designs that achieve fast switching and high contrast while reducing production
costs compared to alternate dynamic window technologies available today. Wide
scale adoption of this unique technology will not only enhance market
penetration for dynamic windows but establish a new benchmark for performance
and cost.