* 1345837
* SBIR Phase I:  Low Cost, High Capacity Lithium-Ion Batteries Based On Nano-Structured Silicon Anodes And Ionic Liquid Electrolytes
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,06/30/2014
* Dharmesh Jawarani, Silexta Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 06/30/2014
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase 1 project will introduce a novel
method of manufacturing a high capacity Si nanowire anode for Li-ion battery
applications. Si has the highest lithium absorption capacity of any anode
material (4200 mAh/g) whereas the incumbent anode material in today's Li-ion
batteries has a capacity of only 372 mAh/g. The adoption of Si anodes however,
is limited by the fact that bulk Si pulverizes due to volume expansion during
cycling. Nanostructured Si does not pulverize, however, the approaches to make
nanostructured Si anodes are either expensive, or not suitable for mass
manufacturing, or limited by specific capacity. The proposed method is estimated
to be low cost, scalable for manufacturing, and does not suffer from any of the
technical limitations of current technologies used to fabricate anodes based on
nanostructured Si. The researchers also propose to optimize the nanowire
morphology and architecture for maximizing the anode capacity and enabling it to
withstand more than 1,000 cycles with sufficient capacity retention.
Furthermore, the researchers propose to integrate an ionic liquid electrolyte
with the Si nanowire anode, which is expected to show high voltage stability.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact / commercial potential of this project
is truly transformational. This research will lead to a better understanding of
electrochemical reactions in cells utilizing Si nanowire anodes. The novel
approach to fabricate the anode may find use in other technologies such as in
thermoelectric devices, gas / chemical sensors, and biomedical devices. The
commercial impact of this low-cost technology is also expected to be highly
significant. The batteries with Si nanostructures reported to-date have used
expensive methods to create nanowires and current collectors. The researchers
envision that their unique and disruptive approach will make ultra-high capacity
anodes (~3000 mAh/g) possible on a large scale. The increase in anode capacity
will result in an estimated 50%-60% increase in energy density for the total
battery pack. Since Li-ion batteries are expected to play an increasingly larger
role in consumer device storage as well as in industrial and electric vehicle
(EV) applications, this would have a tremendous social and environmental impact.
For one, the range that EVs can travel without a charge will be extended,
thereby leading to widespread adoption of EVs. The increased battery capacity
will also lead to solutions for residential and grid storage wherever renewable
energy is used.