* 1345724
* SBIR Phase I:  Trains of Thought, a novel game-based learning curriculum module to teach STEM and entrepreneurship skills
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,06/30/2014
* James Niehaus, Charles River Analytics Inc
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 06/30/2014
* USD 149,966.00

This SBIR Phase I project proposes to design and demonstrate the feasibility of
Trains of Thought, a novel game-based learning curriculum module to teach STEM
(science, technology, engineering, and mathematics) and entrepreneurship skills
to high school students. This project has significant intellectual merit. US
kindergarten through twelfth grade (K-12) STEM education is falling behind
global standards (National Science Board, 2007; US Department of Labor, 2007),
and current educational practice is not doing enough to prepare our students to
compete in the global economy. Trains of Thought explores new applications of
game-based learning to this problem. The approach combines (1) proven
educational research in preparation for future learning (Schwartz & Martin,
2004) and guided experiential learning with scaffolding (Hmelo-Silver, Duncan, &
Chinn, 2007); (2) an existing, popular, open source business simulation video
game; and (3) artificial intelligence experience management (Weyhrauch, 1996),
(Roberts, 2011), (Mott & Lester, 2006) to balance educational objectives with
engaging gameplay, maintaining a sense of flow. The project builds upon emerging
educational research results to develop a fundamentally new methodology for
game-based learning. If successful, this effort should set new standards for the
use of games for teaching STEM and entrepreneurship in K-12 classrooms.

The broader/commercial impact of the proposed research, curriculum module, and
accompanying game software can help to reverse the trend of declining US STEM
and entrepreneurship education. This effect directly supports our future
business leaders in driving American innovation and our nation's long-term
economic prosperity. The transformative concept of effective game-based learning
has the potential to reach out to under-represented demographics in STEM-based
entrepreneurial businesses - including women, African-American, Hispanic, and
Latino populations - by providing students new ways to engage, interact, and
learn from core educational content. The knowledge gained from the proposed
effort also has significant implications to the scientific and educational
communities for the design and application of game-based learning. Our
principles, methods of development, and evaluation outcomes may form a model for
developing additional curriculum modules on a variety of subjects, therefore
increasing effectiveness of US STEM and entrepreneurship education in a wider
context. These results may also spur new research efforts to refine and extend
our findings in game-based learning, creating more effective STEM and
entrepreneurship education in future efforts.