* 1345215
* HBCU-RISE:  Enhancement of Research Infrastructure for the Development of Nanoelectromechanical Systems (NEMS) Devices and Materials
* EDU,EES
* 04/15/2014,12/31/2018
* Suely Black, Norfolk State University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Santiago
* 12/31/2018
* USD 998,968.00

With National Science Foundation support, Norfolk State University will
strengthen the institution's research infrastructure and facilitate
implementation of a doctoral program in Materials Science and Engineering in the
Center for Materials Research. The project supports the development of enhanced
research capabilities and curricular modifications in the area of
Nanoelectromechanical Systems (NEMS) Devices and Materials for biomedical
applications. Support is provided to train Ph.D. students, especially
underrepresented minorities, in these emerging fields through the enhancement of
the curriculum to include nanoelectromechanical systems - related content,
professional development activities for students and post-doctoral researchers,
the acquisition of equipment to facilitate the proposed research, and engagement
of K-12 students in STEM activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit:&lt;br/&gt;The project supports research on the processing of
Nanoelectromechanical Systems materials and devices for biomedical applications.
Efforts include the development of plasmonic nano-array biosensors, mechanically
tunable hyperbolic meta-surfaces, and nano-cantilever biosensor arrays; and
studies of electrochemicalmechanical coupling of 3-D nanoelectrodes in neural
sensing. Through this project, new generation label-free biosensors will be
realized via Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering substrates incorporated with
curved graphene structures. Moreover, NEMS cantilever resonator arrays will be
developed and integrated with biocompatible nano-materials and multiple
monoclonal antibodies to improve the sensitivity and specificity of prostate
cancer screening. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;The project
will enhance the Materials Science Curricula at Norfolk State University to
include emerging topics such as Nanoelectromechanical Systems. The expansion of
research capabilities will be facilitated, improving the recruitment and
retention of quality doctoral students and faculty, and strengthening
partnerships with universities and industry. By exposing underrepresented
minority K-12 students to engaging STEM outreach activities, the pipeline of
students in STEM fields will be established, with the ultimate goal of inspiring
youth to pursue degrees in STEM fields. This research will lead to an enhanced
understanding of nanostructures for novel functionalities such as prostate
cancer screening. The research will also lead to improved electrochemical
sensing electrode designs, increasing the lifetime of implantable biomedical
sensing devices and reducing the cost of disease diagnostics and health care.