* 1345523
* SBIR Phase I:  REACT: Fostering Computational Thinking through Real-time Classroom Learning Assessment
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,06/30/2014
* Alexander Repenning, AGENTSHEETS INC
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 06/30/2014
* USD 150,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project proposes to build a Cyberlearning tool called REACT
(Real Time Evaluation and Assessment of Computational Thinking) based on a
highly innovative assessment methodology that will help teachers with computer
science education. There is growing interest in having more students exposed to
computer science and in broadening STEM participation for women and minority
students. However, the question is one of how. Research by the REACT team -
conducted in diverse innercity, remote rural and Native American communities -
indicates that: a) a well-defined strategy exists that can make computer science
education work in public schools, and b) it is difficult to create the classroom
environment needed to support the highly engaging and educational pedagogical
approaches that form the heart of this strategy. Open ended projects can be
highly inspiring to students across genders and ethnic groups. It is proposed to
build and evaluate a cyberlearning tool that will assess student-built games (or
simulations) and provide the teacher with feedback on what students are actually
learning in real time. This feedback is an embedded, formative assessment that
gives the teacher important information directly from their students' programs
and enables teachers to make crucial instructional decisions during lessons.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader/commercial impact includes the benefits of
embedded assessment - that is, assessment that taps directly into student
created projects instead of soliciting information from students through tests.
Part of the assessment problem is that it is difficult to extract meaningful
information from design artifacts. In the case of game design, it is most useful
to extract information from the programs and games themselves. REACT employs a
highly innovative pattern matching approach called Computational Thinking
Pattern Analysis (CTPA). CTPA can find patterns that are relevant to game design
as well as computational science modeling. A successful embedded, formative
assessment of design-based artifacts like programs could advance learning
sciences and significantly enhance in-class and online learning by creating
closed loop learning environments presenting real time information to students
and teachers. REACT could result in an important tipping point because embedded,
formative assessment provides crucial information to teachers as they are making
crucial instructional decisions. This could be highly relevant to broadening
participation in computer science learning. A teacher using a supportive
Cyberlearning approach would be able to better engage and motivate female and
underserved populations. This increased engagement could significantly scale up
the exposure of students to computer science education.