* 1345900
* SBIR Phase I:  EI:I2: PANOPTES: A Sytem for Analyzing Big Unstructured Multimedia Data Collections with Applications in Law Enforcement, Manufacturing, and Retail
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,10/31/2014
* Michael Holroyd, Arqball LLC
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 10/31/2014
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop and
commercialize a system for indexing, searching, and visualizing large
unstructured collections of multimedia data (photos, videos, and audio
recordings). In the aftermath of an unexpected disaster such as a terrorist
attack, law enforcement is overwhelmed with a vast amount of multimedia assets
from many different sources ranging from security cameras to witness
smartphones. It is critically important for investigators to quickly and
reliably identify potentially relevant footage in these large corpora in order
to aid their investigation. This project will develop advanced software to
address this need. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential
of this project results from its applicability across a number of industries,
including law enforcement, defense, manufacturing, and commercial retail. The
combined size of these markets in the US is estimated to be roughly $6 trillion.
This project addresses the need for automated tools to organize large
unstructured collections of multimedia data that are expected to increase in
number and size in parallel with the growth in smartphones, wider availability
of low-cost recording equipment, and the prevalence of surveillance and security
video systems. The current approach for searching these types of data
collections will prove inadequate, since it relies on tools that are designed
for reviewing a small amount of footage, normally captured by a small number of
devices at known points in time and space.