* 1345871
* SBIR Phase I:  Sustainable Advanced Composites Manufacturing: Removing Barriers to Automation
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,09/30/2014
* Jaron Kuppers, Vistex Composites LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 09/30/2014
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will investigate
the feasibility of using Specialized Elastomeric Tooling (SET) as the central
technology for a rapid, automated, low-cost advanced composites manufacturing
system by developing innovative equipment concepts. An industry need exists,
especially in the automotive sector, for an automated solution that can quickly
and affordably produce carbon fiber parts in large numbers. The proposal
identifies the key barriers to rapid and automated production of advanced
composites including (1) moving formed uncured composite workpieces to curing
stations without loss of shape, (2) rapid curing using SET by understanding
polymer degradation and heat transfer characteristics, and (3) rapidly ejecting
cured parts from molds and removing resin residue, all without causing material
degradation or defects. Proposed innovative methods for addressing these
technical problems include but are not limited to: ultrasonics for cleaning and
part ejection, liquid nitrogen jets and conforming vacuum fixturing for quickly
cooling and transporting workpieces, respectively, and use of thermogravimetric
analysis, differential scanning calorimetry, and scanning electron microscopy
for understanding the heat transfer characteristics of resins during Specialized
Elastomeric Tooling curing. The anticipated result will be refined criteria that
allow for execution of innovative equipment concepts for automated composites
manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project is equipment design concepts and
best practices that reduce the cost of advanced composite products and which
reduce cycle times for high volume composite manufacturing as relevant to, for
example, the automotive market. Reducing the cost of composites drastically
increases the composites market opportunity and will have broad impacts on many
sustainability goals such as emission reduction of automobiles and lower cost
renewable energy technologies. Furthermore, the proposed thermal analysis of the
composites during processing will lead to a better understanding of the effects
of heat transfer during resin curing. In general, broader adoption of composites
will directly drive domestic manufacturing job creation as composites displace
foreign produced goods.