* 1345963
* SBIR Phase I:  A green enzyme-based oxidative platform for fine chemical synthesis and remediation applications
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Stephane Corgie, ZYMtronix Catalytic Systems Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 12/31/2014
* USD 179,999.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project aims to increase the
effectiveness of oxidative enzymes of high potential in chemical synthesis and
chemical remediation applications. Enzyme-based systems, the greenest and most
energy efficient processes known to-date, are replacing chemical-based systems
due to their superior potential for energy savings and environmental benefits.
While at the forefront of the green chemistry revolution, however, enzyme-based
systems are difficult to come by. Their adoption has not been as fast, as
widespread, or as beneficial as it otherwise could be because oxidative enzymes
are not cost effective enough to replace chemicals. This project is developing
an integrated technology for oxidative enzymes for industrial use. The project
objectives consist of (1) manufacturing continuous flow reactors dedicated to
processing ZYMtronix?s catalysts, (2) developing a synthesis process for key
pharmaceutical precursors used in cancer treatment, and (3) demonstrating the
remediation application for industrial contaminants. The anticipated technical
results will benchmark reactor characteristics and the catalytic metrics of the
aforementioned processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader commercial potential
of this project is to facilitate the adoption of oxidative enzymes in synthesis
and remediation applications because they can replace precious metal catalysts,
toxic solvents, and energy intensive processes. Additional benefits translate to
safer processes and products for manufacturers, consumers and the environment.
ZYMtronix patent-pending technology is estimated to be substantially more
efficient and cost effective to operate when compared with chemical systems,
increasing enzyme activity, decreasing enzyme inhibition, and expanding the
enzyme´s range of operable conditions. Combined with proprietary reactors being
developed, the catalysts can be recycled for continuous use. ZYMtronix´s
technology serves the fine chemicals, pharmaceutical, as well as the water
remediation, markets applicable to oxidative enzyme processes.