* 1345672
* SBIR Phase I:  Real-time, In-situ Detection of Escherichia Coli Bacteria in Water Using Graphene
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,06/30/2014
* Shun Mao, NanoAffix Science LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2014
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to develop a
graphene-gold nanoparticle-based sensing platform for detection of Escherichia
Coli (E. Coli) bacteria in water. Real-time, inline detection of E. coli in
water is an unmet need but critical for water quality monitoring to ensure
public safety. Several methods have been used for E. coli detection in water;
however, these methods have disadvantages such as low sensitivity, time-
consuming, and high cost. Therefore, there is a great demand for sensitive,
fast, and cost-effective detection technology that could address the limitations
of conventional methods for E. coli detection. The intellectual merit of the
SBIR Phase I project is realized by the superior sensing performance for the
detection of E. coli and the application of graphene as the sensing element in a
field-effect transistor sensor to fulfill unmet needs. Specific research
objectives of the project are: (1) to improve the sensor sensitivity; (2) to
test the sensor performance in flowing water; (3) to study the
stability/reliability of the sensor; (4) to examine recycling potential of the
sensor. The project is expected to lead to a reliable and low-cost E. coli
sensor with a lower detection limit of 1 cfu/mL or below.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this project
will be realized by developing a new E. coli detection platform for improving
public safety in the fresh water supply. The real-time, in-situ sensor will also
contribute to a smart water distribution grid. The proposed activities will
improve the biosensing performance (detection limit, stability, and recycling)
and maximize the commercialization opportunities of the real-time sensing
platform. The targeted commercial product will be a handheld, stand-alone unit
that can be used to measure the E. coli concentration in well water, water from
our faucets and refrigerators. The major sensing materials used in this
platform, i.e., thermally-reduced graphene oxide and gold nanoparticles, are
affordable, particularly given the small amount of materials needed for each
sensor. The project is expected to generate a deeper understanding of the
binding interaction between anti-bacterial antibody and bacteria, which will be
useful for developing next-generation sensors for sensitive and accurate
detection of food-borne and water-borne pathogens. The project will also train
University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee postdocs and graduate students in the areas of
nanomaterials and nanodevices.