* 1345446
* SBIR Phase I:  KinderBots: robotics and programming in early childhood education
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Mitchell Rosenberg, KinderLab Robotics, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 12/31/2014
* USD 179,556.00

This SBIR Phase I project proposes to develop a developmentally appropriate
robotic construction kit specifically designed for early childhood education
(PreK-2) for teaching the components of STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering,
Mathematics), especially the "T" of technology and the "E" of engineering, which
have been the most neglected for this age segment. Recent research on
educational robotics has not focused on the foundational years. However, both
from an economic and a developmental standpoint, educational interventions that
begin in early childhood are associated with lower costs and more durable
effects. The proposed work is consistent with the increasing Federal efforts to
focus on early childhood education. It is organized around several technical and
business questions: 1. What design principles inform creation of a
developmentally appropriate robotic kit to be manufactured at low-cost? 2. What
are the most feasible technical mechanisms for the robotic kit to be programmed
by young children through the use of tangible blocks without a computer screen?
3. What manufacturing processes are needed for scaling from single prototypes to
large-scale volume? 4. What are the outcomes of user testing with children,
teachers and parents in school and home settings? 5. What is a sustainable
commercialization plan?

The broader/commercial impact of this proposal is that it will contribute to the
emerging field of robotics in education by addressing the needs of an
educational segment, early childhood, that today lacks the necessary tools for
teaching technology and engineering in a developmentally appropriate way. This
work comes at a time of re-envisioning early childhood education at the Federal
level, and an accepted need to develop innovative new technologies and
approaches for STEM. This interdisciplinary proposal makes contributions to the
fields of learning technologies, computer science education, early childhood
education and human-computer interaction. At the same time it provides an
opportunity to address the needs of a target audience that, according to the
latest US Census, consists of approximately 13.3 million children. Given the
size of the industry devoted to early childhood education, the potential
commercial impact is significant.