* 1345460
* SBIR Phase I:  Amorphous Metal Nonlinear Resistor Applications for Liquid Crystal Display Backplanes
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Sean Muir, Amorphyx Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 12/31/2014
* USD 172,622.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project assesses the technical
feasibility of the amorphous metal non-linear resistor as a transformational
display technology. This technology challenges conventional display industry
wisdom by using tunneling electronics, enabled through innovative materials, to
simplify the active matrix liquid crystal display backplane. A new path is
defined for realizing enhanced performance that goes beyond simply adding
process complexity to achieve incremental gains. The amorphous metal non-linear
resistor has no semiconductors, fewer process layers than traditional thin-film
transistor based backplanes, and leverages inherently flexible amorphous
materials. These qualities are allowing cost-to-performance expectations to be
redefined by solving transistor stability and speed issues and by ultimately
enabling a new path to roll-to-roll backplane manufacturing. The project will
establish a process for producing amorphous metal non-linear resistors that is
compatible with high-volume display manufacturing techniques. At the same time,
the project will advance knowledge by developing an improved understanding of
the materials and interface properties necessary for realizing and controlling
Fowler-Nordhiem conduction in fully patterned
structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project is in liquid crystal display backplane manufacturing energy and cost
reduction. Amorphous metal non-linear resistor technology, with fewer steps,
reduces the energy used in display backplane fabrication. By proving the
stability and reliability of amorphous metal based thin-film devices, this
technology will fundamentally alter the traditional suite of materials that
scientists and engineers use to design electronics beyond display applications.
Current industry solutions that attempt to improve active-matrix-liquid-crystal
display performance, e.g., low temperature polysilicon and amorphous oxide
semiconductor thin-film transistors, only increase manufacturing complexity and
energy costs. Roll-to-roll processing of display backplanes on flexible glass
substrates is a proposed cost savings initiative in the display industry.
Amorphous metal nonlinear resistor technology, offers further commercial benefit
to the display industry through enabling roll-to-roll production of flexible
display backplanes.