* 1345168
* SBIR Phase I:  Enabling Ultra-Compact Photonic Integrated Circuits with Designer Disordered Dielectrics
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,11/30/2014
* Ruth Mullen, Etaphase, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 11/30/2014
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project positions a
stepping stone in the chasm between fundamental new physics insights relating to
the structure of matter and an aggressive approach to commercializing
"Semiconductors of Light" in emerging markets which include photonic integrated
circuits (PICs) for high density optical interconnects. Prior assumptions that
periodicity was essential to forming the photonic band gaps (PBGs) necessary to
create "Semiconductors of Light" have recently been proven false. New
structures, characterized by suppressed density fluctuations (hyperuniformity),
include disordered structures that exhibit photonic band gaps which are
isotropic. This loosens layout constraints and reduces fabrication tolerances
for PBG PICs relative to "Semiconductors of Light" based on photonic crystals.
Research objectives include the use of hyperuniformly disordered PBGs in the
design of PBG-based PIC modulators. This research will leverage entirely new
classes of both symmetric and asymmetric resonant light defect structures in a
new kind of designer dielectric capable of isotropic light control. Anticipated
technical results include higher-performance optical modulators for photonic
integrated circuits providing improvements in wavelength density per unity chip
area, reduced energy requirements, and improved fabrication
tolerance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project is to apply a newly-discovered structure of solid matter to the
elimination of bandwidth bottlenecks that might otherwise constrain the growth
of cloud computing business models and threaten continued free availability to
the public of increasingly advanced network services. The $3.3B optical
interconnect market projected for 2015 will include a rapidly-growing family of
high-density optical transceivers priced for datacenter applications operating
at rates of 400 Gb/s and beyond. Market entry will require a disruptive rather
than just an incremental technological improvement. Commercialization of
photonic integrated circuits based on newly-discovered hyperuniformly disordered
structures (HUDS) disrupts the current trend toward photonic integrated circuits
(PICs) made with silicon photonics microring resonators (MRRs) because HUDS-
enabled PBG resonant structures are ~100x smaller in chip area than MRRs. The
smaller volume of PBG resonant structures relative to MRRs has been shown to
enable lower energy per bit modulation. Finally, HUDs-enabled PBG PICs are
expected to be less sensitive to temperature than MRRs. These advantages of
HUDS-enabled PBG PICs, along with the improved fabrication tolerance, layout
flexibility, and isotropy of HUDS, promise to provide lower cost, more compact,
and more energy-efficient optical transceivers for networking equipment and data
center markets.