* 1345143
* Understanding Cratons and their Margins: Insights From Body and Surface Waves
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2014,01/31/2017
* Donald Forsyth, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 01/31/2017
* USD 231,400.00

Much remains to be learned about the cratonic lithosphere, including the
physical and compositional properties that distinguish its mantle from the
underlying asthenosphere, how its motion couples to flow in the asthenosphere,
and the processes by which it formed. To gain insight on these topics, we will
combine the complementary resolving power of scattered waves (Sp and Ps) and
anisotropic surface wave tomography in the interior and across the margin of the
Baltic Shield, where dense arrays of permanent and temporary broadband stations
exist, and the central U.S. craton and its margins, where the EarthScope
Transportable Array and other stations provide excellent sampling. We will image
crust and mantle discontinuities with Sp and Ps phases, constrain crust and
mantle velocities and attenuation with Love and Rayleigh wave tomography, and
carry out joint inversions that integrate surface wave, Sp, Ps and other data to
derive 3D azimuthally anisotropic models of the lithosphere and asthenosphere.
This work will help to constrain whether the vertical gradient in shear velocity
between the lithosphere and asthenosphere (the seismological lithosphere-
asthenosphere boundary) fundamentally differs between cratonic and non-cratonic
continental lithosphere. We will interpret these results in terms of contrasts
in temperature, bulk composition, volatiles, melt content and grain size between
the lithosphere and asthenosphere. Within the body of the cratonic lithosphere,
negative velocity gradients at mid-lithospheric depths have been observed with
Sp and Ps phases, often coinciding with the "8&amp;#730; discontinuity" first
seen in long-range seismic profiles, and, in North America, with a vertical
gradient in the fast direction of azimuthal anisotropy from long-period-waveform
tomography. We will obtain new resolution of the internal structure of the
cratonic lithosphere in the central U.S. and Baltic shield, and we will use
these results to test models for the processes that formed the cratonic mantle
or contributed to its subsequent evolution. Finally, shearing in the
asthenosphere relative to the lithosphere will cause vertical gradients in the
orientation of azimuthal anisotropy. This work will constrain the distribution
of azimuthal anisotropy in the mantle beneath the Baltic Shield and central U.S.
cratons, allowing us to assess the geometry of shear in the sub-continental
asthenosphere and how continental plate motion is coupled to the asthenosphere
across the lithosphere-asthenosphere boundary.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cratons
represent ancient, stable regions of the continental lithosphere that have not
undergone major tectonic activity for the last ~550 million years or more.
Geophysical and geological evidence has shown most cratons are underlain by
layers of mantle with anomalously high seismic wavespeeds that represent mantle
lithosphere that is cold and chemically distinct from the asthenosphere, and
whose thickness is much greater than the surrounding, younger lithosphere.
However, much remains to be learned about the physical and chemical properties
of the cratonic mantle lithosphere and how it differs from the underlying,
weaker asthenospheric mantle. In this research we are improving models for the
structure of the cratonic mantle and asthenosphere beneath cratonic regions in
northern Europe and the central U.S.; in the latter region we are employing data
from the EarthScope Transportable Array as well as other stations. Our approach
combines seismic waves that are sensitive to localized gradients in seismic
velocity structure with those that reflect volume-averaged velocity structure.
The improved constraints on mantle structure will help to test models for how
the cratonic mantle lithosphere formed, how it has evolved over time, and how
its plate motion relates to flow and deformation in the asthenosphere.