* 1345432
* SBIR Phase I: A Semantic Data-Driven Human Capital Recommendation System
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Monica Messer, Green Schingle LLC
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 12/31/2014
* USD 179,999.00

This SBIR Phase I project proposes to apply the combination of semantic
matchmaking and a knowledge acquisition loop to human capital selection
processes to generate a rank-ordered short-list of qualified candidates. The
problem with available job matching methods is they rely primarily on keyword
searches and lack comprehensive learning that includes feedback on quality of
recommendations. The opportunity is to build technology to create a candidate
recommendation system incorporating feedback on relevance of its performance.
The research objective is to determine if integrating semantic matching and
machine learning provides a feasible basis for creating a commercially viable
predictive candidate recommendation system. The natural language processing
techniques, and the ontology knowledge base developed during this research, have
the potential to advance knowledge and understanding of using natural text to
express the availability of skills and experience. The anticipated result is the
creation of a human capital ontology structure and rules that learn from
feedback loops of rank-order successes to improve semantic matching. While this
project assesses the significance of ontology and machine learning to improve
the quality of candidate recommendations, the results also enhance technological
understanding of combining ontology and machine learning within broader work-
force science research.

The broader/commercial impact of this product is to significantly increase the
success of selected applicants and improve employers' ability to manage human
capital selection efficiently and at less cost by presenting them with a more
accurate short-list. Identifying the most qualified candidates should increase
the return on investment in over $6 billion spent annually by businesses in the
United States for online recruiting efforts ultimately resulting in greater
organizational competence and competitive advantage. By implementing technology
that automates the process of rank-ordering job candidates based on skills,
qualifications, and machine-learning from historical selections, businesses will
be able to reduce costs associated with identifying quality job candidates while
dealing with the growing challenge of talent shortages, especially in Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Math (STEM) professions. The feedback loop provides
for knowledge acquisition to be integrated; thus improving results over time and
reducing effort needed to identify qualified candidates. Such insights into
talent data will help businesses make more informed recruiting, hiring, and
other resource management decisions. This innovation has the potential to extend
to talent information in disparate sources offering Big Data analytics solutions
for many talent management functions and providing unprecedented insights for
human capital management.