* 1345138
* EAGER/RUI: Vertically Aligned Bulk Heterojunctions by Combining Screen Printing and Lyotropic Liquid Crystal Processing
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2013,11/30/2015
* Xiaoying Rong, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 11/30/2015
* USD 99,906.00

This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) award provides funding
to evaluate the feasibility of producing vertically aligned bulk heterojunctions
by combining screen-printing and lyotropic liquid crystal processing. The
proposed research includes three key aspects related to this liquid crystalline
printing. First, novel core-shell hybrid nanowires will be synthesized by
chemically grafting conjugated polymers onto inorganic nanowires. Lyotropic
liquid crystalline behaviors of the resulting rod-like hybrids will be
determined with variations of concentration, solvent and temperature. Second,
rheological tests will be performed to optimize formulation of liquid
crystalline ink for appropriate alignment during the screen-printing process. In
particular, studies on viscosity, thixotropy and viscoelasticity of printable
nanowire ink will guide further development of screen-printing for high
throughput production. Third, processes of screen-printing for producing
vertically aligned bulk heterojunctions of liquid crystal ink will be developed
in a well-controlled manner. The processing-structure-property correlations will
be established to optimize the materials properties.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;If
successful, the results of this research will lead to the creation of a new
paradigm, which will have a profound impact on the production of solar energy
devices. The vertically aligned bulk heterojunction is an ideal morphology and
structure required for high efficiency hybrid photovoltaic cells. The new
approach of the liquid crystalline printing developed in this research will be
of significant importance for the manufacture of large-scale, cost-effective,
high-performance polymer-based hybrid photovoltaic cells that would
revolutionize renewable energy generation. A reliable analysis of the
processing-structure-property correlations will provide a foundation for the
optimization of new multifunctional nanomaterials that can be utilized in
various energy generation and conversion systems. This interdisciplinary award
makes contributions to the fields of nanomaterials, liquid crystals, polymers,
organic electronics, coatings, and graphic printing.