* 1345032
* MCTP: PI4: Program for Interdisciplinary and Industrial Internships at Illinois
* MPS,DMS
* 03/01/2014,02/28/2021
* Yuliy Baryshnikov, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 02/28/2021
* USD 1,199,999.00

The Program for Interdisciplinary and Industrial Internships at Illinois is a
multi-year mathematics graduate training program designed to bring students
through three critical transition points: the transition from undergraduate to
graduate studies; the transition from working on ``canned'' problems to tackling
open-ended problems and even formulating the problems themselves; and the
transition from pure ``problem solving'' to doing research on a real-world
mathematical, scientific or engineering challenge. The program consists of
summer mini-courses; graduate level research seminars; group problem sessions;
mini-workshops; networking events that include other scientific departments,
government research laboratories, and local technology industry partners; and
internships in industry or in academic research laboratories. Research topics
include the foundations of information processing in the brain, geometric
underpinnings of big data algorithms, and the differential geometry of nonlinear
control. The entities that will partner with the Department of Mathematics in
this activity include the University of Illinois Institute of Genomic Biology,
School of Cellular and Molecular Biology, Coordinated Sciences Laboratory,
Beckman Institute, the AXIS Research Center, Sandia National Laboratories, and
Wolfram Research.

Long-term systemic trends in the mathematical sciences include a steady increase
in numbers of PhDs produced concurrent with a steady decrease in academic
tenure-track openings. These trends demand bold steps. The project aims at
creating alternative educational models for graduate students in mathematical
sciences that can address these broad systemic changes in our discipline. This
project will impact over 125 U.S. graduate students in the mathematical sciences
over a 5-year period.