* 1345715
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of Biomimetic Toxin Nanosponges with Enhanced Toxin Affinity
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,07/31/2014
* Che-Ming Hu, Arytha Biosciences, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 07/31/2014
* USD 155,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop a
cholesterol-enriched biomimetic toxin nanopsonges with enhanced toxin-binding
affinity for efficient scavenging of cytolytic toxins in the bloodstream.
Consisting of nanoparticle-supported red blood cell membranes, toxin nanosponges
serve as a biomimetic decoy to arrest and neutralize pore-forming toxins
regardless of their molecular structures. The platform can detoxify alpha-
hemolysin, a major toxin in methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA),
as well as other toxin types with different molecular structures. Toward
translating the platform to treatment of toxin-induced injuries and diseases,
this Phase I project aims to enhance the toxin-binding affinity of the
nanosponges for more efficient toxin removal by enriching the platform with
cholesterol, a common receptor for many pore-forming toxins. The project also
serves to expand the toxin nanosponge platform from the existing mouse blood
model to two other non-human animal species, rat and pig.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project lies in the unique
biomimetic properties of the nanosponges and its broad applicability against
multiple pore-forming toxin types. The platform possesses significant
therapeutic potential owing to broad presence of membrane-damaging virulence
factors in bacteria and in animal venoms. In addition, the platform presents a
unique nanostructure that elegantly bridges biological materials with synthetic
nanomaterials. The success of the project will bring forth a potent therapeutic
option against many virulence factors and establish a new class of
nanoparticulate for emerging biomedical applications. This program will benefit
the field of antitoxin treatment as well as nanotechnology studies in general.