* 1345013
* RTG: An Interdisciplinary Research Training Program in Applied Mathematics, Computational Science, and Mathematical Physics
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2023
* Randolph Bank, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 07/31/2023
* USD 1,837,677.00

This project involves a coordinated training program for post-doctoral
researchers, graduate students and undergraduate students that give equal
emphasis to theory, computation and application---the three cornerstones of
modern research in applied mathematics. A fundamental goal of the project is to
provide the students and postdoctoral researchers with the intellectual and
software tools that they need to engage in cutting-edge research in either a
university or industry based environment. The 5-year program is designed to fund
up to 6 postdoctoral researchers, 10 graduate students, and 3 undergraduate
students during the academic year and summer session. These postdocs and
students will be organized into team-based research groups, with each team being
coordinated and mentored by two or more of the Investigators. The research topic
of each assembled team will reflect the diverse range of areas in applied
mathematics, computational and data science, and mathematical physics that are
focus areas of the Investigators. The cross-disciplinary aspects of the training
program will be enhanced substantially by the newly developed interdisciplinary
Computational Science, Mathematics, and Engineering (CSME) Doctoral Program at
UCSD. An RTG outreach program includes elements devoted to the training of
local-area high-school teachers on the important role of computational and
applied mathematics in our society. Efforts will focus on local-area high
schools that provide intensive college preparatory education for low- income
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technology produced by this award will
include mathematical algorithms, analyses, and numerical software that will
provide powerful tools for the exploration of multiscale models in physics,
chemistry, biology, engineering and medicine. The results will potentially
impact the formulation, analysis and development of methods for critical complex
multiscale and multiphysics problems that have a fundamental impact on the US
economy. RTG-sponsored students and postdocs will participate in the application
of mathematical sciences to a range of research projects involving such diverse
areas as undersea oil exploration, optimal power scheduling, drug design and
organ modeling. Our outreach program to local-area high-schools will encourage
students in under-represented groups to choose careers in applied mathematics
and computational science. At the national level, the project will make a
positive contribution towards achieving the long range goal of the RTG program
of expanding the work force of well-prepared US citizens, nationals and
permanent residents in the mathematical sciences. In addition, the project will
make an important contribution in the direction of the NSF-wide, and more
generally, national priority of nurturing the crucial role of the basic
mathematical sciences in interdisciplinary research.