* 1345033
* EAGER:  Raising the Awareness of PULSE Through a Targeted Public Awareness Campaign to Engage Life Science Departments in Implementing Vision and Change
* BIO,EF
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Richard Cardullo, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 08/31/2017
* USD 146,156.00

An award has been made to Washington State University to organize a national
effort to raise awareness of the Partnership for Undergraduate Life Science
Education (PULSE). Last September, the PULSE partners (HHMI, NIH, and NSF)
appointed 40 Vision and Change Leadership Fellows to stimulate transformative
changes in the undergraduate life science education community. All Fellows met
in October 2012 and have since organized into four working groups to address
different challenges to reforming how biology is taught at all types of
undergraduate institutions. The Vision and Change Leadership Fellows are
focusing on how life science departments can encourage and reward faculty
members' efforts to improve undergraduate life sciences education. Such
improvements should increase student learning, should increase retention rates
for students in the sciences, and should prepare all students to be more curious
and scientifically literate citizens. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current award is
to fund a Public Awareness Campaign by the Raising the Pulse Working Group. One
barrier to implementing the recommendations made in the Vision and Change Call
to Action is an awareness of the report itself. Therefore, this multi-step
campaign plans to ensure that all department leaders in the US know about the
Vision and Change report and know about PULSE activities. These goals will be
accomplished by developing promotional materials to be used at conferences,
production of a video documentary to highlight the need to reform undergraduate
life science education and to highlight effective efforts that are underway, and
develop two Local Impact Maps, one to catalog national reform efforts underway
and the second to document the continuing activities of the Fellows. The project
team anticipates that the PULSE Public Awareness Campaign will increase
participation of faculty engaged in Vision and Change efforts and will also
motivate departments to implement systemic change in biology education. A
greater awareness of PULSE and Vision and Change will help catalyze systemic
change in undergraduate biology education throughout the country. Results from
the Public Awareness Campaign will be shared at specific regional and national
conferences and more broadly with the life sciences community, primarily via the
www.pulsecommunity.org website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being
funded jointly by the Directorate for Biological Sciences and the Directorate of
Education and Human Resources, Division of Undergraduate Education as part of
their efforts to support Vision and Change in Undergraduate Biology Education.