* 1345100
* Geodetic observations at the early stage of subduction zone seismic cycle:  towards complete seismic cycle coverage
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2014,02/28/2019
* Timothy Dixon, University of South Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 02/28/2019
* USD 260,000.00

Subduction zones such as those along the Pacific ?Ring of Fire? produce Earth?s
largest and most destructive earthquakes, and most tsunamis. The giant
earthquakes and tsunamis of 2004 (Sumatra) and 2011 (Japan) were wake up calls
that our ability to estimate future earthquake magnitude remains weak.
Measurement of strain accumulation in the vicinity of subduction zones, as is
now possible with high precision GPS units, has the potential to forecast the
location and size of future earthquakes. The coastal Nicoya Peninsula of Costa
Rica lies close to the trench (&lt;70 km), allowing observations directly over
the seismogenic zone. Here I propose to upgrade and operate a continuous high
precision GPS network in the Nicoya Peninsula, and use the resulting data to
investigate a number of questions related to seismic and tsunami processes in
the subduction zone environment. In principle these kind of measurements could
provide predictive capability in terms of location and size of future
earthquakes and perhaps tsunamis (timing would still presumably be unknown).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Northern Costa Rica is characterized by fast (~8 cm/yr)
subduction and a short (50?60 year) earthquake cycle, producing frequent large
(M&gt;7.5) earthquakes including events in 1853, 1900, 1950 (M 7.7) and most
recently September 5, 2012 (M 7.6). Previous NSF-funded studies in this region
have defined the regional tectonics and quantified a number of key seismogenic
parameters at the late stage of the seismic cycle, including the pattern of
interseismic strain accumulation and microseismicity, and the nature and timing
of slow slip events (SSE). The 2012 earthquake gives us a chance to investigate
these processes at the beginning of a seismic cycle, providing the scientific
community an incredible opportunity to characterize a complete seismic cycle.
All data generated by the Nicoya C-GPS network are made publicly available
through UNAVCO, and analyzed products (e.g, coseismic and slow slip offsets) are
available on my website (http://labs.cas.usf.edu/geodesy/) to assist researchers
who are unfamiliar with the details of GPS processing use the data for
earthquake research.