* 1345098
* Establishing a Secretariat for The Science and Technology Alliance for Global Sustainability
* GEO,RISE
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2015
* Catherine Kaszluga, SUNY System Administration
* Standard Grant
* Maria Uhle
* 07/31/2015
* USD 74,700.00

This award will provide support to help establish a secretariat for the Science
and Technology Alliance for Global Sustainability. The ?Alliance? is a high-
level body composed of leaders of the leaders of international organizations
committed to finding solutions to the world?s most pressing questions about the
future sustainability of the planet. These organizations include composed of
representatives from the ISSC, ICSU, UN, UNEP, UNU, and WMO (as an observer).
The Alliance works to ensure that the results of multi-disciplinary research are
accessible to decision makers concerned with the sustainability of the planet.
The Alliance seeks to foster unprecedented collaboration between the natural,
social, economic, engineering, and human sciences, the Alliance will contribute
to the creation of creative, bold, and integrated solutions for global
sustainability. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The seed funding will be used to support
the work of the secretariat, which will provide:&lt;br/&gt;1. A platform for
expanding the Alliance, including creation of the Alliance Forum, which extends
the Alliance to the global business community.&lt;br/&gt;2. A means for Alliance
members to meet and create a strategic plan for the Alliance.&lt;br/&gt;3. A
visible presence for the Alliance through development of communications
materials and strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Alliance secretariat will
help the Alliance fulfill its mission to drive and facilitate the co-design, co-
production and co-delivery of knowledge with relevant stakeholders in order to
address and create solution pathways for global sustainability problems. The
first major activity of the Alliance is the establishment of ?Future Earth?, a
10-year initiative on Earth System research for global sustainability. This
initiative will bring together and build on the strengths of existing
international global environmental change program and incorporates the outcomes
of recent visioning and agenda-setting processes led by the Alliance members.