* 1345755
* SBIR Phase I:  Capacitive Machines for Direct Drive Wind Turbines
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,11/30/2014
* Justin Reed, C-Motive Technologies Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 11/30/2014
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project investigates the
merit of a novel capacitive generator design for use in the wind energy sector.
The general design utilizes electric fields to exert forces on mechanical
systems, a concept that is routine on the Microelectromechanical Systems (MEMS)
scale but is nonexistent at the macro scale common to most industrial power
applications. The technology is synthesized from a multidisciplinary approach of
electrical, mechanical and chemical components which provides a novel approach
for wind turbines, electric motors, and generators, yet which is theoretically
capable of higher sheer stress and lower power loss than any currently available
machine. In this project, these various components and the resulting machine
will be prototyped, tested, and evaluated against competing, current state-of-
the-art wind turbine generator technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project is to decrease the levelized cost of
energy for wind power generation compared to fossil fuels and current methods of
wind power generation, while simultaneously enabling a suite of fundamentally
new types of motors, generators and actuators for use in global industry.
Commercially, the technology resulting from this project will offer a lower cost
of torque in a smaller and lighter unit than competing technologies by
leveraging electrostatic versus electromagnetic forces. Furthermore, the
inherent high torque capability increases system reliability by eliminating
gearboxes and their maintenance. Wind energy is a large, global, and high-growth
industry, particularly in the ?large wind? market segment (&gt;100 kW). Under
the increasing pressures of climatic change, demand for and investment in
renewable energies such as wind will continue to increase. Additionally, wind
power is most commonly farmed in rural areas; therefore it offers new revenue
streams for rural populations and increased investment in rural areas while
minimizing detrimental ecological impacts. From a technical perspective, the
proposed capacitive machinery is naturally high-torque and low-speed, making it
ideal for direct drive applications outside of wind as well, namely as a prime
mover for large pumping, drilling, or mining installations.