* 1345156
* CREST Phase II: Nanotechnology Center for Biomedical, Environmental and Sustainability Applications
* EHR,HRD
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2022
* Agnes Padovani, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Continuing Grant
* Luis Cubano
* 03/31/2022
* USD 5,000,000.00

With National Science Foundation support, this project further develops the
Nanotechnology Center for Biomedical, Environmental and Sustainability
Applications at the University of Puerto Rico-Mayaguez (UPRM). The Center's
mission is to combine transformational research and education efforts in the
area of nanoscaled materials by focusing on: biomedical, environmental
remediation, and sustainability applications. Faculty members involved in the
Center will investigate application-oriented processing of materials with
properties and applications that depend on phenomena occurring at the nanometer
scale: (1) Medical and Biological Applications; (2) Remediation of Recalcitrant
and Emerging Contaminants from the Environment; and (3) Sustainability. This
project will establish effective means to institutionalize research and
education aimed at founding a sustainable platform at UPRM of international
recognition. Through formative and summative assessments, a systematic project
evaluation will provide information to ensure continuous improvement, focusing
on achieving the proposed objectives. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
&lt;br/&gt;Three interdisciplinary research groups will focus on the following
areas: (i) Development of new nanoscaled materials for cancer therapy assisted
by the application of magnetic fields and specialized light sources. Toxicity
and transport will be assessed using model human cancer cell lines and other
appropriate models. The goal of this research team is to create non-invasive
therapeutics for treatment of patients suffering from diverse forms of cancer.
(ii) Fabrication of a novel series of composites for the removal of emerging
contaminants from water sources, including pharmaceuticals and personal care
products, and selected pathogens. Additionally, researchers will work on
processing new porous adsorbents for the selective and efficient capture of CO2
from the environment and enclosed habitats. (iii) Finding new nanocatalysts for
the conversion of renewable resources. This research group will also develop new
nanostructured composite materials using polymers as the main component and
combined with specialized constituents, which are intended for the next
generation of fuel cells applications. Finally, high performance and sustainable
(low-energy consuming upon fabrication) concrete mixes will be formulated using
specific nanoparticles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;The
Center for Biomedical, Environmental and Sustainability Applications will
develop technologies for cancer therapy, water disinfection and air cleaning,
and sustainability. Despite dramatic improvements in cancer chemotherapeutics,
there is still an unmet need to understand the underlying causes of treatment
failures. The knowledge acquired through the proposed activities will become
invaluable for the development of novel cancer therapies and materials with
applications in medicine. Center goals will also address global environmental
challenges associated with water and air. Sustainability-related research will
also be impacted by the Center. At the undergraduate level, the Center will
impact the Undergraduate Certificate in Materials Science and Engineering
program, as well as undergraduate research courses in the various engineering
departments. The Center for Biomedical, Environmental and Sustainability
Applications will develop a competitive cadre of Hispanic professionals well-
prepared to contribute to the Nation's nanotechnology workforce.