* 1345401
* SBIR Phase I:  4D reconstruction algorithm for image guided interventions
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Cristian Atria, nView medical Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2014
* USD 179,969.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will prove the
feasibility of a low-dose 4D cone beam tomosynthesis reconstruction algorithm
for use in medical image-guided interventions. Despite the availability of
highly accurate 3D guidance systems, most image-guided interventions are still
performed under 2D fluoroscopy. 3D guidance is significantly more complex and
expensive, as it requires the combination of 3D imaging (like CT) with surgical
navigation, both expensive and complex technologies. A system capable of
reconstructing a 4D scene would provide accurate and easy to use guidance for
the medical professional, at lower costs. This research will develop a 3D
reconstruction algorithm with quasi real-time performance (4D) that does not
increase exposure to x-rays when compared to 2D fluoroscopy. The proposed
technology will combine the most recent advancements in tomosynthesis, iterative
reconstruction and compressed sensing and fundamentally change image-guided
interventions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of
this project is that advanced medical procedures, like minimally invasive
surgery, will be significantly improved in workflow and accessibility, reducing
healthcare costs, improving outcomes and improving quality of life for patients.
In the U.S. alone, a 10% shift to minimally invasive spine surgeries can reduce
healthcare costs by $180M while reducing patient trauma and providing faster
recoveries to 45,000 patients. This technology could be applied in other
clinical areas like oncology and interventional radiology, improving a broad
array of procedures and bringing a new level of excellence in medical
interventions. 4D systems would compete in the intra-operative x-ray medical
imaging market, a $1B market that is growing 6% annually, and in the Surgical
Navigation market, a $400M market that is growing 9% annually. The proposed
concept has the potential to disrupt both these markets by replacing pairs of
intra-operative 3D imaging and surgical navigation systems with one 4D system
that is more cost effective and easier to use.