* 1345096
* Adjoint tomography of the crustal and upper-mantle seismic structure beneath Continental China
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Fenglin Niu, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 07/31/2017
* USD 250,000.00

East Asia has drawn much attention of geoscientists due to its complicated zoo
of tectonic activities: unique continent-continent collision of India and Asia,
different styles of plate subduction, various types of hydrocarbon-bearing basin
formation, widespread intracontinental rifting, intraplate volcanism and
magamatism. Tracing the driving forces behind these tectonic activities is vital
to understand how the ancient continental roots, continental and oceanic plates
at the plate margins, and mantle flows underlying lithosphere interact amongst
each other in a dynamic earth framework. It?s essential to obtain high-
definition multi-parameter seismic images of the earth?s interior to test
different hypotheses of the tectonic driving forces, such as crustal shortening
or/and Indian plate underthrusting causing the uplift of ?the world?s roof?, the
Tibetan Plateau, lower-mantle plume or/and dehydration from the stagnant slab in
the mantle transition zone (410 ? 650 km depths) inducing hot mantle upwelling
contributing to the intraplate volcano Changbaishan along the border of China
and North Korea, and the Pacific slab subduction and rollback producing
extension, transtension, and thinning of the lithosphere beneath the East China
and opening of the marginal seas of Japan and South China. Seismic imaging in
this study will map full waveforms of seismic records to render more realistic
models representing the earth?s interior properties. The outcome will not only
provide the independent and robust seismological constrains to test the end
members of tectonic formation mechanism, but also shed new light on the
composition, thermal state, flow and fabric structure of the lithosphere and
upper mantle, which are complementary to geological, geochemical, petrological,
and geodetic observations of East Asia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An unprecedented
seismic waveform dataset recorded by very dense array stations in China and its
surrounding regions will be used to image the crust and upper-mantle structure
beneath the East Asia. This dataset is comprised of seismic records from the
CEArray, the NECESSArray, the INDEPTH-IV Array, F-net and other global and
regional seismic networks. Contrary to traditional ray-theory based seismic
imaging, adjoint tomography of this study takes into account full 3D wave
propagation effects and off-ray-path sensitivity. In this implementation, it
utilizes a spectral-element method for precise wave propagation simulations. The
tomographic method starts with a 3D initial model that combines the smooth
radially anisotropic mantle model S362ANI with 3D crustal model Crust2.0
(potentially recently released Crust1.0 can be used for more accurate and higher
resolution model refinement). Traveltime and amplitude misfits are minimized
iteratively based on a conjugate gradient method, harnessing 3D finite-frequency
kernels computed for each updated 3D model. The massively parallel simulations
are carried out on XSEDE supercomputers available to the team via an existing
XSEDE research allocation. The final models will allow close examination of
seismic structures beneath different tectonic units of East Asia, and better
understanding of how sub-surface processes shaping surface geology and tectonic
features. The preliminary results already show strong correlations between
heterogeneities in the crust and upper mantle with surface tectonic units, such
as the Himalaya Block, the Tibetan Plateau, the Tarim Basin, the Ordos Block,
and the Sichuan Basin. Narrow slab features emerge from the smooth initial model
above the transition zone. 3D wavespeed variations in the preliminary model are
either comparable to or sharper than high-frequency P- and S-wave tomographic
images from previous studies. Additional iterations will be carried out to
refine the 3D radially anisotropic models, and to resolve 3D azimuthal
anisotropy and attenuation, which are closely related to mantle rheology and
crustal and lithospheric strain rates and flow. This proposal will support one
graduate student and one research scientist. The outcome of this research will
also have a broader impact on understanding the linkage between 3D wavespeed
heterogeneities and seismogenic processes. The more realistic high-definition
models will help assess seismic hazard by providing more accurate ground motion
maps, more robust slip predictions and rupture estimations on finite fault
surfaces for future catastrophic earthquakes. The final models will be archived
and distributed for quantitative studies in other fields of geoscience, such as
geology, geochemistry, petrology, geodynamics and volcanology. With the existing
3D visualization lab facility at Rice, the earth models can be readily displayed
to the public to promote earth science. Finally the results will enhance
scientific communication between US and China and broaden future potential
collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;