* 1345630
* SBIR Phase I:  Semantically Intelligent Knowledge Hub for Course Authoring
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,06/30/2014
* Ramji Raghavan, Pragya Systems Corp.
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 06/30/2014
* USD 150,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project proposes to develop a system to significantly improve
organization and curation of on-line learning content. Majority of educational
material used within institutions is stuck in learning management systems and
textbooks. However, many of the latest advances are captured in forums outside
of these repositories. As a result, many higher-ed courses are obsolete and
static. There are no authoring tools available to instructors to leverage
existing open and shared learning content. Internet search engines focus on
discovery and flat indexing of information based on keywords. However, higher-ed
is built around knowledge streams of inter-related concepts that lead from
fundamental core concepts to practical applications. This project proposes to
develop new technology to semantically organize learning content extracted from
various sources including LMS databases and OER sites. The semantically parsed
learning units are modularized and categorized across multiple learning
dimensions via intelligent meta-data enrichment that enhances existing meta-
tagging standards. The semantic engine is packaged behind a simple cloud-based
intuitive course authoring UI that teachers can use to put together visually
rich digital experiences for courseware. The authoring UI captures teacher
curation and student relevance, which further enhance the effectiveness of the
semantic engine.

The broader commercial impact of the technology is multifold and outlined below.
It will significantly lower the cost of online course authoring and makes course
content relevant and aligned with current job competencies/skills. The
technology provides mechanism to share courseware developed independently across
various departments and institutions, thus significantly simplifying the
authoring process for teachers. A meta-tagged topic-based interconnected hub of
all institutional courseware simplifies tracking of learning objectives and
outcomes in colleges, which enables identification of inefficiencies in
curriculum while lowering the cost of accreditation compliance. The project's
technology also allows a simple mechanism for granularity of existing textbooks
to be broken down and woven into custom/cutting edge courseware developed by
professors. This creates a new (institutional) market place for premium learning
content (in more flexible/small form factors to augment legacy textbooks) that
is woven into a course workflow (potentially obsoleting archaic college
bookstores over time). The marketplace also enables institutions to monetize
proprietary, value-added course-packs. The cloud-based solution will be licensed
for institution wide or individual teachers/instructor usage. Tools are
available to help with course delivery, but none to help with content discovery,
creation and curation.