* 1345060
* Is Grain Boundary Sliding the Dominant Deformation Mechanism in the Hydrous Upper Mantle? Experimental Constraints on the Lithosphere-Asthenosphere Boundary.
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2014,02/28/2019
* Mark Zimmerman, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 02/28/2019
* USD 339,999.00

Water is the most important chemical constituent of our planet having impact on
climate, mineral and rock properties, mantle convection, and plate tectonics.
Recent observations of the propagation of elastic waves generated by earthquakes
through both oceanic and continental regions have revealed large changes in the
velocity of these seismic waves. This change in velocity occurs at the
transition from the relatively rigid lithospheric plate to the relatively fluid
asthenosphere that lies below and requires a concomitant change in the strength
of the upper mantle. These changes are thought to be due in part to a change in
the water content of the rocks that comprise the upper mantle. However, the
seismic evidence also indicates that a change in the mechanism of deformation
must become sensitive to grain-size. Previous experiments conducted to explore
deformation under wet conditions in this grain-size sensitive or grain-boundary
sliding (GBS) regime have produced ambiguous results. This is due in part to
experimental difficulties that have recently been overcome in the PI's lab. The
results of the PI's previously funded NSF research on GBS in olivine-rich rocks
under dry conditions expanded the region where GBS dominates deformation from
high-stress, lithospheric conditions to include low-stress, asthenospheric
environments, an expansion that impacts the interpretation of seismic waves and
modeling of dynamic processes in the upper mantle of Earth. Uncertainties about
the mechanical behavior of rocks under wet conditions must be resolved to allow
extrapolation of laboratory results to conditions in the Earth where water plays
a vital role.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The present project emphasizes a
transformative approach to laboratory experiments designed to investigate the
role of GBS in the deformation of olivine under wet conditions. To achieve
steady-state microstructures and thus steady state flow rates, the investigators
have introduced three important techniques to their deformation experiments.
First, they fabricate samples saturated with water with grain sizes larger than
the steady-state grain size. Second, they deform these samples in torsion to
large strains, such that dynamic recrystallization produces a steady-state grain
size. Third, a source of water is incorporated into the torsion assembly to
maintain saturation levels in the olivine. Initial results demonstrate that
steady state is attained in these experiments. These experiments were proposed
because recent experimental results and field observations indicate that dynamic
recrystallization of olivine in Earth's mantle might reduce the grain size
sufficiently to make GBS the dominant deformation mechanism. Even small changes
in grain size due to grain growth or changes in water content during a
deformation experiment in the GBS regime may lead to significant errors in
determinations of the dependence of mantle viscosity on stress or grain size as
well as on temperature. The dependence of viscosity on stress, grain size,
temperature, and water content are not currently known well enough to allow
extrapolation of results obtained from laboratory experiments to geodynamical
processes occurring in Earth's mantle. Consequently, this approach is designed
to overcome these difficulties and provide the necessary parameters for
seismologists and modelers to investigate the origin and nature of the
lithosphere-asthenosphere boundary.