* 1346079
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of long service life vacuum insulation composites
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,06/30/2014
* SaravanKumar Shanmugavelayudam, MaxQ Research LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 06/30/2014
* USD 149,999.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is focused on
development of a novel manufacturing method for producing compartmentalized
vacuum composites that exhibit superior thermal and structural efficiency. The
proposed efforts will enable mass production of these materials and assembly
into appropriate sizes and shapes, while maintaining vacuum inside the panels.
The limited insulation capability and mechanical performance of foam-based
insulation currently used for temperature-sensitive shipments require thicker
walls and a large amount of cooling agent to maintain payload temperature. This
reduces the payload volume and limits re-usability. There is an opportunity to
develop highly insulating, structurally efficient materials that can
significantly increase insulation capacity and longevity of cold chain shipping
containers. Compartmentalized vacuum composite prototypes will be manufactured
and tested for mechanical and thermal insulation properties using accredited
testing methods. Key manufacturing and quality parameters will be confirmed for
lab-scale and industrial-scale production. Successful completion of this work
will result in a novel manufacturing method which will enable highly efficient
(five to ten times improvement in insulation) cold chain shipping solutions. The
proposed materials will provide sustainable economic and environmental benefits
and are poised to replace polystyrene and vacuum insulation panels currently
used in cold chain shipping.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project could eventually extend
to cold chain shipping, storage, building insulation, automobiles, aerospace and
other advanced markets. The first application is in the cold chain shipping
industry for highly sensitive materials. Based on the proposed technology, a new
generation of lightweight, evenly-insulated, durable, and long-lasting
containers will be realized. Temperature-sensitive products such as life-saving
vaccines and blood can be shipped using these containers. These containers will
offer longer shipping duration, high impact resistance, and re-usability.
Customers in the cold chain shipping market include blood banks, the Red Cross,
pharmacies, clinical trial shippers, diagnostic centers, and life science
material providers. The annual United States market potential in life sciences
packaging is estimated at $291 million. Successful completion of the proposed
objectives will result in a versatile insulating structural material that will
also find application in infrastructure, automobiles, aircraft, marine,
computing, commercial electronics and other household applications.