* 1346123
* SBIR Phase I:  Ultra Power-efficient Biologically-Inspired Integrated Circuit Architectures for the Processing and Classification of Analog Sensor Signals
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,10/31/2015
* Paul Smith, MAVRIC Semiconductor Inc
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 10/31/2015
* USD 174,140.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project demonstrates the
disruptive energy-efficiency advantages of neural classifier approaches for
context aware applications (embedded systems incorporating a multiplicity of
sensors to autonomously infer their current state in noisy conditions). The
value proposition benefits a wide range of consumer (wearable computing),
telecommunication (mobile handset), industrial (internet-of-things edge nodes),
medical (eHealth, portable medical devices, implanted devices), and military
(autonomous control drones) applications which incorporate multiple sensors and
where battery life/small form factor/product weight/device accuracy trade-offs
are concerns. We address the digital signal processing power consumption
problem, which requires engineers designing battery-powered systems to make
undesirable product trade-offs. Our proprietary mixed signal approaches uniquely
close this traditional power/performance gap, solving a long-standing challenge
for battery-powered/autonomously powered devices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact/commercial potential of this project includes disruption of
traditional design approaches for battery-powered intelligent devices,
accelerated scientific research, more efficient mixed signal electronic
curriculum, new classes of portable devices that enhance the human condition and
extend healthy life, and job creation. This project will demonstrate fundamental
breakthroughs which can subsequently be extended to create a new generation of
low-power configurable computing devices with potential impact matching the
commercialization of earlier break-through digital technologies (FPGA, GPU,
embedded processor). Over the past 30 years, handheld electronics have improved
energy efficiency 1000X; our approach enables another factor of 1000 improvement
in energy efficiency for potential applications. With advances in the tool-
chain, experimental hardware from diverse scientific disciplines (neuroscience)
incorporating FPAA technology will implement formerly impractical algorithms,
achieving fresh scientific insights. Eventual tool enhancements support
opportunities in engineering and computer science laboratory sensor-related
curriculum. The initial wearable computing target market was based on strong
technology-market fit, accelerated product adoption cycles, and a $300M market
opportunity. Wearable devices incorporating FPAA technology will be easier and
safer to use, less obtrusive, and communicate more accurately.