* 1346694
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant - Investigating The Effects of State Expansion in Rural Greece
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/2014,12/31/2014
* Rebecca Seifried, Field Museum of Natural History
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2014
* USD 20,351.00

A fundamental goal of this research is to understand how, in large scale
political units such as states or empires, rural or "peripheral" communities are
integrated into larger economically dominant social centers. Currently, the lack
of such integration has resulted in unrest in developing countries in many
regions of the world. Archaeological research, such as this project, has the
ability to bring a centuries-long perspective to this question. As empires rise,
expand, and fall, the people living within their borders are affected in
dramatically different ways. With the guidance of her doctoral advisor, Dr.
William Parkinson, Rebecca Seifried will study the ebb and flow of imperial
expansion in a region famed for its location on the cultural and geographical
edge of Greece - the Mani peninsula in the southern Peloponnese. The project
will focus on how the transition from Byzantine (1204-1453) to Ottoman
(1453-1830) rule affected where people lived and the types of physical and
visual connections they maintained over time. To accomplish this task, she will
use an innovative combination of methods, including analysis of aerial
photography and satellite imagery, archaeological survey, study of historical
archives, and spatial analysis with geographic information systems (GIS)
software. Data will be gathered from several different sources: ceramics,
architectural traditions, cobbled road systems, village populations, and
geographic locations of settlements. After mapping and dating the settlements
and the roads that connect them, Seifried will use spatial analysis to determine
how their relationships changed after Ottoman rule was established in the
region. Finally, the findings will be compared with other regions in the former
Ottoman Empire, including the Albanian highlands, the island of Cyprus, and the
neighboring peninsulas of Messenia and Laconia.

Archaeological research on state expansion has tended to focus on the most
important cities and their economically productive hinterlands. Different
anthropological models (generally referred to as "core-periphery" models) have
been proposed to understand how these types of places interacted. However, most
of the rural areas within imperial borders have been left relatively unexplored.
This project challenges these core-periphery models by exploring a region on the
outskirts of an imperial territory. This work is directly relevant to the modern
geopolitical landscape, since, like the Mani, much of the world does not fit
neatly into the categories of "core" or "periphery." As such, the project seeks
to illuminate the relationship between state systems and their borderlands,
regardless of place or time period.

The project will also have a broader impact in terms of international
collaboration, training, and education. It will also demonstrate how a
multidisciplinary approach, combining techniques from the fields of archaeology,
geophysics, and history, can greatly benefit our understanding of rural
socioeconomic changes in the recent past. It will actively promote collaboration
between American and Greek scholars, encourage involvement of women in the
sciences, and provide Greek students with training in innovative techniques and
hands-on archaeological field experience. The ceramic collection of the local
archaeological museum in Pyrgos Dirou will be expanded with material from these
later periods, which are severely underrepresented in most Greek museums. More
generally, all data will be disseminated to the public and the scientific
community through The Field Museum website, publications in peer-reviewed
journals and edited volumes, press releases in Greece, and lectures at Greek
institutions and scholarly conferences. Seifried will also give presentations
for locals in the Mani to provide information about the project, promote
engagement with recent cultural heritage, and encourage the protection of
Byzantine and Ottoman archaeological sites and features.