* 1346397
* STTR Phase I:  Rubber Particle Dissection and Directed Reconstitution in Synthetic Vesicles
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Xueyan Liu, EnergyEne Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2014
* USD 224,202.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I proposes to develop a
foundation for the production of rubber and high-value elastomers through the
identification of the members of the elusive rubber transferase complex. The
proposed novel research utilizes recently-developed biochemical separation
protocols to concentrate membrane-bound rubber transferases several hundred-fold
while simultaneously removing the rubber phase. Phase I of the project will
focus on utilizing this technique to achieve the following specific aims:
isolation of intact membrane-bound rubber transferase complexes from rubber
particle membranes; characterization of bioactive lipids in rubber particle
membranes; identification of rubber transferase proteins through a combination
of proteomic and transcriptomic analysis; and expression of rubber transferase
peptides in optimized heterologous systems. Data generated by this research will
allow, for the first time, the purification and identification of members of the
rubber transferase complex from membranes enriched in these proteins.
Heterologous expression of these proteins paves the way for the construction of
synthetic rubber production systems, and improvement of on-farm rubber crops.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this project,
if successful, is to enable the development of commercial rubber crops
cultivated in the US. Over 93% of global natural rubber production is in Asia
and relies on a single clonally-produced crop species (Hevea brasiliensis). The
severe geographic restrictions for this crop are a major factor limiting natural
rubber production. Current market models predict that, by the end of this
decade, the world may experience a cumulative rubber shortfall of 6.6 million
metric tons (US consumption is 1.2 MT/yr). This shortfall will have a dramatic
negative impact on agricultural, civil, and military economic sectors. Rubber-
producing plant species suitable for the US have been identified and are the
focus of intensive commercial development and scientific research. This project
will significantly increase the scientific understanding of rubber biosynthesis
and speed the development and deployment of millions of acres of high yielding
alternative rubber crops. It will enable the application of both molecular
assisted breeding and biotechnological approaches to crop improvement and help
create opportunities to introduce rubber production as a co-product of
established crops. New rubber crops will create at least 5,000 new agribusiness
jobs for every 50,000 acres, and self-sufficiency will require 2-4 million
acres.