* 1346859
* EAGER: Plasmonic Wide Angle Light Concentrators for Bulk-Heterojunction Solar Cells
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2014
* Qiuming Yu, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Rorrer
* 07/31/2014
* USD 90,000.00

PI: Yu, Qiuming Proposal Number: 1346859 Institution: University of Washington
Title: EAGER: Plasmonic Wide Angle Light Concentrators for Bulk-Heterojunction
Solar Cells

Organic bulk heterojunction (BHJ) solar cells offer the potential advantages as
low-cost, lightweight, flexible, and large area devices that can be fabricated
in the roll-to-roll printing method. Despite the recent progress in the increase
of power conversion efficiency (PCE) of organic BHJ solar cells, fundamental
breakthrough has to be made in order to develop high efficiency solar cells
especially those working for wide light incident angles. This EAGER project will
explore the concept of integrating novel plasmonic wide angle light
concentrators as transparent electrodes in BHJ solar cells to tune and enhance
transmitted light to match the energy band gaps of the donor and acceptor in the
active layer in a wide range of incident angles. Electromagnetic finite-
difference time-domain (FDTD) simulations will be applied to rationally design
the plasmonic nanostructures and the transfer matrix (TM) optical modeling will
be used to design the entire device architecture to ensure the maximum light
absorption in the active layer. The designed plasmonic nanostructures will be
made on glass substrates via the nanoimprinting method which can be extended to
the low-cost roll-to-roll printing method. The effects of far-field light
transmission and near-field electric field enhancement induced by plasmonic
nanostructures on the performance of BHJ solar cells and the fundamental
physical processes in solar energy conversion will be elucidated by conducting
the experimental measurements on photocurrent density-voltage curve, reflectance
and UV-Vis absorption spectroscopy, steady state and dynamic photoluminescence
(PL), and external quantum efficiency (EQE). The objective of this work is to
fundamentally understand the physical principles and processes governing the
tuning of wide angle light absorption and the enhancement of charge transport
and collection in BHJ solar cells by plasmonic nanostructures via a combined
electromagnetic simulation and experimental approach.

By integrating plasmonic wide angle light concentrators as transparent
electrodes in BHJ solar cells, it will allow one to (1) replace the expensive
ITO; (2) tune and concentrate far-field transmitted light to match the band gaps
of donor and acceptor in the active layer; (3) enable wide angle absorption
without mechanical moving parts; and (4) understand near-filed electric field
enhancement on exciton generation and charge separation, transport and
collection. A wide angle light concentrator enabled by plasmonic nanostructures
will be developed and integrated into organic BHJ solar cells to enhance the
solar energy conversion efficiency even at large oblique incident angles. The
fundamental investigation and experimental findings from this work can be
generalized for guiding the development of other types of solar cells and novel
optoelectronic and plasmonic devices. Graduate and undergraduate students from
underrepresented groups such as female will receive training and participate in
this highly interdisciplinary research project.