* 1346277
* Collaborative Research: The Road to Tomorrow: Cybersecurity Experimentation of the Future
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2015
* David Balenson, SRI International
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 09/30/2015
* USD 419,271.00

Cyberspace is rapidly evolving with nearly every aspect of society moving toward
pervasive computing and networking. These changes bring real and wide-ranging
cybersecurity threats and challenges that require new solutions based on sound
scientific principles. The scale and complexity of the challenges require that
researchers employ experimentation infrastructure to enable discovery,
validation, and ongoing analysis. The Road To Tomorrow: Cybersecurity
Experimentation of the Future project is exploring current and expected
experimentation infrastructure needs in the context of current and future
cybersecurity research challenges and producing a roadmap for developing an
accessible, broad, and multi-organizational cybersecurity experimentation
capability that supports tomorrow's research. The collaborative, community-based
effort includes three main thrusts: (1) investigate and assess existing
experimentation infrastructure and user community experience; (2) identify
future cybersecurity experimentation infrastructure needs; and (3) organize the
requirements and needed capabilities into a strategic plan and roadmap for
future cybersecurity infrastructure development. The future needs are being
identified through a series of community-based study groups to understand hard
cybersecurity problems and use cases that can benefit from experiment-driven
research, identify the experimentation infrastructure needed to facilitate
research, and identify gaps between needed and current capabilities and
prioritize capabilities based on domain needs. The strategic plan will help
shape the development of sustainable experimentation infrastructure to support
evolving cybersecurity research needs. The resulting experimentation
capabilities will provide essential means for research communities to develop a
fundamental understanding of and to reason about cybersecurity solutions and
ultimately provide for secure and trustworthy cyberspace.