* 1346638
* CAREER: High-Speed Continuous Assembly of Nanoparticle Monolayers and Discrete Cluster Arrays
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2013,09/30/2018
* Anastasios John Hart, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 09/30/2018
* USD 320,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program award seeks to create a
manufacturing technology for high-speed evaporative self-assembly (ESA) of
nanostructures, and to extend the reach of the PI's nanomanufacturing education
activities to community colleges and high schools. For example, nanoparticle
assemblies can be used in photonics, biological/chemical sensors, solar cells
and batteries, self-cleaning surfaces, data storage, catalysts, and other
applications. However, despite recent advances, the practicality and scalability
of ESA is hindered by the limited size of crystalline domains (1-100 µm), and
rates (typically <0.1 mm/s) that are orders of magnitude slower than required
for commercial manufacturing. The research program seeks to overcome these
barriers by creating continuous ESA processes that address two critical limits:
high-speed fabrication of high-quality large-area monolayers of particles; and
deterministic assembly of discrete particle cluster arrays. A novel apparatus
for continuous-feed ESA will lead to the identification of process conditions
for monolayer assembly at cm/s or greater feed rates. Together with
comprehensive in situ and ex situ characterization, we will elucidate the
mechanisms of particle transport and packing for particles across the 0.05-5 µm
size range. Finally, we will explore the optical properties of assembled
materials, for applications as next-generation sensors that enable sensitive
detection via Fano resonances, and engineered coatings for energy-efficient
glass (in collaboration with industry).

These research outcomes would have transformative impact on the translation of
lab-scale ESA methods to commercial scales and applications, including those
mentioned above. In parallel, the PI's education and outreach program will
include three main initiatives: (1) A partnership with the Nanotechnology in
Materials Science Program at Oakland Community College (OCC), wherein the PI
will share materials and consult with OCC faculty to develop a course on
nanomanufacturing processes for their program, and create a lab on self-assembly
via a senior design project at Michigan; (2) Extension of the PI's new course on
the Ph.D. Research Process into a required element of the first-year graduate
curriculum in Mechanical Engineering, which also meets the NSF requirements for
training in responsible and ethical conduct of research; and (3) Growth of
collaborations with artists and architects, wherein the PI aims to promote
general public awareness of nanoscale science and technology using artistic
images, including through the PI's Nanobliss gallery (http://www.nanobliss.com).
The OCC lab will be featured in high school summer programs that are proven to
increase interest in science and engineering across a diverse student
population. Through synergistic integration of research and education, an
overarching aim of this program is to increase the number of four-year
university graduates with expertise in nanomanufacturing-related topics, and to
contribute to a rejuvenated manufacturing workforce and knowledge base in
Michigan.