* 1346376
* STTR Phase I:  A Simulated Anaerobic Digester Learning Tool
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,06/30/2015
* Sara Silverstone, BioDrill Technical Solutions, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 06/30/2015
* USD 254,999.00

This SBIR Phase I project proposes to create an innovative educational game that
engages secondary school students in learning about the science of anaerobic
digestion and the business of biogas production. The Simulated Anaerobic
Digester Learning Tool is a casual, simulation-based game that teaches students
about the physicochemical operation of an anaerobic digester, as well as an
entrepreneurial game that teaches about the new economic model of the 'triple
bottom line' of sustainable business practice of balancing the concerns of
people, the planet, and profit. This innovative game experience meets the
growing need for real-world interdisciplinary Science, Technology, Engineering
and Mathematics (STEM) problems as a motivational and driving force for
education. There are no existing accurate anaerobic digestion simulators that
are accessible to secondary school students. Currently existing models of
anaerobic digestion, such as Anaerobic Digestion Model No. 1 (ADM1), are used by
researchers at universities, and involve computational and mathematical
complexity beyond the grasp of secondary school students. Phase I of the project
involves simplifying the complexity of the model while retaining its accuracy in
the creation of an engaging game for secondary school students.

The broader/commercial impact of The Simulated Anaerobic Digester Learning Tool
are: 1) The Learning Tool is aligned with current reforms in science education.
The new Next Generation Science Standards, based on the National Research
Council's Framework for K-12 Science Education necessitate the increased use of
real-world topics that can be made comprehensible only by drawing on ideas and
methods from many scientific disciplines. Biogas generation through anaerobic
digestion is complex and interdisciplinary in a real world context and thus is
an excellent vehicle for STEM learning. 2) The game incorporates research into
gender inclusiveness and exploration of social and ethical issues, and its
development will include traditionally underrepresented students. Beta-testing
will take place in high school classrooms of a high-needs rural school district
and a high-need urban school district with an 86% minority population and a 49%
graduation rate, in which 88.4% of students qualify for free- or reduced-price
lunches. 3) Commercially, the game has tremendous potential to be marketed in a
variety of science courses in both secondary and post-secondary education,
including Biology and Environmental Science as well as interdisciplinary courses
in Integrated STEM, Sustainability, and Agriculture.