* 1346727
* Collaborative Research: Petascale Design and Management of Satellite Assets to Advance Space Based Earth Science
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2013,03/31/2015
* Patrick Reed, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Edward Walker
* 03/31/2015
* USD 15,000.00

This award facilitates scientific research using the large, new, computational
resource named Blue Waters being deployed at the University of Illinois. It
provides travel funds to support technical coordination between the principal
investigators, the Blue Waters project team and the vendor technical team.

This collaborative award to Pennsylvania State University and Princeton
University formally links high-resolution astrodynamics design and coordination
of space assets with Earth science impacts. This is accomplished through the
project's petascale many-objective global optimization framework. The
multidisclinary research team will exploit Petascale global sensitivity-based
model diagnostics to evaluate the predictive fidelity of the astrodynamics and
Earth system models, and allow visualization of design tradeoffs. With Blue
Waters, the project's research aims to transform the scale and scope of systems-
of-systems engineering design challenges that can be explored. From the design
cognition perspective, this use of Blue Waters will radically advance ability to
discover and visualize optimal many-objective satellite constellation design
tradeoffs that include Earth science applications. In this case the research
will demonstrate the planning framework on Blue Waters using Global
Precipitation Measurement (GPM). GPM provides a highly challenging design
benchmark that has strong links to Earth science through its (1) 4-D
characterization of freshwater availability, (2) improved characterization of
the microphysical properties of precipitation events, (3) improved climate
predictions based on enhanced estimation of surface water fluxes, (4) high value
operational data for numerical weather prediction, and (5) global enhancements
in hydrologic prediction and management of floods, droughts, landslides, and
hurricanes.

Beyond the US and Europe, there is a critical deficiency in the in-situ Earth
observations needed to monitor floods and droughts. In the developing world,
water managers are reliant on future satellite observations and in particular on
satellite-based precipitation information. The proposed framework will
strengthen our ability to serve this critical need by providing a specific
evaluation of how candidate GPM designs can potentially improve our ability to
use satellite data for flood assessment, drought monitoring, and assessing water
availability in large river basins. The project will also be used in the
training of 15-25 demographically and geographically diverse graduate PhD
students from engineering, computer science, mathematics, statistics, operations
research, and the Earth sciences.