* 1346934
* SusChEM: US/India Chemical Engineering Conference and Workshop on Energy, Environment and Sustainability
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2014
* Sankaran Sundaresan, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Rorrer
* 07/31/2014
* USD 30,000.00

PI: Subramaniam, Bala Proposal Number: 1346934 Institution: University of Kansas
Center for Research Inc Title: SusChEM: US/India Chemical Engineering Conference
and Workshop on Energy, Environment and Sustainability

The primary goal of The US-India Chemical Engineering Conference and Workshop on
Energy, Environment and Sustainability, to be held in Mumbai, India, December
27-30, 2013, is to promote interactions between academia, industry and
government from India and the United States on frontier topics in energy,
environment and sustainability. Energy is important to all sectors of the world
economy. Concerns about rapidly depleting crude oil supplies amidst growing
global demand for energy have spurred research and development aimed at
developing sustainable and affordable alternate sources of energy. Given that
energy powers the businesses and industries that create jobs and enable trade
around the world, the aforementioned energy challenges are foremost in the
strategic science and technology initiatives of the U.S. and Indian governments.
As evidence, both governments are investing billions of dollars annually in
energy-related R&D.

The proposed joint conference will focus on traditional, non-traditional and
future energy, environment and sustainability issues including (1) Oil and
Natural Gas, Petroleum; (2) Coal; (3) Bioenergy; (4) Hydrogen & Fuel Cells; (5)
Solar Energy; (7) Wind, Geothermal, (8) Water Resources, and (9) Life Cycle
Analysis. In each topical area, there will be invited lectures by experts from
both countries. Specifically, the conference will provide a unique forum for
scientists and engineers in academia, industry and government from both
countries to discuss the following aspects: (i) the many energy-related grand
challenges facing the global community, including economic and sociopolitical
issues; (ii) ongoing energy-related research activities in academia, industry
and government laboratories, and (iii) particularly in the Workshop, discussion
of future research needs aimed at developing mutually beneficial collaborations.

The conference participants will benefit from state-of-the-art reviews and
presentations by leading experts, by exchanging the latest advances on frontier
research subjects relating to energy, environment and sustainability, and by
debating controversial points with their peers. The meeting will provide an
excellent opportunity for interaction and cooperation among the academic,
industrial and government researchers, from India and the U.S. The award of
travel funds are expected to attract young researchers, who have an opportunity
to interact with each other and with experienced researchers in the field, which
will positively influence their professional development. By placing emphasis on
problems related to energy, environment and sustainability, the foremost
concerns of the 21st century, the knowledge disseminated in the joint conference
and workshop will benefit the society at large. We expect that the lectures and
the proposed workshop will stimulate many collaborative investigations on these
important topics. The resulting research and development activities will
generate new sustainable energy technologies that will enhance the quality of
life in society.