* 1346321
* The Effects of Radiation Damage and Crystallography on Helium Diffusion in Minerals: An Integrated Bulk and Laser Ablation Depth Profiling Study
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/2014,04/30/2019
* Kip Hodges, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 04/30/2019
* USD 273,916.00

Thermochronology - the study of temperature histories for geologic samples using
the tools of isotope and nuclear geochemistry - has evolved into a fundamental
part of earth system research. Just as the geochemistry community in the 1970's
and 1980's led an explosion in the development of new isotopic tracers as probes
of mantle and crustal evolution, the thermochronology community is now driving a
rapid expansion in the temperature range and precision of temperature history
reconstructions. Such reconstructions have a variety of applications to
understanding aspects of earth system evolution relevant to society.
Reconstructing the thermal history of sedimentary basins is essential for our
determination of oil and gas potential. More generally, we know that thermal
histories are of rocks in the upper crust are strongly influenced by erosional
processes. Those processes are, in turn, influenced by climatic variations such
that low-temperature thermochronometry - the focus of this research project -
has become our primary means of reconstructing past climate fluctuations on
timescales of millions of years. Such information is essential for us to
establish long-term climate variations that can help us to better compare
current climate trends to those further back in earth history, and to more fully
evaluate the societal implications of extreme changes in climate.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The practical utility of mineral-isotopic systems for
thermochronometry, is limited by the quality of our knowledge of helium
diffusion kinetics. Recent experimental studies of apatite and zircon suggest
that radiation damage substantially affects the diffusivity of helium. Recent
studies of zircon suggest a strong helium diffusion anisotropy (orders of
magnitude greater parallel to the c crystallographic direction). The
investigators propose a study aimed at systematically quantifying both of these
influences on helium diffusion on a variety of minerals with proven or
anticipated value for (U-Th)/He thermochronometry: monazite, rutile, titanite,
xenotime, and zircon. They will prepare samples with various levels of radiation
damage through thermal annealing and proton irradiation for two kinds of
diffusion experiments: 1) the more familiar incremental heating, bulk diffusion
approach through which most of the currently available helium diffusion data
were obtained; and 2) a newly developed laser ablation depth profiling approach
that enables the interrogation of laboratory induced diffusion profiles in
predetermined crystallographic orientations. The ultimate goal of the project
will be to contribute to the development of a schema for assigning appropriately
unique diffusion parameters to individual crystals so that themochronologists
can more confidently use measured dates for thermal history reconstructions.