* 1346961
* Ab initio phonon models of lattice thermal conductivity of lower mantle minerals
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* Jianjun Dong, Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 07/31/2018
* USD 210,000.00

The Earth's internal heat drives plate tectonics at the surface, convection
within the mantle, and the magneto hydrodynamics in the core. However, the total
heat flow across the core-mantle boundary (CMB), a crucial component of the
global heat budget, remains poorly constrained, because laboratory thermal
transport experiment can not yet directly access the relevant high
temperature/pressure conditions, and long extrapolations of measured data at
lower temperatures/pressures results in large uncertainties in previous
estimates of thermal conductivity of the thermal boundary layer right above the
CMB. Atomic scale calculations and simulations based on the first-principles
quantum theories provide a complimentary approach to determine the lattice
thermal conductivity of iron bearing lower mantle mineral solid solutions. The
proposed study is made possible by the availability of large parallel
supercomputers and the successful algorithm/data-structure parallelization and
optimization by the investigator's group. Not only the new first-principles
computer models will improve the constraints on the estimated CMB heat flow, the
calculated results will also help us to understand microscopic heat conduction
processes in the complex materials systems and therefore reveal the basic
physics of heat transport at extreme conditions. The computational methodology
development in this study can be adopted to study other complex materials
systems, such as novel thermoelectric materials. The training of graduate
students in solid-state physics, geophysics, and high-performance computing will
provide a well-rounded interdisciplinary education for the next-generation
computational mineral physicists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, theoretical
models of thermal conductivity of the Earth's lower mantle will be proposed,
anchored on robust first-principles models of temperature, pressure, and iron
concentration/spin-state dependences of lattice thermal conductivity in four
major lower mantle mineral groups, including ferropericlase, Fe-bearing
perovskite and post-perovskite MgSiO3, cubic CaSiO3 perovskite, derived using
the newly implemented first-principles computational method that combines
density functional theory and the kinetic phonon transport theory. The first-
principles theoretical data will be formulated and tabulated in the formats that
can be easily adopted by geodynamical simulations and/or other Earth Sciences
applications that require thermal transport data. In addition, the new
theoretical models will be benchmarked with latest experimental data (1) to
validate and further improve empirical temperature-pressure extrapolation models
for thermal transport properties, and (2) to explore new heat conduction
mechanisms at extremely high temperatures.