* 1346087
* SBIR Phase I:  Mobile Indoor Localization and Navigation System Using Sensory Data with Data Mining and Machine Learning Techniques
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,06/30/2014
* Benjamin Balaguer, Intelligent Computer Programming Labs Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 06/30/2014
* USD 128,004.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will explore the
feasibility of an indoor localization technology that works efficiently and
accurately when GPS does not. GPS receivers, although universally adopted by the
general public, do not work indoors and suffer from inaccuracies of up to 25
meters in outdoor urban environments. By analyzing and processing data generated
from WiFi, bluetooth, cellphone signals, magnetometers, accelerometers,
compasses, and gyroscopes, a building's sensory blueprint can be created. The
building's sensory blueprint can then be exploited to localize people holding
smart mobile devices. The research will consist in investigating, designing,
implementing, and validating the following: (i) a motion model capable of
detecting a user's movement with accelerometers, compasses, and gyroscopes, (ii)
a diverse set of different machine learning algorithms to be compared in terms
of speed and localization accuracy, (iii) a probabilistic measurement model
built from the best machine learning algorithm of phase (ii), and (iv) a Monte
Carlo Localization (MCL) algorithm that combines the motion and measurement
models. The final indoor localization algorithm will be implemented, tested in
real-world conditions, and refined to prove the technology's superiority in
terms of accuracy, speed, and applicability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project is that it could revolutionize the
way buildings are used. The technology offers benefits to both end-users and
companies. On one hand, users inside large buildings (e.g., supermarkets,
shopping malls, hospitals, museums) will have access to floor plans, location-
based information, and turn-by-turn directions directly on their mobile devices.
On the other hand, companies will be able to analyze their customers' movements
and provide them with targeted information or advertising when and where they
need it. Other applications of the technology will provide societal benefits:
(i) first responders will be able to accurately localize victims thus reducing
response times and saving lives, (ii) building managers will be able to save up
to 30% energy and money by conditioning each room in real-time based on the
room's occupancy, (iii) people with disabilities will be able to use the
technology for assistance such as finding wheelchair-accessible routes, and (iv)
warehouse managers will be able to reduce order fulfillment time. Indoor
localization will be, in the near future, as pervasive as GPS is today.