* 1346380
* STTR Phase I:  Robot Rescue Responder-Learning Robot Programming through Playing Computer Games
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2014
* John Budenske, Moai Technologies L.L.C.
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 12/31/2014
* USD 224,879.00

This STTR Phase I project proposes to develop an interactive computer game to
promote interest in science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM) for high
school students. The game will use NSF-funded technologies to teach students how
to program and control robots while simultaneously maintaining student interest
through the entertainment of playing a real time strategy (RTS) game. The
proposed game will be targeted at high school students with no prior knowledge
of robotics programming, however could easily be adapted to include greater
levels of difficulty aimed at early level college courses, extra-curricular
robotics clubs, and private at home consumer use. It will enhance the STEM
learning environment by having robot programs written by the student become an
actual piece (sub-algorithm) of the game during play (giving the student greater
satisfaction and accomplishment). This is innovative from the point that current
interactive computer games have the player select options and choices but game
entities are manually manipulated with a game controller,
etc.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader/commercial impact resulting from the
proposed activity is that this effort pushes into new territory in the teaching
of STEM concepts to students. The novelty of our approach is in having the
students learn how to program robots by (a) providing all of the tools of a
program development environment along with (b) the ability to have the programs
written by the student to be part of an entertaining game. This is a leap beyond
current educational games that merely expose the student to the desired concepts
or have the student interact with the game by selecting options and choices as
the process of playing the game. The leap is that the student is not just
selecting something, but she is writing the software that controls a robotic
entity of the game; in short, they are programming a piece of the game. They
write a robot program; they see how it works in the game environment; and then
they can rewrite and optimize their software to improve their playing of the
game. The proposed game has the commercial potential to tap a huge market of
organizations interested in STEM education.