* 1346575
* EAGER: Investigating the value of automatically-gathered software impact data
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2013,03/31/2017
* Jason Priem, ImpactStory
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 03/31/2017
* USD 297,500.00

This EArly Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) award funds a preliminary
investigation into the value of automatically-gathered software impact data. The
investigation has three parts: a quantitative scoping study of automatically-
retrieved impact metrics for software projects, a before-and-after survey of
researcher attitudes and experiences with software impact metrics on their
projects, and a qualitative analysis of real-world use of metrics in evaluation
materials. Metrics will be collected using the open-source ImpactStory web
application after improvements to its software impact tracking capabilities,
including: agreements and code to text-mine the bulk of the scholarly
literature, support for usage tracking (downloads, installations, conversation,
and reverse dependencies), and presentation of an impact profile that integrates
software with related research outputs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims
improve the reusability of research software, helping to eliminate the wasted
time, money, and opportunity spent on one-time-use software. If automatically-
gathered metrics of software reuse prove valuable to researchers, these metrics
will fill the current incentive gap between reusable software and career
advancement. Researchers will invest in reusability, improving the efficiency
and effectiveness of federal funding. As well as promoting reusability
incentives, community engagement throughout this project will spur awareness,
discussion, and engagement on the issue of software impact. Finally, all code
and data in this project will be released openly (within bounds of provider
agreements), supporting future research, development, and policy.