* 1346176
* SBIR Phase I: A Learning Drug Discovery Platform in the Cloud
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Christian Lang, Acelot, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2014
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes to
develop a web-based learning software platform for collaborative drug discovery
and optimization. Current drug discovery software tools do not support the
sophisticated data management that is needed for iterative and adaptive drug
discovery, learning, and collaboration. This project aims to change this by
building a web-based drug discovery platform with three main objectives: (1)
provide novel insightful graphical feedback on binding properties, (2) provide
simple virtual screening over millions of vendor compounds, and (3) keep track
of past assay results in order to iteratively refine prediction models and to
continuously improve accuracy. The challenges in this project include (1)
scalable data management to support hundreds of users and large numbers of
compounds and models, (2) data encryption for the protection of proprietary
information, and (3) a simple pharmacologist-oriented user interface. The
outcome of the project will be a web-based tool that can be used across
pharma/biotech research groups and across labs for effective collaborative drug
discovery and optimization. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial
potential of this project, if successful, will be the potential for novel
visualizations that will significantly improve the understanding of molecular
binding properties. It will result in novel data mining and analysis algorithms
that can operate directly on encrypted data, with far-reaching impact on other
areas that require data safe-keeping (e.g., electronic health record
management). In addition, the project will offer insights into interface design
for pharmacologists, biologists, and chemists and how to better foster
collaboration among them. On a larger scale, the project will aid in the
discovery of novel leads for pressing healthcare needs. Especially for difficult
drug targets without much structural information, such as Alzheimer's disease
targets or cancer targets, the proposed platform can identify novel drug-leads
with fewer side effects and higher efficacy. This ultimately may result in a
much faster time-to-market for such drugs. For pharma/biotech companies using
the platform developed in this project, this could mean a significant commercial
advantage.