* 1346945
* US-Egypt workshop on Industry/University Collaborative Research, Alexandria, Egypt, January 2014
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2016
* Magdy Iskander, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 09/30/2016
* USD 51,500.00

1346945&lt;br/&gt;Iskander. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project supports a US-
Egypt workshop on Industry/University Collaborative Research and Technology
Transfer Partnership. The organizers are Dr. Magdy Iskander, Director, Hawaii
Center for Advanced Communications and Director NSF Industry/University
Cooperative Research Center at the University of Hawaii and Dr. Amr Farouk
Abdelkhalik, Academy of Scientific Research and Technology, Cairo, Egypt.
&lt;br/&gt;The workshop, scheduled for January 2014 in Alexandria, Egypt, is to
bring together researchers and colleagues from industry and academia to discuss
avenues to stimulate, and promote effective collaborative research partnerships
that will result in significant research outcomes and in technology transfer,
commercialization, job creation and broader benefits to the community. Invited
paper and plenary presentations describing the overarching issues in
establishing industry/academia collaborative research will be scheduled,
opportunities and available NSF programs for joint funding will be described,
and avenues towards establishing partnerships and start-ups will be described.
Opportunities in two specific research areas including wireless communications
and electronic design and packaging technologies will be described and used as
representative examples of avenues and procedures for establishing successful
industry/university collaborative research activities and centers. Fifteen US
researchers and leading professionals from academia and industry have been
invited to present research results and discuss views on the broader topic of
industry/university collaborative research. Intellectual property issues,
avenues/barriers towards commercialization, procedures for startups, and
available NSF/Egypt programs for international collaborations in engineering
research and education will be addressed. &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: There
is a strong interest and recognized need in the US, and also in Egypt, for
transferring innovative academic research to industry for commercialization,
economic growth, and benefits to the broader community. An avenue for achieving
this goal is to stimulate, promote and facilitate stronger collaboration between
industry and universities in research activities of mutual interest. The
workshop will provide presentations and panel discussion sessions and
opportunities for open Q&amp;A forums on the topic of industry/university
collaborative research, its benefits/challenges and effective implementation
procedures for highly successful partnerships. The two areas of wireless
communications and electronic design and packaging are popular and of future
interest and growth and will be used to help focus the discussion on specific
roadmaps for implementing and the formation of successful partnerships between
scientist and engineers in the US and Egypt. The goal is to develop tech
transfer between companies and Universities in Egypt and foster faculty and
industry collaborations, and to enhance collaboration with US scientists and
industrial researchers. Fifteen U.S. scientists will make presentations at the
workshop on (a) intellectual property issues, (b) tech transfer lessons, (c) job
creation, and (d) commercialization. The objectives are to: enhance
collaboration between scientists and engineers, increase understanding of
Egypt's scientific needs by U.S. scientists, and develop an IP culture in Egypt
and foster improved collaboration and trusted relations between the U.S. &amp;
Egyptian companies. The workshop is expected to create opportunities for
international multidisciplinary collaboration between scientists in the two
countries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The workshop offers an
opportunity for scientists and engineers in the US and Egypt to start new
international collaborations. The workshop, through focus on industry/university
collaborations in research and economic development, is expected to help
stimulate technology transfer and commercialization of academic research. It
will help provide researchers with resources for realizing the much anticipated
benefits from a collaborative industry/university research activities and
partnerships. It will be a positive experience for the participants on both
sides and can help act as a catalyst for international collaborations between
the US and Egyptian scientists and engineers. If successful, the workshop will
have a strong broader impact in pushing the technology transfer from academia to
industry in Egypt. Egypt is a large country and there is strong potential for
commercialization and economic growth, and forming company and scientific
partnerships with the U.S. is highly beneficial. The project is funded through
the US-Egypt Joint Fund with co-funding from the NSF/International Science and
Engineering office and the Division of Electrical, Communications and Cyber
Systems.