* 1346453
* STTR Phase I:  Gabor-domain optical coherence microscopy for detection of defects in manufacturing
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2014
* James Munro, LighTopTech Corp.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2014
* USD 225,000.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer Phase I project will explore the
applicability of a Gabor-domain optical coherence microscopy (GD-OCM) instrument
to qualify materials during manufacturing processes. State-of-the-art
interferometric instruments yield excellent resolution in depth, discriminating
between different layers within a volume; optical microscopy offers high lateral
resolution, but cannot characterize the features that are beneath the surface of
the sample. GD-OCM offers the potential of combining the advantages of these two
technologies - interferometry and microscopy - to produce unparalleled three-
dimensional resolution throughout the volume of the sample. The primary
objective of this effort will be the demonstration of a robust and accurate GD-
OCM instrument for use in subsurface imaging and detection of defects in
manufactured materials. During the project, this instrument will also be tested
on various materials, including multilayered, in order to demonstrate its
effectiveness and versatility in the acquisition of near-real-time information
for use in guiding the optimization of manufacturing parameters for optimal and
repeatable outcomes. The research will address the need for a rapid and robust
scanning mechanism, compactly integrated within the optical microscope, to
sample three-dimensional volumes and quantify undesired defects and
imperfections introduced during the manufacturing of materials.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is
to effectively provide information about product quality during the
manufacturing process of materials, including layered materials, through a
robust and reliable instrument to be used in industrial environments. An
industrial-class high-resolution GD-OCM system will enable manufacturers of
materials (e.g. polymers, layered glass, reinforced composites, and advanced
textiles) to optimize the fabrication parameters, improving the yield of their
products. The application of GD-OCM has proven to be especially valuable to
manufacturers of optical materials, such as spherical gradient refractive index
(S-GRIN) polymers and layered optical structures -- including beaded and
prismatic retroreflective films -- that are otherwise impossible to characterize
nondestructively. GD-OCM will also enable new advances in a wide variety of
scientific fields by offering the capability to image and optically section
material samples without destroying them. This will offer new insight into the
study of materials needed to advance tissue engineering and agricultural disease
management, in addition to high-performance films and layered materials for
other applications.