* 1346784
* Workshop on 'Frontiers in Electronics' (WOFE-13)) to be held in San Juan, Puerto Rico on December 17-20, 2013
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2013,01/31/2015
* Michael Shur, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Mahmoud Fallahi
* 01/31/2015
* USD 10,000.00

Objective: The proposed project seeks financial support for support conference
organization expenses related to Workshop on Frontiers in Electronics (WOFE-13)
to be held in San Juan, Puerto Rico on December 17-20, 2013.

Intellectual Merit: This Workshop on Frontiers in Electronics (WOFE-13) will
bring together researchers focused on the frontiers of electronic device and
circuit research and development. This workshop will be a special forum to
gather some of the most creative minds and leading experts from academia,
industry, and government agencies, to review the most recent advances in
electronics. The workshop will include a wide range of topics such as
nanoelectronics, wide band gap technology, UV photonics, and Terahertz
electronics. This meeting offers a special opportunity for the community to
share state-of-the-art technological developments, stimulate new ideas, and
explore/promote new collaborations.

Broader Impact: The meeting aims to bring together international researchers
from academia, government and industry to assess the current state-of-the-art of
electronics and photonics. The meeting will help to advance these fields through
sharing of results, methods, inspiring of new ideas, and initiation of new
collaborations. WOFE-2013 will pay special attention to attracting students and
young faculty with special emphasis to inviting women and members of the under
representative minorities. Proceedings of WOFE-13 will appear in the Special
Issue of International Journal of High Speed Electronics and Systems and will
also be published as a hard cover book.