* 1346944
* EAGER: Plasmonics Resonance Enhanced Active Photothermal Effects of Metal Nanoenergetics for Lean Combustion Ignition
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2015
* Zhili Zhang, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Song-Charng Kong
* 07/31/2015
* USD 60,000.00

The goal of this project is to obtain quantitative data of nanoenergetics-
enhanced ignition for lean combustion and to educate students on the combustion,
nanoscience, plasmonics, and novel energy-related technology. Novel
nanoenergetic materials have various appealing properties for combustion
applications. The photothermal effect of nanoenergetics is initiated and
controlled by a flash lamp. Localized Surface Plasmonics Resonance (LSPR)
effects confine and enhance the optical energy within the nanoenergetic
particles. The oxidation reactions of the particles are activated by the local
temperature increase and provide additional energy to accelerate the chemical
reactions for flame ignition. However many fundamental questions of photothermal
ignition of nanoenergetics are still far from being solved. Here advanced in
situ and ex situ diagnostic tools will be developed and utilized to gain
quantitative understanding of LSPR enhanced active photothermal effects of
nanoenergetics for lean combustion ignition, including photothermal ignition
delay and photothermal minimum ignition energy of various fuel/nanoenergetics
mixtures. The results may significantly increase our understanding of the
nanoenergetics as a new fuel additive and/or a solid fuel. Reliable ignition of
lean combustion may be achieved, reducing NOx emissions and pollutant formation
in combustion systems.

Undergraduate students from minority and underrepresented groups will be
recruited and supported in the project. The graduate student will work towards
his Ph.D. degree. The PI will further develop graduate courses to make
engineering education reflect the state-of-the-art in engineering practice.