* 1346449
* STTR Phase I:  Design and Implementation of New Wafer-Scale Millimeter-Wave Massive-MIMO Transceivers
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Payam Heydari, Cepand, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 12/31/2014
* USD 225,000.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project studies the
implementation of the world?s first wafer-scale 100+ element massive MIMO
transceiver operating at millimeter-wave frequency. An essential attribute of
this system is the resource sharing of transceiver chains, leading to great
saving of area. The proposed system is capable of accommodating any multi-
antenna scheme, including spatial multiplexing, spatial diversity (including
orthogonal space time block codes, maximal-ratio combining, and beamforming).
This will result in significant improvement of performance and reduction of
power consumption.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential
of this project is that it transforms the landscape of the broadband multi user
wireless access across the globe and helps the U.S. wireless sector to be the
leader of the world. The wafer-scale massive MIMO base stations will have
tremendous impact on the emerging multi-function multi-antenna wireless
communications by exploring theories and developing circuits and systems. The
telecommunications sector is changing at warp speed, driven by technological
innovation that results in new equipment and services. This STTR project will
precisely contribute to this innovation in the United States by providing a
foresight for the future direction of research and development in wireless
communications.