* 1346343
* STTR Phase I:  An Endoscopic-Based INSPIRE Platform for Treating and Monitoring Unresectable Pancreatic Cancer
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Rafael Davalos, VoltMed
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2014
* USD 225,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project focuses on the
development of a minimally invasive endoscopic surgical device for the treatment
of pancreatic cancer. Alarmingly, more than 38,000 Americans will die this year
from pancreatic cancer and the average survival time following diagnosis will
typically be 6-9 months; a statistic that has not changed significantly over the
last 3 decades. Most cases of pancreatic cancer are diagnosed by symptomatic
detection once infiltration and metastasis has already occurred, with no
effective therapies for late-stage, regionally infiltrative, or metastatic
pancreatic tumors. The proposed platform uses very brief, yet intense pulsed
electric fields to disrupt the membrane of cells within a solid tumor. The
research objectives of this project are to precisely define the electric field
necessary to achieve a therapeutic effect without damaging surrounding healthy
tissue. The technical objectives of this project are to develop a clinically
viable pulse generation system and endoscopic probe for the treatment of
oncological disease. The endoscopic-based platform will provide a feasible
avenue to treat, monitor, and confirm the success of the therapy at the time of
outpatient biopsy without additional surgical
procedures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial
potential of this project is that technology facilitates the treatment of tumors
currently inoperable with surgical resection or other focal ablation
technologies due to their proximity to critical structures such as nerve bundles
and major blood vessels. The scientific results achieved in this proposal will
enhance our understanding of how high frequency electric fields affect cells and
tissues and produce the tools necessary for their use in other therapeutic
capacities. proposed platform is a non-thermal treatment mechanism and is immune
to heat-sink effects caused by local blood vessels. Our proof-of-concept
experiments will accelerate the commercialization of the endoscopic-based
proposed technology and demonstrate the potential to treat other diseases
tissues including lung and colorectal cancers, venous eczema,
lipodermatosclerosis, and arrhythmic cardiac tissue. The global ablation market
is anticipated to grow to $12.4 billion by 2016 and the proposed platform is
uniquely positioned to gain a significant market share.