* 1346647
* EAGER: US-Turkey Collaboration on Energy Harvesting for Sustainable and Energy Efficient Buildings of the Future
* ENG,EFMA
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2015
* Brian Korgel, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Garie Fordyce
* 09/30/2015
* USD 50,000.00

This proposal was submitted as an EAGER grant; it seeks funding for a US-Turkey
Collaborative research initiative. The application entitled, "EAGER: US-Turkey
Collaboration on Energy Harvesting for Sustainable and Energy Efficient
Buildings of the Future," was submitted by Brian A Korgel and Heath Naquin from
the University of Texas at Austin. The goal of this collaborative project is to
establish a long-term collaboration between researchers at UT Austin and Middle
East Technical University (METU) in the area of energy-efficient, sustainable
buildings. The research will explore new semiconductor nanomaterials (both
silicon-based and alternatives to CIGS), which are suitable for spray-on solar
paint applications, and the combination between concentrated solar power and
geothermal energy. New knowledge will be created from these studies that will
lead to future buildings that are sustainable and energy efficient.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will bridge the NSF-funded Industry/University
Cooperative Research Center (IUCRC) on Next Generation Photovoltaics with the
Turkish government-funded Center for Solar Energy Research and Applications
(GÃœNAM) at METU. These centers have significant involvement with industrial
partners to establish a research infrastructure that can rapidly transfer new
technologies to the commercial sector for the promotion of joint economic
development in both the US and Turkey. This research project also focuses on
student education and training and providing an element of international
collaboration which is important for training the next generation of technology
innovators.