* 1346269
* STTR Phase I:  Surgical Glove with Shear Thickening Fluid Textile Composites for Protection Against Needlestick Injuries
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,06/30/2015
* Richard Dombrowski, STF Technologies LLC
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 06/30/2015
* USD 225,000.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer Research (STTR) Phase I project will
demonstrate the technical and commercial feasibility of a puncture resistant
surgical glove having areas reinforced by flexible, needle resistant
nanocomposite materials made from knit textiles intercalated with shear
thickening fluids (STF). STF treated textiles are a class of smart material that
respond differently based on the applied stress and have proven applications in
stab-resistant soft body-armor. This STTR Phase I research will advance the
knowledge and understanding of flexible composite materials for needle-resistant
protective equipment. Current puncture resistant materials are made from hard
ceramics or stiff, woven fabrics. The novelty of this research is the use of
knit substrates, which impart important flexibility as would be required for use
in glove for medical professionals and others requiring significant dexterity
and tactile sensation. The proposed research will further elucidate the
mechanisms that lead to the unique material characteristics of nanocomposites
based on shear thickening fluids. The optimization of the STF textile puncture
resistant glove materials and glove design in this project will yield a cost-
effective glove that offers protection against accidental needlestick injury
together with the fit, feel and comfort demanded by medical professionals.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is to fill a
significant, unmet need for needlestick protective gloves in the billion dollar
surgical glove market. There is no PPE option currently available to surgeons
and nurses that protects against needlestick injury. Annually, 100-200 of these
medical professionals die from infections resulting from needlestick injury. The
device envisioned in this proposal will directly mitigate some of the 350,000
needlestick injuries sustained by medical professionals each year in the U.S.
Prevention of these injuries has significant benefit for medical professionals
as well as potential cost savings to our health care system. In addition, there
are substantial benefits to patients with associated cost savings, by preventing
incidental patient infection through needlestick injuries to surgeons and
operating room nurses. The flexible, puncture resistant composites developed by
this research will also serve as an enabling technology for advanced personal
protective equipment with much broader applicability. Puncture-resistant gloves
that are lightweight, flexible, and cost-effective are of great interest in
markets such as law enforcement, waste handling, bioresearch, construction and
industrial work.