* 1346549
* RCN-UBE: Bridging the divide between research and education with authentic research experiences in introductory biology
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2020
* Rachelle Spell, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Sophie George
* 08/31/2020
* USD 499,744.00

This RCN-UBE network project seeks to increase the opportunities for students to
participate in authentic research experiences in undergraduate biology
laboratory courses, especially at the introductory level. These research
experiences allow students to better understand course content by applying that
material to a research question and to gain first hand experience in the
scientific process. This network is building on an RCN-UBE incubator project
that surveyed instructors of introductory biology laboratories to help define
the important elements of authentic research experiences and identify barriers
to implementing authentic research experiences.

The network team will use a series of workshop meetings to bridge the divide
between the biology education community and disciplinary researchers in biology.
By bridging this divide, new models for authentic research in introductory
laboratory courses will be developed and new faculty will become engaged in
implementing these experiences. In each year, one workshop will be hosted in
association with an annual meeting of the biology education community (e.g.,
either Association for Biology Laboratory Education [ABLE], Council on
Undergraduate Research [CUR], National Association of Biology Teachers [NABT],
or Annual Biomedical Research Conference for Minority Students [ABRCMS]) and
disciplinary researchers in biology will be actively recruited to attend. A
second workshop will be hosted in association with a biology disciplinary
society and members of the biology education community will be actively
recruited to attend. Finally, to advance the field of biology education research
in relation to authentic research experiences in laboratory courses, a meeting
among disciplinary biology researchers, biology education researchers, and
biology education practitioners will be held in association with the Society for
the Advancement of Biology Education Research.

This project is funded jointly by the Directorate for Biological Sciences and
the Directorate of Education and Human Resources, Division of Undergraduate
Education in support of efforts to address the challenges posed in Vision and
Change in Undergraduate Education: A Call to Action
http://visionandchange.org/finalreport/.