* 1346286
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Maya Community Production and Consumption Practices
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/2014,12/31/2014
* Barbara Voss, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2014
* USD 13,085.00

The central goal of this project is to gain understanding of how local small-
scale communities are incorporated into global economic and social systems. This
issue is of relevance in the world today since in many regions, including Middle
America where this research is situated, lack of successful integration is a
cause of social unrest. Archaeology has the potential to show how the
integration process may unfold over time. Under the guidance of Dr. Barbara
Voss, Guido Pezzarossi will analyze ceramic artifacts and plant pollen remains
recovered during 2011 excavations at San Pedro Aguacatepeque, a Late Classic to
Late Colonial period (900-1800 AD) Kaqchikel Maya site located in the Pacific
piedmont region of Guatemala. The community of Aguacatepeque was adjacent to an
important commercial route that connected highland and coastal markets, as well
as being located within microclimate favorable for the cultivation of cacao and
sugar cane. These two prized cash crops became a focal point for Aguacatepeque's
agricultural production in the colonial period. Mr. Pezzarossi will analyze
plant pollen remains and ceramic artifacts from Aguacatepeque in order to
identify changes in the community's labor and consumption practices. The goal of
this research is to identify the impacts of Spanish colonization and the
developing capitalist world economy as felt by Maya communities. This work
contributes to a better understanding of the effects of participation in the
global economy on the daily life and traditions of indigenous populations in the
past and present.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central role that Spanish colonial
projects and the global capitalist economy played in the development of modern
Latin America and in the lives of its still sizable indigenous populations (such
as the Maya) is without question. However, little archaeological research has
been conducted on Colonial period Maya sites with the intention of understanding
exactly how daily life changed for Maya people in the wake of colonization and
integration into the global economy. This archaeological research tracks
specific changes in daily life, labor, consumption and economic practice prior
to, during and after colonization, providing key insight into how precolonial
contexts influenced the form and outcomes of colonization. This study also
traces the role of indigenous populations within global economic networks and
the effects of colonization and global economic entanglement on established ways
of life.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project analyzes plant pollen recovered from
pre-colonial and colonial occupation periods at Aguacatepeque, in order to
identify changes in agricultural labor, subsistence and environment, and cash
crop cultivation. In addition, ceramic artifacts will be analyzed using
instrumental neutron activation analysis and ceramic petrography. This will
determine which ceramics were produced locally, and which were acquired through
market exchange. The shifting ratio of local to non-local ceramics will track
changes in market dependence and consumption
practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This broader impacts of this project include
support of graduate student training as well as specialized training in
technical material science analyses that will allow Mr. Pezzarossi to complete
his doctoral dissertation. This project also fosters collaboration between
Guatemalan and US-based researchers and students, as well as between Mr.
Pezzarossi and various US-based universities and laboratories. The results of
this project will be disseminated through US and Guatemalan conference
presentations, peer-reviewed publications and through the project websites. All
raw data will be housed and made publically available through the Stanford
Digital Repository. Finally, the project is working with a local non-profit in
Antigua, Guatemala to develop a community outreach archaeology workshop and
curriculum for rural Maya communities.