* 1346547
* Theoretical studies and numerical simulations of backward-wave photonic micro devices.
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2013,08/31/2015
* Alexander Popov, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2015
* USD 81,750.00

THE OBJECTIVE of this research is to explore new avenues for nanoscale photonics
and to improve fundamental understanding of physical (including quantum)
operational principles of novel class of ultracompact photonic components. THE
APPROACH is to develop theory, to numerically model and simulate functional
properties of the proposed components and to investigate their potential
capabilities. INTELLECTUAL MERITS. The proposal implements an exotic property,
backwardness, of electromagnetic waves in negative-index metamaterials, unique
features of coherent nonlinear-optical coupling of ordinary and backward waves,
counterintuitive effects of quantum interference and methods of quantum
engineering. It presents unparallel, nonlinear-optical approach to compensating
strong losses inherent to plasmonic metamaterials and to control light energy
distribution and conversion across metafilms. Recent advances in design of bulk
multilayered nanostructured metamaterials make such opportunities crucially
important for creation of unique devices. BROADER IMPACTS. This research
contributes to synergetic interdisciplinary approach to nanotechnology-based,
high priority, revolutionary breakthroughs in optical processing technologies.
It will also greatly benefit educational efforts for introducing nano and device
technologies to undergraduate students. The effort provides excellent
opportunities for enhancing the curriculum of related courses in physics and
chemistry and for addressing photonics and nanoengineering as the
interdisciplinary science and technology areas. Special focus will be placed on
incorporating students into a comprehensive computer-enhanced research program
in the exciting field of modern electrical engineering and on disseminating its
results to society. Interdisciplinary seminar series will be developed for
undergraduate students to foster their motivation in learning and to broader
their vision of contemporary science and technology.