* 1346395
* Request for Travel Support for Domestic Invited Speakers to Attend the "Emerging Areas in Polymer Science and Engineering" Program at the 2013 American Institute of Chemical Engine
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2014
* Rodney Priestley, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 08/31/2014
* USD 4,200.00

TECHNICAL AND NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award provides
partial support for two special sessions on "Emerging Areas in Polymer Science
and Engineering" at the fall 2013 meeting of the American Institute of Chemical
Engineers (AIChE). The program is focused on tunable and responsive polymers,
nanoparticles and surfactants, functional gels, smart/reconfigurable polymer
networks, interfacial interactions, polymer batteries and capacitors, and
transport through structured polymeric matrices. The talks cover an array of
polymer research topics, with the overall theme being the use of nanoscale
engineering and advanced materials chemistry to manipulate materials structure,
properties, and function of polymer systems. The combination of the talks in
each session will highlight recent theoretical, simulation, and
experimental&lt;br/&gt;advances in polymer science and engineering in areas
related to energy storage and generation, drug delivery, nanoscale templating,
coatings, nanocomposites, and biomaterials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The speakers
represent a broadly diverse group of leaders in the polymer field at different
career stages. These focused sessions will cater to graduate students,
postdoctoral researchers, faculty, and industrial professionals in a variety of
areas related to polymer science and engineering. Furthermore, these sessions
will showcase the breadth of emerging polymer-related activities in the chemical
engineering community.