* 1346158
* SBIR Phase I:  Ultrasonic 3D Rangefinding for Mobile Gesture Recognition
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,06/30/2014
* Richard Przybyla, Chirp Microsystems
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 06/30/2014
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project proposes the development
of an ultrasonic three-dimensional (3D) rangefinder system for mobile gesture
recognition. Optical gesture recognition has been introduced for gaming and will
soon be launched for personal computer (PC) interaction, but optical gesture
sensors are too large and power-hungry to be incorporated into tablets,
smartphones, and smaller devices. The proposed 3D rangefinder uses an array of
tiny piezoelectric ultrasound transducers which are built on a silicon wafer
using microfabrication techniques. Custom electronics are used to control the
transducers. In operation, the system emits sound into the air and receives
echoes from objects in front of the transducer array. The system infers the
location of the objects by measuring the time delay between transmission of the
sound wave and reception of the echo. The system will be designed for
incorporation into smartphones, tablets, and other mobile devices. The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project is to bring contextual awareness to
everyday devices, which currently have very little idea about what is going on
in the space around them. The proposed ultrasonic 3D rangefinder has the
potential to be small and low-power enough to be left on continuously, giving
the device a way to sense the physical objects surrounding it in the
environment. While today's optical 3D ranging systems work across a small room
and are capable of sufficient resolution, they are too large and power hungry to
be integrated into battery-powered devices. Mobile contextual awareness will
enable 3D interaction with smartphones and tablets, facilitating rich user
interfaces for applications such as gaming and hands-free control in
automobiles. Looking beyond the smartphone and tablet market, the proposed
rangefinder would be well-suited for wearable devices that are too small or
simply don't allow for a full-function touchscreen, such as head mounted
displays and smart watches. These products currently have limited input options
since the area available for buttons and touch-sensor inputs is only slightly
larger than a finger. Ultrasonic contextual awareness has the potential to
revolutionize the user interface for tiny consumer electronics.