* 1346272
* EAGER:  Persistent Virus Infections in Marine Phytoplankton
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2013,08/31/2016
* William Wilson, Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* David Garrison
* 08/31/2016
* USD 299,546.00

Viruses are prevalent in every part of the environment of our living planet, and
yet our understanding of type, distribution, and function is the least well-
known aspect of biodiversity. In recent years we have developed an increased
appreciation for the role viruses play in driving host evolution in the
environment, but fundamental knowledge about the mechanisms involved remain
lacking. Additionally, viruses may influence diversity indirectly through "kill
the winner" scenarios, as well as through cell lysis and subsequent release of
dissolved nutrients, which facilitate restructuring of microbial communities.
The majority of research on marine viruses to date has focused on combinations
of acutely susceptible host strains with highly virulent virus isolates.
However, it is likely that marine viruses also employ a persistent infection
life strategy, arguably preferring it to the more widely recognized lytic cycle.
The objective of this project is to demonstrate that persistent virus infections
occur in marine phytoplankton, and that these are a crucial component of ocean
ecosystem function and a key evolutionary driver in primary producers. Using a
range of persistent virus:host systems, this project will investigate: 1) how
pervasive persistent virus infections are in marine systems; and 2) the role of
non-coding RNAs in maintaining host:virus symbiosis. This is a high risk-high
pay research as it involves a radically different approach to the analysis of
viruses in marine systems. The investigators plan to apply a suite of molecular
(transcriptomics, genomics and development of novel diagnostic markers)
techniques to include the analysis of microRNAs to determine the functional
importance of persistent viruses in the ocean. The results of this project will
be potentially transformative for our understanding of virus-driven
phytoplankton evolution and its potential impact on biodiversity in marine
phytoplankton, a vital component of the global carbon
cycle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broder impacts of this project include the fact
that this project is about "ecosystem resilience and stability", one of the
pillars of the National Ocean Policy. Products of this research will include a
comprehensive knowledge base, representing a paradigm shift in our understanding
about how viruses interact with global primary productivity processes and
evolution. Research outlined in this project will be discussed as part of
Bigelow Laboratory's informal Cafe Scientifique program designed to introduce
the public to the latest ideas in science. In addition, the investigators will
work with a science writer to give our project a social network presence by
"embedding" the writer into the science program. These materials, in combination
with media outreach for coverage in popular science magazines and broadcasts,
will be employed to foster public recognition and awareness of the importance of
viruses in the ecology, evolution, and functioning of the ocean.