* 1346265
* RCN-UBE-Incubator: HBCU-ALBN:Network of Biologists and Life Science Educators for Vision and Change in the Curriculum
* BIO,DBI
* 02/01/2014,06/30/2016
* Diann Jordan, Alabama State University
* Standard Grant
* christopher meyer
* 06/30/2016
* USD 49,948.00

This project seeks to create an RCN-UBE network for the purpose of providing
faculty development activities at several historically black colleges and
universities (HBCUs) in Alabama. The HBCU-Alabama Biosciences Network (HBCU-
ALBN) will be a community of biologists and life scientists from all ranks,
diverse experiences, pedagogical approaches and scientific training who will be
willing to adopt and explore recommended curriculum changes in undergraduate
science education that are much needed in the HBCU
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Virtual and in-person planning meetings by the
Steering Committee will proceed a workshop planned for the summer of 2014 at
Alabama State University. Network activities will provide a forum to exchange
examples of reforms that are underway and will challenge other faculty to
incorporate active learning approaches in their classes to better engage
students. For example, faculty will consider using case studies to demonstrate
the everyday relevance of what students learn in life science courses, encourage
cooperative learning among students, and explore the use of new technologies in
the classroom.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the project lie in
forming a network of faculty at HBCUs who want to adopt student-centered
approaches in the classroom to better engage students. Courses for both majors
and non-majors will be the focus of network activities to improve biological
literacy of all students and retention of students interested in biology.
Currently there is no central association of life science faculty at HBCUs in
Alabama for them to share resources and information to improve undergraduate
biology education. This RCN-UBE network plans to form such a network that could
serve as a model for other HBCUs and community colleges in other
states.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded jointly by the Directorate
for Biological Sciences and the Directorate of Education and Human Resources,
Division of Undergraduate Education in support of efforts to address the
challenges posed in Vision and Change in Undergraduate Education: A Call to
Action http://visionandchange.org/finalreport/