* 1346567
* RCN-UBE: Assessment of Competence in Experimental Design in Biology (ACED-Bio) Network
* BIO,DBI
* 02/01/2014,09/30/2020
* Trevor Anderson, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Sophie George
* 09/30/2020
* USD 500,000.00

This RCN-UBE project seeks to create a network of educational specialists (who
study how students learn) and scientists (who are active researchers) to develop
assessment tools that directly measure what students learn about experimental
design in biology through undergraduate research and classroom experiences.
Collaboratively, these two groups will develop common learning standards about
the concepts underlying an experiment and the nature of representations students
should apply in reasoning about experiments and visualizing data. They also will
evaluate existing assessments and create and validate new assessments based on
the standards to reveal areas of student difficulties, leading to new
instructional and mentoring approaches targeting those areas.

While an increasing number of studies focus on helping students decipher the
experimental research process in general, most assessment tools only indirectly
measure what undergraduates learn from performing biology experiments. The
intellectual merit of this project is that it addresses the need to develop
assessments that directly measure what students learn about biology research to
strengthen their research skills. It is envisaged that these assessments will
have both summative and formative applications as activities for promoting
learning about experimental research competencies.

The broader impacts of the project lie in the fact that faculty involved in the
project come from a variety of biology sub-disciplines at different career
levels and from a wide range of institutions, providing an opportunity for
liberal arts colleges and master's-degree-granting institutions, in particular,
to provide input to the development of assessments that can positively impact
their students. As a key outcome, the common standards and assessments will be
used across multiple institutions and disciplines of biology.

This project is funded jointly by the Directorate for Biological Sciences and
the Directorate of Education and Human Resources, Division of Undergraduate
Education in support of efforts to address the challenges posed in Vision and
Change in Undergraduate Education: A Call to Action
http://visionandchange.org/finalreport/