* 1346780
* I-Corps Site: A Biological Sciences Site for the California State University
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2018
* Alex DeNoble, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 04/30/2018
* USD 330,000.00

This is an I-Corps project from the California State University (CSU) Program
for Education and Research in Biotechnology (CSUPERB) for an I-Corps Biological
Sciences Site. The activities proposed aim to smooth the development path for
nascent academic entrepreneurs across the CSU. The Site recognizes the learning
obstacles along the path to biological sciences commercialization including
cultural differences between academic research and commercial development,
product regulation, intellectual property management, and financing for long
product development cycles.

CSUPERB will: 1) Recruit biological sciences researchers and fund 30 Site Teams
annually, providing opportunities to explore biotechnology commercialization
pathways; 2) Draw upon CSUPERBs existing network of alumni, industry experts and
campus-based entrepreneurship resources, to offer tailored advice for science-
based ventures; 3) Tailor a curriculum for biological sciences entrepreneurs to
explore venture ideas, assess the maturity of their technology, and map out
development milestones; and 4) Organize recurring, regional meetings co-hosted
by industry associations and partner organizations for curious academic
biological sciences entrepreneurs.

The I-Corps Biological Sciences Site will nurture CSU researchers so that they
gain confidence in their entrepreneurial abilities, greater understanding of
biotechnology commercialization pathways, and a better calibration of their
concepts maturity level.

Broader Impacts: More than a quarter of the California State University STEM
baccalaureates are from underrepresented populations. The CSU educates more
Hispanic, African-American, and American Indian undergraduates than all other
institutions in the state combined. The immersive learning provided by
biological sciences research and entrepreneurial activity is engaging and
valuable to CSU students, even the most at-risk populations. Employers and
investors greatly value creative students who graduate with demonstrated
accomplishments in team-based research, the ability to solve real-world
problems, and experience with technology commercialization. A Biological
Sciences Site program gives students and faculty access to mentors, sources of
capital, business expertise, and leadership opportunities.