* 1346633
* EAGER: Collaborative Research:  SciWiNet: a Science Wireless Network for the Research Community
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2014
* Ivan Seskar, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Lyles
* 07/31/2014
* USD 51,593.00

Large scale Internet testbeds such as PlanetLab and GENI are widely used by the
academic community. Unfortunately, wireless infrastructure to support wireless
networking systems research is not as prevalent. Projects such as Orbit and
GENI/WiMAX provide a valuable service framework, but these wireless testbeds are
limited in scale in terms of geographic footprint as well as in terms of
diversity of radio access and device technology. Not only the networking
community but also application domain specific research communities such as
environmental sensing and intelligent transportation systems require wireless
cyberinfrastructure. Currently the effort required to design and deploy wireless
infrastructure to support such research 'in the wild' imposes a significant
burden on projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project builds and trials
a nationwide wireless network that supports the academic research community
called the network the Science Wireless Network or SciWiNet. SciWiNet is based
on a Mobile Virtual Network Operator (MVNO) model: SciWiNet (a collaboration
between Clemson University and Rutgers University) represents the Service
Operator; the operator of the NVMO infrastructure represents the Carrier of
Record and FCC license holder; the Wireless Network Operator (WNO)owns the
underlying spectrum and network infrastructure. The underlying infrastructure is
not under investigation. Instead, this project is developing and evaluating a
possible service framework that can support a broad set of academic researchers
and which can integrate campus-provided wireless infrastructure. More
specifically, the objectives of this project are to: &lt;br/&gt;1. Evaluate the
efficacy of an MVNO model to provide a wireless testbed for the academic
research community; &lt;br/&gt;2. Integrate and build upon innovations and
resources made available from the GENI community; &lt;br/&gt;3. Develop
appropriate support for the community of SciWiNet users that are from outside
the networking research community; &lt;br/&gt;4. Identify viable paths by which
SciWiNet can evolve to become a self-sustaining, national
resource.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will enable research that currently
not feasible because of the limited coverage of existing GENI/WiMax base
stations, including research in areas such as eHealth, intelligent
transportation systems, smart buildings and structures, homeland security,
and&lt;br/&gt;Internet of Things. It is expected that the combination of campus
provided wireless access and the NVMO will facilitate development and deployment
of new applications and will be instrumental in educating students to consider
the combination of theory and practice in complex heterogeneous wireless
systems.