* 1346451
* Conference Support: Dynamics Days 2014 Conference on Nonlinear Dynamics and Chaos;  Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia; 2 to 5 January 2014
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Turgay Uzer, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 05/31/2014
* USD 30,000.00

This grant provides funding for the travel expenses of graduate students,
postdocs, and individuals without other sources of support to attend the
conference Dynamics Days US 2014, which will be held in the Clough Undergraduate
Learning Commons on the campus of Georgia Tech in Atlanta, GA. Dynamics Days is
an annual international conference that has been running in the US for more than
30 years. During this time, Dynamics Days has served as one of the main venues
where recent developments in and applications of nonlinear dynamics are
disseminated. This year the conference will feature 20 invited speakers giving
talks on topics including nonlinear dynamics of biological systems, systems
biology, population dynamics and genetics, neural dynamics and engineering,
swimming and flight, robotics, dynamics on and of complex networks, dynamics of
nonequilibrium and stochastic systems, and fluid dynamics. The work of
conference participants will also be highlighted through the delivery of
approximately 20 contributed talks and the anticipated presentation of
approximately 100 posters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In recent years, Dynamics Days
has become established as an excellent venue for interactions between
specialists in different fields and between young and established researchers.
The topics of the talks cover a variety of areas with overlapping interests in
nonlinear dynamics. This variety attracts participants from various fields in
mathematics and physics, and also a significant number of participants with
backgrounds in other fields such as engineering, biology, and geology.
Experienced researchers will benefit from the exposure to new techniques and
potential collaborators in diverse fields. Financial support will be available
to students and young researchers. These young researchers will especially
benefit from the format of the conference, gaining a broad perspective of
current research in interdisciplinary areas. The participation of students and
young researchers in engineering research communities, in particular from
underrepresented groups, will be especially encouraged.