* 1346808
* CBMS Conference: Mathematical Foundations of Transformation Optics
* MPS,DMS
* 02/01/2014,01/31/2018
* Mohammad Mahmood, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 01/31/2018
* USD 34,973.00

This award will support an NSF/CBMS regional conference to be held at Howard
University in Washington, DC in the summer of 2014 on the mathematical
foundations of transformation optics. The principal speaker will be Prof. Allan
Greenleaf from the University of Rochester. The lectures will cover topics
concerning both the theoretical basis for transformation optics designs, such as
cloaks, field rotators and electromagnetic wormholes, and some of the issues
which arise in trying to physically realize them. Areas to be discussed include
different types of wave propagation, the equations that govern them, and how
they transform under changes of variables; ideal cloaking for electro- and
thermal statics, for scalar optics and acoustics, and for electromagnetic waves;
approximate cloaking; and resonances as both difficulties and opportunities. In
addition to the main lectures by Prof. Greenleaf, a lecture on the view from the
physics community will be given by Prof. Ulf Leonhardt of the Weizmann
Institute. Further additional lectures will be presented by Prof. Daniel Onofrei
of the University of Houston, who will discuss both other approaches to cloaking
and numerical methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The last seven years have seen an
explosion of interest in the design, analysis, simulation and actual
implementation of cloaking, or invisibility, devices. This area of physics and
engineering fits into a broader ongoing development of materials and devices
that have radical effects on wave propagation, where the waves in question can
range from electromagnetism (including visible light) to acoustic waves to heat
flow to matter waves in quantum mechanics. Many of the designs for cloaking and
related devices are based on the transformation rules for the equations that
describe these waves, an area that is now referred to as transformation optics.
Physical realization of these designs are created using structured composite
materials, called metamaterials. Devices designed using transformation optics
and implemented using metamaterials have the potential to radically change the
way that technology manipulates waves, whether they be electromagnetic,
acoustic, thermal or other. The ability to design devices with radical effects
on wave propagation of many types has enormously varied potential applications,
ranging from military to industrial to medical to entertainment. Having a
greater range of devices or better performing ones, or for that matter a more
sober view of their limitations, will be of great value. These lectures will
address both the theoretical background and some of the practical limitations on
devices designed using these techniques.