* 1346088
* SBIR Phase I:  Nickel-based printable metal electrodes on flexible substrates
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,06/30/2014
* Hee Park, Laser Prismatics LLC
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 06/30/2014
* USD 149,999.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop
printable nickel materials and the laser reduction-sintering process to produce
high-resolution metal electrodes on flexible substrates. Screen printing or
inkjet printing with conductive inks based on metal nanoparticles is an
attractive low-cost technology for direct metallization for optoelectronic
devices. Today?s conductive inks and pastes are primarily made of silver.
However, silver is expensive and prone to price volatility, whereas the price
pressure of end consumer products is ever increasing. Therefore, silver
alternatives are being sought, but the main challenge in replacing silver by
inexpensive metals, such as copper and nickel, is in avoiding their oxidation at
ambient conditions. Our innovation solves this problem by combining air-stable
nickel oxide nanoparticles and laser processing, where the laser light induces
direct local photochemical reduction, agglomeration, and sintering.
Additionally, by employing the laser direct-write patterning, non-conducting
nickel oxide film can be converted into a patterned, conducting nickel electrode
in one step, without relying on complex process tools. This project will
commercialize this technology by demonstrating the as-printed conductivity of
nickel comparable to that of silver, by rigorous understanding of the
photochemistry, ink formulation and laser process optimization.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is
to foster and advance printed electronics, an emerging market with tremendous
growth potential across various end-user industries. The commercialization of
large-scale printed-electronics is contingent on the development of low-cost
materials and processes for conductive electrodes in many different application
areas, including smart packaging, radio-frequency identification tags, flexible
displays, biosensors, photovoltaics, thin film batteries, and smart textiles.
Conventional electronic systems are fabricated using photolithography, a
complex, multi-step process that requires expensive facilities and generates
large volumes of hazardous waste, which damage the environment. The advancement
of nanotechnology can convert inexpensive and more naturally abundant metals
such as nickel into a functional material that can outperform silver. The total
market for silver inks and pastes exceeds $7 billion today. If successful, the
products developed in this project can capture a large share of this market.
Printable electronics is a disruptive technology that has a profound effect to
the America?s manufacturing competitiveness. The proposed project can establish
a key component of this technology that stems from the fundamental work and
promising results obtained by the collaborating team of researchers in
photochemistry and nanotechnology.