* 1346424
* STTR Phase I:  Integration of carbohydrate and gaseous fermentations for maximum C4 chemical yield
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2014
* BRYAN TRACY, ELCRITON, INC
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 12/31/2014
* USD 225,000.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer Research Phase I project aims to enhance
fermentation yield of four carbon (C4) chemicals by instating mixotrophic
fermentation. In order to realize the most cost effective fermentation for
commodity chemical and biofuel production, the process should achieve maximum
conversion of feedstock. In carbohydrate fermentations, CO2 and H2 are commonly
evolved, which negatively impacts yield of desired products. We hypothesize that
mixotrophic fermentation can recapture that yield loss. We define mixotrophic
fermentation as the simultaneous consumption of organic and inorganic
substrates. Improvements in yield from mixotrophic fermentation can be very
significant. Moreover, certain clostridial organisms in theory can perform such
fermentation, but relatively little is known about this. Moreover, the genetic
tools to manipulate these microorganisms are underdeveloped. Consequently, this
Phase I STTR will develop a genetic toolbox for these microorganisms,
interrogate their ability for simultaneous substrate utilization of both
carbohydrate and gas, and demonstrate the potential to produce C4 chemicals from
mixotrophic fermentation.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is to develop renewable
and domestic chemical production and transportation fuel technologies that are
cheaper, greener and more sustainable. Project outcomes, have the potential to
increase product yield 10 ? 50%, which greatly reduces production-operating
expense. The potential to utilize CO2 in the fermentation, minimizes the carbon
footprint of the process. Lastly, process sustainability is enhanced since a
greater diversity of feedstocks can be concurrently used such as complex
carbohydrates, five and six carbon sugar monomers, biodiesel waste, hydrolyzed
biomass, syngas, waste gas, and activated methane molecules. Overall, the
project has the commercial potential to improve the triple bottom line of many
chemical companies. Furthermore, this project could significantly enhance
scientific and technological understanding of microbial physiology and
metabolism during gas and carbohydrate fermentation.