* 1346385
* STTR Phase I:  Advanced Hybrid Piezoelectric Energy Harvester
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Tian-Bing Xu, PolyK Technologies, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2014
* USD 225,000.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer Research (STTR) Phase I will develop
advanced hybrid energy harvester to provide power for wireless sensor network
systems. Although piezoelectric energy harvesters have found broad applications,
their power density and mechanical-electrical conversion efficiency are still
low, with values at microwatts to milliwatt and &lt;10%, respectively since they
primarily operate at the ?d31? mode of the piezoelectric transducer and the
mechanical impedance mismatch between the vibration source and the harvesting
device. It is known that the ?d33? mode in many piezoelectric materials can
generate 2~3 times more energy than the ?d31? mode. In this project, novel
hybrid piezoelectric harvesters will be designed by an integrated approach and
uniquely constructed to combine both ?d31? mode and ?d33? mode in a single
device. This hybrid design can also reduce the harvester stiffness so the
vibration can be effectively transferred from the source to the device.
Therefore, they will have significantly higher power density and conversion
efficiency at &gt;100 mW and &gt;40%, respectively.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact/commercial potential of this project is to develop advanced
hybrid energy harvester that can enable broad deployment of wireless sensor
networks. Self-sustainable power supply is in urgent need for portable electric
devices, wireless sensor networks, infrastructure health monitoring, active
control, and battleground soldier support. Scavenging ambient energy from
environment to power these devices can eliminate the cost of replacing
batteries, particularly in remote environment. The hybrid energy harvesters
developed in this project will significantly improve the power output and
response dynamic frequency, therefore provide sufficient power to many such
devices. The high power density will also enable more frequent data acquisition
and transmission of such sensor networks, and promote more ubiquitous deployment
of advanced sensor networks.