* 1346972
* Value and Sustainability of Biological Field Stations, Marine Laboratories, and Natural Reserves in 21st Century Science, Education, and Public Outreach
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2015
* Deborah Glickson, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2015
* USD 333,473.00

The National Academy of Sciences is awarded a grant to support a study to assess
the importance of and make suggestions for field stations, marine laboratories,
and natural reserves (FSMLNRs) to advance science, education, and public
outreach in a financially sustainable manner. The National Research Council will
convene an independent, expert committee to review current contributions to
determine the types of research, training, and public engagement efforts
commonly undertaken; examine the infrastructure, logistical, and financial needs
to advance science, education, and public outreach endeavors; and develop a
range of long-term strategies to enhance financial stability and effectiveness
of FSMLNR activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;FSMLNRs serve three broad, functions:
research and innovation, education, and public engagement in science. Recent
publications describe key investments needed in infrastructure, education, and
public outreach to maximize the unique value and function of FSMLNRs. FSMLNRs
are poised to benefit also from input on how to adapt to changing scientific
capabilities or societal needs, develop collaborations and partnerships, and
incorporate financially sustainable strategies to support FSMLNR needs and
roles. The proposed activity will help build the research, education, and public
outreach infrastructure needed to advance technologies, address national and
global challenges, and prepare citizens and future workforce to engage in
environmental science, conservation biology, sustainability, and other FSMLNR-
related science and engineering topics. Information on the National Research
Council and its products may be found at http://www.nationalacademies.org/nrc/.