* 1346955
* CNIC: US-Turkey Collaborative Research to Study Multiple Climate Stressors on   Phytoplankton Community Dynamics in Subtropical, Eutrophic Coastal Regions
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Sibel Bargu, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Roxanne Nikolaus
* 08/31/2016
* USD 20,000.00

Technical description&lt;br/&gt;Drs. Sibel Bargu, Department of Oceanography and
Coastal Sciences, Louisiana State University&lt;br/&gt;and Nihayet Bizsel,
Institute of Marine Sciences and Technology, Dokuz Eylul University,
Turkey&lt;br/&gt;have initiated a new international collaboration to study
questions relating to the influence of nutrients and temperatures on
phytoplankton dynamics. The focus is on changes in phytoplankton diversity, the
related functions, and productivity in space and time with the goal to
understand the impact of climate change on coastal marine ecosystems. The sites
selected for comparative study are two subtropical, eutrophic coastal regions in
the Gulf of Mexico, and the Aegean Sea. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Aquatic systems
are exposed to a variety of impacts that originate from both natural and human-
induced stressors. With climate change, the temporal and spatial growth
conditions for primary producers and their species-specific adaptations will be
altered in coastal waters around the world. Although similar hydrological
environments in different oceans are expected to have similar phytoplankton
assemblages, human induced and climate related stressors such as: changes in
nutrient bioavailability and increase in temperature could yield geographic
differences in phytoplankton species and genetic diversity, their productivity,
and other associated functions in their environment. The Izmir Bay and Louisiana
Coastal waters are the selected sites for improving understanding of the eco-
physiological mechanisms that determine ecosystem responses to natural or
anthropogenic stressors within the context of phytoplankton ecology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader description&lt;br/&gt;Comparing the similarities
and dissimilarities of the two systems in the context of phytoplankton ecology
offers significant opportunities to understand the impact of climate change on
coastal marine ecosystems. Beyond the scientific contributions, the project will
initiate a promising, new bilateral collaboration with Turkish researchers,
offer a unique international research opportunity to an undergraduate student
from Louisiana State University, and will contribute significantly to the
development of a follow-on large-scale, multidisciplinary research project that
will be submitted to the Biological Oceanography Program in GEO/Ocean Sciences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;