* 1346168
* SBIR Phase I:  Disaster Recovery and High Availability of Cloud Computing Applications, Data, and Services
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Navraj Chohan, AppScale Systems, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 12/31/2014
* USD 179,996.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will establish
the feasibility and commercial potential of developing software technologies
that enable disaster recovery and high availability for cloud-based web
applications and mobile app back-ends (apps). The innovations address the key
pain points associated with public cloud use as revealed by interviews conducted
as part of the NSF I-Corps program: disruption, privacy, and lock-in. The
project plan is to design, develop, and empirically evaluate the utility, scale,
and commercial potential of cutting edge proprietary software products that
automate and make migration and failover easy for app developers that employ
cloud-based services to implement their apps.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project results from its ability to benefit
a wide constituency. On the commercial side, cloud and platform-as-a-service
(PaaS) markets are growing at an alarming pace. This project is unique in that
it combines the benefits of modern cloud platforms with the key missing pieces
of all extant approaches to PaaS: disaster recovery, easy migration, and hybrid
cloud use by apps and data across public and on-premise deployment options. The
simplification enabled by this cloud platform with a disaster recovery solution
lowers the barrier to entry and reduces both the risk and cost associated with
public cloud use.