* 1346899
* Collaborative Research:  Incorporating Physiological Variation in Mechanistic Range Models for Ecological Forecasting
* BIO,EF
* 06/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Lauren Buckley, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* timothy kratz
* 08/31/2016
* USD 180,719.00

These scientists will use computer models to investigate the impacts of climate
change on the continental distribution of a well studied and widespread lizard.
The model will link the attributes of individual lizards to assess how whole
populations of lizards adapt to specific environmental conditions. For example,
the model considers how temperature and rainfall limit lizard activity, such as
feeding. Feeding activity is then related to survival and reproduction. By
monitoring the behavior and measuring internal activity of lizards across the
entire United States, the investigators will be able to compare how variation in
these attributes leads to different predictions about how climate in different
regions should affect lizards. Then the PIs will evaluate how the evolution of
physiology would affect the distribution of lizards under various climate change
scenarios. This project will set the stage for a new modeling approach that
considers how evolutionary adaptation and gene flow can help determine the
geographic range of a species. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Predicting the ranges of
species and how they will shift during conditions of environmental change is a
major challenge for biologists that has important applications to conservation.
Existing models either fail to incorporate important processes or are too
abstract to apply to real populations. This project will expand our knowledge by
incorporating ecological processes into a model that is tailored to a real
species of lizards. This model could then be generalized and applied to other
species in the future. The project will make significant contributions to the
missions of research and education at three universities in Arizona, North
Carolina and Texas. It will train students from under-represented groups, will
develop cross-university workshops on these new models and approaches, and
should lead to software usable by resource managers to forecast biological
responses to environmental change. The project participants will provide public
lectures, prepare non-technical publications, and develop web pages with
summaries and activities designed for the public, in addition to writing the
usual scientific papers.