* 1346827
* On the Relative Robustness of the Size of Tests to Local Model Violations
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2013,08/31/2014
* Patrik Guggenberger, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Georgia Kosmopoulou
* 08/31/2014
* USD 81,310.00

When an applied researcher tests a hypothesis, she can make one of two mistakes.
She can reject a true null hypothesis or accept a false one. To implement the
test the applied researcher picks a significance level, which is the maximal
probability at which the researcher is willing to commit the first type of
error. This maximal probability at which the first error occurs is also called
the size of the test.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Competing testing procedures of equal
(large sample) size are typically ranked according to their relative power
properties, where power denotes 1 minus the probability of the second type of
error. However, noting that key assumptions underlying Econometric models are
often questionable in practice, the PI proposes an alternative ranking of tests
according to their relative large sample size distortion under local violations
of certain model assumptions. The PI includes tests into the comparison that
have large sample size equal to nominal size when the key model assumptions hold
true and that are consistent against fixed alternatives when the model is point
identified. As a more ambitious goal--beyond ranking existing tests according to
the new measure--the PI intends to investigate whether there exists an optimal
test, that is, a test that has smallest large sample size distortion for a given
degree of local violations of the model assumptions in the class of tests that
have correct asymptotic size when the model assumptions are true and are
consistent when the model is point identified.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Out of many
examples, the PI focuses on two lead examples. First, the PI considers
hypothesis tests involving the structural parameter vector in the linear
instrumental variables (IVs) model where the IVs and the structural error term
may be correlated. The correlation fades away at rate n^(-1/2) as the sample
size n increases to infinity. The PI considers tests that have correct large
sample size when the correlation is in fact zero and that are consistent when
the IVs are strong and uncorrelated with the error term. Of the various tests
considered the PI finds that Anderson-and-Rubin-type tests are the least
distorted under local correlation of the IVs and the error
term.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Second, the PI considers tests for the unknown
parameter vector in partially identified models defined by moment inequalities.
The PI ranks the tests with respect to their large sample size distortion when
the moment inequalities are locally violated at rate n^(-1/2). The PI finds that
among the tests considered those based on plug-in asymptotic critical values are
the least size distorted under local misspecification. An optimality theory is
under investigation for both examples.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Borader Impact: If
an applied researcher chooses a test based on its favorable power properties,
then her inference may suffer from severe size distortion when the model
assumptions are slightly violated. Unfortunately, model violations seem to be
pervasive in empirical applications. The new criterion instead suggests using
tests that limit the size distortion while still being consistent under standard
assumptions. The proposed methods will have broad empirical impact and has the
potential to improve inference. It is expected that the methods provided by this
research will find frequent use by applied researchers in social sciences within
academia and the public sector.