* 1346974
* CSHL Advanced Bacterial Genetics Course
* BIO,MCB
* 01/15/2014,12/31/2016
* Terri Grodzicker, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 12/31/2016
* USD 255,000.00

Intellectual Merit: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory's three-week summer course in
Advanced Bacterial Genetics prepares participants to enter directly into
research employing advanced techniques and concepts in molecular genetics.
Students gain hands-on training in the theoretical knowledge and practical
skills needed to analyze and manipulate bacterial genes and genomes both in vivo
and in vitro. Experiments provide a solid grounding in classical genetic
analysis, while supporting training in contemporary uses of transposon
mutagenesis, gene fusion and reporter technology, complementation analysis,
suppressor analysis, and gene transfer by conjugation, transduction and
transformation. Experiments also introduce students to new molecular techniques
of genetic engineering that can be applied to diverse problems in bacterial and
bacteriophage genetics, such as bacteriophage recombination functions
("recombineering"), gene cloning using site-specific recombination, and advances
in site-directed and linker-scanning mutagenesis. In addition, students receive
bioinformatics training that is necessary for modern molecular genetics
including PCR and oligonucleotide design and DNA sequence analysis. The course
is taught by instructors, who are chosen based on their expertise and
contributions to the field of bacterial genetics. The instructors invite guest
lecturers to give up-to-the-minute reports on current research on diverse
topics, while emphasizing the genetic methodologies they used to study these
topics. A hallmark of the course is the free exchange of ideas and discussion
between participants, instructors, and lecturers. Course participants are chosen
from a pool of highly qualified applicants ranging from graduate students to
senior investigators and coming from diverse research backgrounds, including
biology, chemistry, engineering, physics, and
mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The course provides a
collaborative environment for intense training in modern microbial genetics. The
course trains an ethnically, racially and scientifically diverse group,
stimulates interaction among all participants, and provides a route for
productive research mentorship and engagement.