* 1346732
* Geomicrobiology and Microbial Geochemistry Workshop 2013
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2014
* Gregory Druschel, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 07/31/2014
* USD 66,948.00

A two-day workshop reviewing the past progress, future opportunities, and
possible new approaches to advance the field of Geomicrobiology and Microbial
Geochemistry (GMG) will be held in Chicago, IL, involving 30 leading scientists
in the field. The primary product of this event will be the generation of a
report illustrating these points to serve as an informational tool for the field
at large and scientists in other fields with possible overlapping expertise and
interest. Additionally, participants will lay out at least one viable framework
to better encourage and facilitate the multidisciplinary nature of the
challenges and opportunities for basic scientific advancement in the
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Geomicrobiology and Microbial Geochemistry are two
fields of expertise intimately linked towards understanding the fundamental
nature of how microorganisms and their chemical surroundings behave in tandem.
Microorganisms shape their surroundings through metabolism and growth,
dominating many geochemical cycles (including carbon, oxygen, nitrogen, sulfur,
and iron), while the chemical setting (including minerals, water, and gases)
plays a decisive role in selecting for populations of microbes able to thrive in
specific locations. This link between microorganisms and their chemical
surroundings shape a wide variety of modern and ancient settings. There remain a
host of questions, challenges, and opportunities for advancing better
understanding of these interactions. These gaps in understanding limit the
ability to precisely define signals of life in deep time or other planets, gauge
the relative changes in microbial cycling of elements in response to climate
change, and predict how anthropogenic impacts on land, sea, and atmosphere will
affect natural systems, among other things.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Microbial
interactions with their chemical surroundings are key processes to consider in a
wide range of problems of great societal interest, including the availability of
resources, the impact of man on natural systems, the fate of contaminants in the
environment, and the origin, evolution, and evidence for life. Opportunities for
the development of new technologies and the discovery of new chemical compounds
utilized by microorganisms for specific functions have been, and will continue
to be realized by encouraging research in these fields. Additionally, there are
a number of critical tools and areas of expertise that are inherently valuable
in working with microorganisms and their surroundings. Finding new and improved
ways of bringing these multidisciplinary areas together represent another
significant opportunity for advancing science and for training a new generation
of scientists able to effectively work across these boundaries.