* 1346331
* STTR Phase I:  Enabling an Evidence-Based Digital Health Revolution through Do-It-Yourself (DIY) Evaluation
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,06/30/2015
* Kevin Durr, notsoldseparately.com LLC
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 06/30/2015
* USD 269,997.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project is designed to
address the emerging need for evaluation of mHealth applications (apps). The
goal of our project is to ?break down the ivory tower wall of academic medical
research? and design a Platform as a Service (PaaS) to allow app developers to
conduct rigorous evaluation. Through market-driven design and application of
fundamental research in behavioral and computer science, this platform will
overcome cost, technological and intellectual barriers to rigorous evaluation,
thereby accelerating translation of behavioral and medical discoveries into
commercially-viable, online applications proven effective in improving health.
The usercentered and agile designed platform will be ?programmed for
evolvability? given the rapidly changing technological and regulatory landscape,
while protecting human subjects (their safety, privacy and confidentiality). The
focus will be on assisting non-research software engineers and distributors of
digital health applications who do not have access to clinical, regulatory or
research expertise to conduct rigorous health outcomes evaluation of their new
technology.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is to accelerate the
availability of proven effective and useful digital applications that improve
human health. With over 40,000 digital health applications currently available,
most with little scientific foundation or evaluation of safety, efficacy or
efficiency payers, providers and regulatory bodies are demanding evidence. It is
estimated that a growth market of new apps will require rigorous evaluation
through the FDA and a total Digital Health market estimated to reach $10.2
billion by 2018. Through accelerated commercialization of evaluated,
commercially-viable online applications in health promotion and disease
management that are broadly available through the Web, this software product can
reduce disparities in access to high quality health resources. Economic
development, jobs and profits will be created. This product and partnership will
promote two national goals: (1) to strengthen the US innovation ecosystem (for
technology to promote health and wellness) and (2) to create a society in which
all people live long, healthy lives.