* 1346142
* SBIR Phase I:  Three-Dimensional Computational Optical Imaging Sensor
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Rafael Piestun, Double Helix Optics Inc
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2014
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project investigates the
feasibility of a compact, robust, low-cost optical imaging sensor system capable
of acquiring three-dimensional&lt;br/&gt;(3D) information from a scene with high
precision and accuracy, superior to current commercialized technologies. The
sensor provides, from a single shot, an image as well as distance information;
associating each object feature with its precise 3D location. With the advances
in sensing technology, 3D information is increasingly incorporated into real-
world applications, from manufacturing to entertainment and security. However,
the extraction of high-resolution 3D information remains challenging without the
use of active illumination, a critical requirement for compact, low power
applications. Existing passive illumination solutions are essentially based on
triangulation or defocus effects. Methods based on triangulation suffer from
occlusion and correspondence problems. On the other hand, the accuracy of depth
estimation based on defocus effects is essentially limited by the depth of field
of the imaging system. Novel light-field cameras extend the approach to multi-
apertures at the expense of an inherent loss in resolution. The proposed sensor
system overcomes these limitations and fundamentally provides improvements in
depth resolution while being fast, parallel, compact, lightweight, and scalable.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this project
stems from the possibility of obtaining real-time 3D depth information with high
depth resolution using a compact and robust sensor system. Imaging sensors are
now widespread and inexpensive, and so is computing power, already an integral
part of most cameras. Demand for 3D imaging is rapidly expanding and is the
burgeoning sector of the 40 billion dollar imaging market. The proposed system
paradigm can be integrated with existing optoelectronic hardware that can be
mass produced at low cost. Such a cost effective approach in conjunction with
the unique capabilities of the 3D computational imaging sensor could enable
disruptive applications for manufacturing, robotics, human-machine interfaces,
and emerging 3D scanners. These applications are not always possible to
implement with existing low resolution or active illumination methods. The
company is generating synergistic industrial partnerships to accelerate the
transfer of discoveries into applications.