* 1346857
* Proposal for Continued Support for the LTER Schoolyard Book Series
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2019
* Diane McKnight, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* John Schade
* 08/31/2019
* USD 532,567.00

The Long Term Ecological Research (LTER) Schoolyard Book Series was established
in 2004 to engage elementary school students and their families in learning
about the earth's ecosystems, both locally and internationally, through
narratives that reflect the dynamic research being conducted at the National
Science Foundation's Long-Term Ecological Research Sites. This project extends
the book series in several important ways. First, funding will support
publication of three new books, one from each of the Hubbard Brook Forest, Plum
Island Ecosystem, and the Jornada Experimental Range projects. Second, existing
books will be translated into different languages in order to extend their
impacts. Third, electronic versions of the books will be developed along with
additional instructional materials. By engaging a Series Editor, the project
will ensure direct engagement with the education and trade book markets.
Familiarity with content delivery trends and new publishing ideas will keep the
Series Editor informed and able to be nimble with developing future books. Taken
together, these activities will provide a solid foundation for advancement of
the educational and outreach goals of the LTER network.

The importance of the project lies primarily in its broader impacts. It will
significantly extend the impact of the LTER Schoolyard Book Series by broader
sharing of place-based knowledge about ecosystems with elementary school
students. The proposed translation of existing books into other languages
provides the opportunity to reach a wide diversity of under-served audiences
both within the US and around the world. Many local partnerships will be formed
to distribute and use these books and to provide professional development to
teachers who adopt the books. The series has great potential to help teachers
meet Common Core English Language Arts Standards while simultaneously educating
students about the natural world and about the profession of scientific
research.