* 1346431
* STTR Phase I:  Evaluating New Pharmaceutical Excipients For Dissolving Poorly Water-Soluble Drugs
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Yuan Yao, PHYTOPTION LLC
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2014
* USD 225,000.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project will demonstrate
the superiority of new biomaterial-based excipients (NBBE) to improve drug
efficacy and safety and to reduce drug cost. In the pharmaceutical industry,
modern drug discovery has brought a large number of drug candidates; however,
80-90% of them are poorly water-soluble. In addition, roughly 40% of newly
commercialized drug molecules are poorly water-soluble. Low solubility greatly
hinders drug dissolution and is detrimental to drug safety and efficacy. To
address this grand challenge, a number of excipients have been developed;
however, they can only solve part of the solubility problems. New multi-
functional, potent excipients are highly desirable for the pharmaceutical
industry. The goal of this project is evaluate the commercial potential of NBBE
as pharmaceutical excipients to stabilize and solubilize poorly water-soluble
drugs. Early work has shown extraordinary capability of NBBE in solubilizing
poorly water-soluble drugs, which can hardly be achieved by other drug
excipients. To evaluate the commercial potential of NBBE, the objectives of this
project are to: (1) prepare NBBE and NBBE-drug formulations, and evaluate their
stability and solubility, and (2) assess the safety and efficacy of NBBE-drug
formulations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial
potential of this project will be realized through significantly enhanced drug
efficacy and safety, reduced drug formulation hurdles, and simplified drug-
manufacturing process. In this project, university professors and a business
leader bring together expertise in materials science, drug formulation, and
business development. They have created a solid foundation for this project.
Leading researchers for this STTR project have close relationships with the
pharmaceutical industry, and they constantly receive important guidance from
major pharmaceutical companies. The industrial support is critical to directing
this project through defining the matrices and deliverables for successful
commercialization. NBBE are biobased and sustainable since they can be
manufactured from natural, abundant plant sources, which secure the
sustainability and economic advantages of NBBE over numerous petroleum-based
competing materials. Associated with this project, the team has been highly
successful in developing the platform technology, communicating to potential
investors, and collaborating with potential customers. Beyond pharmaceutical
applications, the products developed through this project may also hold great
potentials in the areas of food, nutrition, and personal care.