* 1346506
* STTR Phase I:  Controlling Molecular Morphology and Aggregation Mechanisms in Next-Generation Cementitious Materials
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,06/30/2015
* Rouzbeh Shahsavari, C-crete Technologies Ltd
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 06/30/2015
* USD 224,995.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer Phase I project focuses on designing an
eco-friendly, inexpensive cement hydrate with superior mechanical properties and
applicable to several structural components. Cement is the key strengthening
ingredient in concrete, the production of which accounts for ~2-3% of global
energy use, and 5-10% of worldwide CO2 emissions. There is currently no other
material on the horizon that can replace cement as the backbone material for
infrastructure. This project will create novel protocols integrating state-of-
the-art syntheses, characterizations and testing to synthesize a cement hydrate,
which is not only twice as strong as than typical products, but eliminates a
significant portion of both the energy consumption and CO2 emissions during
cement manufacturing and use. The core of this project lies in topological
functionalization of the basic building blocks of cement hydrate, Calcium-
Silicate-Hydrate, and precipitation of nanoparticles of multiple sizes. This
novel strategy provides a substantial opportunity to reduce the environmental
footprint of cement, because it enables the use of less energy-intensive raw
materials, and also leverages improved material mechanics to ?do more with
less?.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project is substantial. Creating a cement hydrate with superior mechanical
properties will not only benefit all concrete-based infrastructure by requiring
less material to be used, but will also result in more streamlined products,
which will confer several advantages across the construction sector, such as
reduced labor, reduced transportation requirements, and faster construction. The
domestic cement market size is $12 billion, indicating the potential for
significant environmental and economic impacts. More importantly, the innovative
research and development approaches of this project will have a significant
influence on reducing the energy consumption and environmental footprint
associated with cement manufacturing. The latter currently stand among the key
technical challenges facing cement industry. Rooted in the inherent molecular
features of materials, this transformative project will have a broad impact in
the design of eco-friendly cementitious materials, and will also impact other
fields such as ceramics and colloidal systems. As such, the overall project will
create the potential for exploring an entirely new approach for manufacturing
cement-based materials and other particulate systems.