* 1346457
* STTR Phase I:  Rapid and Efficient Scene Modeling for Law Enforcement and Disaster Response
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,06/30/2015
* Sanjiv Singh, Near Earth Autonomy, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2015
* USD 254,800.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer Research (STTR) Phase I project will
produce technology capable of constructing three-dimensional (3D) models of
scenes accurately, rapidly, and at low cost. The technology leverages recent
developments in computer vision and enhances them for operation under varying
ambient conditions while increasing speed of model construction, thus enabling
practical applications. Key system design requirements identified include: 1)
ability to produce complete and accurate high fidelity models quickly; 2)
robustness to varying ambient conditions; 3) ease of use by a non-specialist
without extensive training; and 4) low cost. The proposed research objectives
include: improvements to state-of-the-art algorithms for robust and efficient 3D
modeling from images; the development of an approach for dense 3D reconstruction
using different sensor modalities; the development of a sensor view point
planning algorithm; the creation of techniques for the identification of missing
model data; and the development of a system for merging data from different
sources into a coherent 3D model of the environment. The work plan includes a
thorough assessment of the system?s ability to reconstruct a scene accurately
and completely, as well as the benefit of reconstructing scenes using sensors
deployed by low-cost vehicles. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project will be the widespread use of 3D
modeling for scene documentation. Systems currently available for this
application are expensive, slow, bulky, and their use requires special training.
The technology resulting from this work will enable the production and
commercialization of systems that are faster, more affordable, and easier to use
by non-experts, thereby simplifying their adoption by a larger number of law
enforcers, prosecutors, insurers, and other government agencies. In the
transportation domain, for example, a speedy scene reconstruction is essential
to restore the flow of traffic when accidents happen. On busy highways, traffic
backup can grow at a rate of up to a mile per minute of delay in clearing the
accident site. This currently limits the complete documentation of accidents to
only those cases where fatalities occur. The technology proposed will allow the
documentation of larger number of incidents. Additionally, a great reduction in
the time and complexity involved in determining the cause of accidents is
expected. The potential long-term benefits of this reduction include a more
rapid evolution of regulation and policy to deal with chronic causes of traffic
accidents, which will expedite the implementation of road safety mechanisms.