* 1346580
* Collaborative Research: Measurement and Modeling of Air Entrainment and Ash Distribution in Weak Volcanic Plumes
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2018
* Stephen Solovitz, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 04/30/2018
* USD 179,351.00

The 2010 eruption of Eyjafjallaj√∂kull volcano in Iceland resulted in weeks of
air traffic disruption and more than a billion dollars of economic losses. The
disruption was exacerbated by limitations in the accuracy of models used to
forecast the size, location, and ash concentration of the cloud. The pre-2010
airline industry policy was to avoid any volcanic ash during flight, and
existing models predicted that the plume covered much of Europe. This has
provided a new challenge to forecasters, as the rate that ash is fed into the
cloud cannot be accurately estimated in complex flow situations. This rate is
usually determined from the height of the plume above the volcano, but it can
vary significantly due to many factors, including eruptive conditions,
atmospheric properties, and local wind speeds. Hence, there is a vital need to
develop improved models for realistic
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Traditional plume models assume flow in a calm
atmosphere, but plumes are significantly modified by perpendicular cross flows
with varying scales of turbulence. While cross flow has been considered in some
models, the accuracy is still quite crude. This study will develop an improved
understanding of volcanic plumes in a stratified cross flow, which will be used
to aid in forecasting the dispersal of hazardous ash clouds. Advanced
experimental techniques will be used to measure the flow in a laboratory scale
plume. These results will be incorporated directly into a state-of-the-art
analytical model, which will more accurately quantify the ash density
distribution for volcanic scales. In addition, this research will be presented
to the broad public audience through small-scale, hands-on laboratory
demonstrations at the Oregon Museum of Science and Industry (OMSI).