* 1346312
* STTR Phase I:  Consolidated biosynthesis of methyl ethyl ketone from cellulosic biomass
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Xin Ge, Gate Fuels Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2014
* USD 225,000.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project proposes to
develop a new low-cost platform for the production of methyl ethyl ketone
directly from pretreated cellulosic biomass in a single step using a novel
recombinant cellulolytic Bacillus subtilis strain. Methyl ethyl ketone (MEK),
also referred to as 2-butanone, is the second most important commercial ketone
after acetone. MEK is currently only produced by the oxidation of 2-butanol.
However, this industrial synthesis process uses starting materials derived from
petrochemicals and is generally expensive as well as not environmentally
friendly. There is an urgent need to develop a novel cost-effective and
environmentally friendly method to produce MEK other than through 2-butanol. The
cellulosic biomass is the most abundant natural renewable resource and has great
potential for the production of valuable biocommodities for both short- and
long-term sustainability. However, the process for converting non-food
lignocellulosic material into MEK is not yet economically feasible due to the
high cost of the cellulase involved in cellulose hydrolysis and the use of
fastidious culture media. Using synthetic pathway and metabolic engineering,
this project will convert noncellulose-utilizing B. subtilis into an efficient
cellulose utilizer to produce MEK with high yield and titer, suitable for
industrial fermentation.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project, if successful, will be
a low-cost platform for producing MEK from nonfood biomass in a process called
consolidated bioprocessing. MEK may then be used as a solvent for paint, and
serve as an intermediate in the production of other chemicals. Therefore, MEK
could easily find a market in the paint industry and in plastics manufacturing.
More importantly, MEK could be converted by subsequent hydrogenation into octane
isomers that can be used to produce high-grade aviation fuel. Currently, MEK is
synthesized from petroleum-derived chemicals via a method involving greenhouse
gas emissions. So far, few efforts have been made to produce bio-based MEK due
to low process economics. The proposed recombinant cellulolytic B. subtilis
would have advantages over developing other microorganisms. In addition, the
novel green technology will satisfy operational cost considerations,
environmental concerns, and health and safety regulations. Compared to
traditional mechanism, this novel route will be more cost-effective and
environmentally friendly. If successfully commercialized after the completion of
the Phase II project, this bio-based MEK production technology will have a
significant competitive advantage over traditional methods because it is more
commercially attractive and supports sustainable societal development.