* 1346336
* STTR Phase I:  An ultrasonic device for rapid tomographic rodent tissue and vasculature imaging
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,06/30/2015
* Ryan Gessner, SonoVol, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 06/30/2015
* USD 250,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will build a
state of the art imaging tool for rodent disease quantification using
ultrasound. Hundreds of millions of dollars in the US are spent annually on
preclinical drug efficacy studies, as all candidate cancer therapeutics must be
screened in rodents prior to any clinical trials. Academic and industry drug
researchers make use of noninvasive imaging modalities to assess the in vivo
longitudinal effects of their drugs. In vivo imaging studies enable researchers
to assess tumor presence, functional status, and response to therapy without the
need to sacrifice multiple animals at each assessment time point. Despite the
widespread need for preclinical imaging, most research labs are not equipped
with the imaging tools necessary to perform these studies. The project will
implement ultrasound imaging, which beyond simple anatomical structural
information, has recently demonstrated outstanding imaging quality for vascular
architecture and blood perfusion assessment, and has several advantages over MR
and CT, the other modalities used to acquire anatomical images: low cost,
portability, and real-time imaging ability. The project proposes to build a high
throughput, user-friendly, benchtop ultrasound-based tomographic rodent imaging
device.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is based around the
premise that cheaper and faster imaging studies will result in faster drug
development in both academia and industry, and ultimately less expensive drugs
for the consumer. Currently, due to high imaging system costs, academic research
institutions offer imaging core facilities (ICFs) with a shared-space model. For
industry researchers, contract research organizations (CROs) perform the same
function. ICFs and CROs charge a premium for their services. An inexpensive and
user-friendly preclinical technology for anatomical and vasculature quantitation
would dramatically shift this paradigm. Moreover, it would help open up a
minimally (<10%) penetrated preclinical imaging market (currently, under-
addressed at approximately $300M in sales). Though there are many good
ultrasound systems on the market, the preclinical research community cannot
leverage the assets of ultrasound (inexpensive, portable, real time) for many
applications because no manufacturer provides a whole-body system..