* 1346576
* RCN-UBE Incubator: Development of a Build-a-Genome Network to Teach Synthetic Biology at Diverse Undergraduate Institutions
* BIO,DBI
* 02/01/2014,01/31/2016
* Eric Cooper, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* christopher meyer
* 01/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

The Build-a-Genome course at Johns Hopkins University is an example of an
approach to infuse authentic, interdisciplinary research experiences into the
curriculum. The PI team members of this RCN-UBE network all have experience with
the Build-a-Genome course and now plan to launch an undergraduate Build-a-Genome
course at their own institutions and help other faculty to do the same by
joining this new network. Build-a-Genome is an intensive laboratory course in
which undergraduates participate in the Synthetic Yeast Project, a large-scale
effort to construct the world's first synthetic eukaryotic genome. Along the
way, students gain a comprehensive introduction to synthetic biology, learn
basic molecular biology techniques and make important contributions to a
cutting-edge research project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This
RCN-UBE network plans to organize a national workshop at Loyola University in
Maryland to introduce participants to the Build-a-Genome course, teach gene
synthesis methods, and bring together individuals to develop plans for
implementing similar courses at their home institutions. The network leaders
will then host a series of smaller regional Build-a-Genome/gene synthesis
workshops at North Carolina A&amp;T State University and Hartwick College,
targeting faculty from regional colleges to promote synthetic biology, to make
connections among local institutions, and to disseminate materials developed at
the national workshop.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The proposed
network includes faculty from a range of institutional types (large research
university, comprehensive university, and liberal arts college) and includes an
HBCU and will expand to include a similar diversity of institutions. Build-a-
Genome provides a truly unique, hands-on learning experience for undergraduates.
Students take ownership of their projects, make important contributions to an
ongoing research effort,and learn gene synthesis and molecular biology
techniques while being introduced to the interdisciplinary field of synthetic
biology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded jointly by the Directorate
for Biological Sciences and the Directorate of Education and Human Resources,
Division of Undergraduate Education in support of efforts to address the
challenges posed in Vision and Change in Undergraduate Education: A Call to
Action http://visionandchange.org/finalreport/