* 1346363
* STTR Phase I:  Energy Harvesting Systems with Ultra High Energy and Power Densities from Ocean Waves and Currents for Green Energy Generation
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Qiming Zhang, Nascent Devices LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2014
* USD 224,963.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer Phase I project proposes to develop an
energy harvesting system from ocean waves and currents utilizing the high energy
density and high strain density achieved by recent advances in the development
of ionic nano-composites. With the growing need for clean and renewable energy,
this topic is of interest to the energy industry and general public. The massive
ocean surface of the world holds enormous potential for green energy. However,
the low energy density and power density of all the current energy harvesting
approaches impose severe limitations on utilizing this promising technology for
practical applications. One fundamental issue in current energy harvesting
approaches based on solid-state energy harvesting materials is the low electric
energy density of these materials, and of devices based on them. This project
will address these challenges by utilizing the high energy and power density of
polymer nano-composites. The proposed approach has the potential to achieve more
than two orders of magnitude improvement in the energy density and power density
as compared with the current energy harvesting approaches based on the use of
solid state electroactive materials in ocean waves.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will be the availability
of abundant, low-cost and environmental friendly energy, as the vast ocean
surface can provide an uninterrupted supply of energy. This project, if
successful, will have implications for grid-scale electricity production. The
technology developed can also be deployed to power mobile devices at sea. The
technology could also be adapted to other energy harvesting approaches based on
mechanical motion; for example as a way to power handheld electronics or
wireless sensors.