* 1346482
* STTR Phase I:  Systems approaches to combinatorial therapies targeting cancer metabolism
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Giovanni Paternostro, Salgomed Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2014
* USD 225,000.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project proposes to
develop an integrated computational and experimental platform based on the
hypothesis that the efficacy of anticancer drugs could be greatly improved when
used in combination with other drugs. The proposed platform will implement in
vitro search algorithms for combinations of drugs acting on cancer metabolism.
Combination drug therapy is commonly used to enhance efficacy and overcome drug
resistance in cancer, but at present the choice of drugs is based on empirical
clinical experience alone. Testing multi-drug therapies in a systematic way is
hampered by the large number of possible choices for drugs and doses. Therefore,
an innovative approach for discovering effective drug combinations is needed.
The proposed project is an innovative solution based on a highly
interdisciplinary approach that combines drug discovery, systems biology, and
advanced mathematical and algorithmic methods.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project, if successful, will be
to produce novel and effective therapeutic strategies for the treatment of
cancer. Despite the fact that until recently research investment was increasing
steadily, the number of drugs approved annually by the FDA remains
disappointingly low. Further, currently, there are no effective systematic
methods for the discovery and optimization of combinatorial therapies. The plan
is to use drugs that are either on the market or in the pipeline. The commercial
strategy of the company is to discover specific fixed-dose combinations for
cancer therapeutics as a service for pharmaceutical companies, or to generate
intellectual property for licensing. In the long term, the company plans to
provide a service for physicians by creating personalized drug combinations
based on patient data.