* 1346360
* Climatic and Tectonic Insights from Low-Temperature Thermochronometry Across the Himalayan Rain Shadow, Everest Region, Nepal and Tibet
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2019
* Kip Hodges, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 03/31/2019
* USD 245,808.00

The physiographic transition from the Gangetic Plains to the Tibetan Plateau
corresponds in space to one of our planet's most profound climate transitions.
Several popular geodynamic models for the late Cenozoic evolution of the
Himalaya feature a strong feedback relationship between precipitation, erosional
rock exhumation, and deformation. If valid, these models predict that the
extreme precipitation gradient across the Himalaya should be accompanied by
variations in denudation rate and deformational patterns. Previous studies along
the southern Himalayan flank conducted to verify these predictions have had
mixed results, partly because they were done along the valleys of major rivers
that cut across the Himalaya. These 'Transhimalayan' river valleys serve as
pathways for northern penetration of monsoon storms, such that erosion rates on
either side of the range crest may not truly reflect potential effects of the
rain shadow. In addition, extreme incision of the Transhimalayan rivers during
uplift of the Himalaya may focus exhumation and obscure broader patterns related
to climate and regional tectonics. We endeavor to learn more about exhumation
patterns across the rain shadow by applying the (Uranium-Thorium)/Helium
thermochronometer to rocks collected along a transect that does not follow a
Transhimalayan river. Nearly three decades of research in in the Everest region
of central Nepal and southern Tibet by several researcher groups has resulted in
an unusually good understanding of the basic structural geology of the region,
permitting interpretation of the data obtained in appropriate structural
context. Our goal is a comprehensive dataset suitable for thermal-kinematic
modeling aimed at providing an improved understanding of the coupled influence
of precipitation and dynamics of Himalayan orogenic wedge. We are also taking
advantage of a portion of the data produced to explore the timing and slip
history of the Lhotse and Qomolangma detachments in the Rongbuk Valley north of
Mount Everest. These are two of the best studied of all strands of the South
Tibetan detachment system, a major tectonic feature in the Himalaya. While the
South Tibetan detachment system is known to have been active throughout the
Himalaya in Early to Middle Miocene time, the actual age of youngest movement is
poorly constrained in most areas, including the Rongbuk Valley. We are providing
new constraints on the low-temperature thermal structure of the footwalls of the
two detachments here through (Uranium-Thorium)/Helium and fission track work on
accessory minerals. Exposures of the detachments in the Rongbuk Valley are
unusual: shallow fault dip angles and high relief conspire to provide sampling
opportunities over as distance of greater than 35 kilometers in the direction of
transport in the immediate footwall of the South Tibetan detachment system.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While much research focuses on the global impacts of
climate variations in space and time, some of the greatest frontiers for
research are at smaller, regional scales. On those scales, we are addressing
questions about how climate variations relate to other natural earth system
processes. Of particular interest for this study is how mountain ranges affect
local climate and, conversely, how local climate can influence the erosional
history of a mountain range. The high mountain ranges of the Himalaya retard the
northward track of the South Asian monsoon system, creating two very different
landscapes: the heavily forested slopes of the southern Himalayan flank, which
receive some of the highest recorded annual rainfall totals on earth, and the
high deserts of the southern Tibetan Plateau. Our work is aimed at understanding
how far back in time this climatic pattern may have extended and how it might
cause variations in erosion rate north and south of the Himalayan crest. The
lessons learned here will inform perceptions of the role of regional climate
variation in the erosional process both in the United States and abroad. The
project is supporting a talented female Ph.D. candidate, thereby contributing to
on-going efforts to reduce the gender disparity between male and female doctoral
level scientists, a problem that is particularly acute in the physical sciences.
In addition, special multimedia displays are being created for public museum
exhibitions exploring the science of climate variations in mountainous
landscapes.