* 1346335
* STTR Phase I:  High efficiency low noise detectors for high operating temperature IR cameras
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Chung Hong Hung, Nanopixel Technologies LLC
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 12/31/2014
* USD 225,000.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project proposes a
transformative technology to overcome state of the art mid-wavelength infrared
(MWIR) detector technology by developing a novel nanostructured detector
architecture sensitive to infrared photon absorption. Traditional planar MWIR
photodetectors are fundamentally limited by both the electrical junction area
being equivalent with the optical collection area and the dark current being
limited by generation recombination current. The requisite large collection
thickness of the absorbing material to maximize quantum efficiency results in a
deleterious effect for dark current density reducing signal to noise ratio. The
proposed technology is based on a 3D plasmonic antenna of self-aligned III-V
nanopillars. The proposed technology is expected to result in a 1 - 2 order
improvement in detectivity in the 3 - 5 micron wavelength range compared to
state of the art planar detectors. The proposed technology is expected to
substantially reduce the size, weight and power consumption requirements of IR
cameras.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project offers several routes to
societal benefit by transitioning academic research into technology advancement
and subsequent product development. This proposal will elucidate the fundamental
science of 3D plasmonic antennas and nanostructures in the MWIR which will be
disseminated to the research community. The company will also pursue the
development of a MWIR camera product in partnership with larger industry
collaborators which will bring employment opportunities to the local community.
The successful implementation of the proposed technology will result in a MWIR
camera product with a small form factor at a lower price point. The resulting
camera product would be a disruptive technology in both the surveillance and
home automation markets.