* 1346317
* STTR Phase I:  Modulating Antenna Size to Increase Canopy Photosynthesis and Crop Yield Potential
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,06/30/2015
* Anastasios Melis, Benson Hill Biosystems, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2015
* USD 224,170.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project proposes to
develop novel biotech plant lines with improved rates of photosynthesis in a
canopy setting. The improved rates of photosynthesis will enable increases in
intrinsic crop yield. Photosynthesis has evolved on an individual, rather than a
population basis, resulting in reduced photosynthetic efficiency on a population
basis in an agricultural setting. By optimizing plant physiology for improved
light capture on a population basis in an agricultural setting, this project
will improve photosynthetic carbon fixation, resulting in increased crop yields
on an area basis. The research will utilize synthetic biology and metabolic
engineering to identify traits that lead to significant increases in plant
growth and biomass accumulation and will identify the physiological basis for
these increases. In particular, this work will elucidate the molecular
characteristics of light harvesting antennae that are optimized for efficient
light capture leading to plant growth and biomass accumulation without wasteful
dissipation of energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial
potential of this project, if successful, will be the development of novel
traits that will lead to improved yields across a wide range of crop plants. The
proposed approach is novel, and will lead to an improved understanding of
photosynthesis, and of the factors that limit photosynthetic efficiency in an
agricultural setting. By developing technologies that will enable higher crop
yields, this project will contribute to increased food availability and food
security, and will provide an immense commercial opportunity to the agricultural
sector through the development of novel crop varieties with improved agronomic
traits. These new varieties will provide commercial benefit to seed companies
and to growers alike. While traditional approaches to yield improvement in the
agricultural biotechnology sector have focused on yield protection, this project
will identify traits that increase yield potential. The technologies developed
as a result of this project will augment existing agricultural biotechnology
traits, providing added commercial benefit. Translating the results of this
Phase I project to crop plants will result in improved crop yields and will
provide important benefits to seed companies, farmers, trait developers, and to
society as a whole through improved food availability.