* 1346096
* SBIR Phase I:  A Novel CMOS Device Architecture and Tools for beyond 14 nm Transistors
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,06/30/2014
* leo mathew, applied novel devices
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 06/30/2014
* USD 149,991.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to
demonstrate a innovative device architecture (UT-FET: Ultra Thin Field Effect
Transistor) for scaling of FinFET devices beyond the 14nm node. The outcome of
this project will be a CMOS device that is scalable and reduce off-state leakage
as well as minimize threshold voltage variation. This project will develop a
process technology that is compatible with high volume manufacturing using
industrial toolsets. The main objective for the phase 1 of the proposed SBIR
project is to demonstrate prototype UT-FET devices using manufacturing-capable
tools and processes. The UT-FET device architecture involves a novel means of
isolation of the device that can reduce cost, reduce leakage and increase speed
of electronics systems. In this phase 1 of the SBIR project, production capable
tools and processes will be used to demonstrate scalability of the technology
for volume manufacturing. Successful completion of this technology demonstration
can allow insertion of this technology into the growing markets for low power
mobile communications electronics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project will be address and overcome the
current limits to scaling in low power electronic devices. Low power electronics
devices use CMOS technologies and the scaling of these devices have been the
driving force behind the communication revolution over the last two decades.
Further scaling of these devices will enable faster communication, longer
battery life and more energy efficient operation of electronics systems.
Additionally in the process of developing and demonstrating this technology new
scientific and technological understanding of using thin crystalline devices and
the tools to manufacture them in high volume will enable other applications in
energy, RF signal processing and power management.