* 1346406
* Workshop: Advanced Biomanufacturing to be held in Washington D.C. on July 25-26, 2013
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2014
* David Kaplan, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Athanassios Sambanis
* 07/31/2014
* USD 49,599.00

Program ID 1346406 PI: Kaplan

Overview: A Workshop on biomanufacturing will identify the needs and barriers in
the field of biomanufacturing, including research, scale up and implementation,
further technological innovation and regulatory and cost issues. The Workshop
will bring together leaders in the field, including scholars, government
officials, industry representatives to discuss and identify critical issues and
challenges related to biomanufacturing. To address these goals, the workshop
will be run in an interactive and iterative approach where session leaders will
be asked to prepare pre-workshop outlines of major topics and then address these
to the attendees. The vision for this effort is to see biomanufacturing as an
emerging discipline in academic and industrial communities, as well as a
technological opportunity to spur research and industry growth. To navigate to
this vision, we must assess where the state-of-the-art is currently located for
the field, what the paths are to move forward to reach the vision, and to
identify the major barriers along this path. These needs will encompass the
science and engineering involved, the regulatory and infrastructure needs and
the systems infrastructure and integration required. The outcome from the
workshop will be a report that provides a detailed road map of where the current
state-of-the art is in terms of biomanufacturing, what the major barriers are to
move the field ahead, and identifies some of the major targets and
opportunities. The potential impact on US infrastructure will be described and a
network in the community will be established.

Intellectual Merit: The intellectual merit will mainly be in coalescing insight
into the field of biomanufacturing in terms of the current scientific state of
the art, the technological implications and the future vision for the field.
This insight will be a foundation upon which to propel the field ahead in the
coming years towards direct impact for the US economy.

Broader Impacts: The broader impact of the Workshop will be the identification
of critical challenges for the scientific and technological communities for this
emerging field, impact on the broader educational activities for
interdisciplinary needs for students at all levels, guidance for the NSF in
terms of future directions of impact, insight for government officials at all
levels of future needs for growth in the US to support jobs, manufacturing and
future technological leadership, and broad and new insight into the unique
intersections between nature and engineering that remain to be tapped and
exploited for a sustainable planet. Publication of outcomes and related
materials will inform the general community and related venues.