* 1346146
* SBIR Phase I:  Real-Time, On-Line, Continuous Monitoring of Carbohydrate Mixtures
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,06/30/2014
* Jonathan Vickers, OptiEnz Sensors
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2014
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes to
develop a versatile, sensitive, and inexpensive carbohydrate monitoring system
based on optoelectronics and biosensor technologies. The platform allows
continuous measurement of simple carbohydrates using small, disposable fiber-
optic biosensors with accuracy comparable to conventional instrumentation. This
technology offers the ability to both detect carbohydrates over a large linear
range and do it in a simple, automated, and online fashion. Many different
bioprocesses, including fermentations to produce biofuels, amino acids, and
pharmaceuticals, are based on microbial conversions of sugars to high-value
products. Real-time monitoring of carbohydrate concentration during the biomass
conversion would provide a great advantage in process control, leading to
increased yields at decreased production costs and a lower environmental impact.
No current technology is available for continuous, quantitative monitoring of
specific sugars, and the sensor system to be developed will address this need.
The project is designed around four specific aims that will result in the
development of sensors for glucose and xylose, a method for monitoring both
sugar concentrations simultaneously, and comparison of methods to sterilize
these sensors. The outcome will be demonstration of a sensor for continuously
monitoring glucose and xylose in bioprocesses.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project, if successful, is the
development of carbohydrate sensors to enable bioprocess monitoring, control,
and optimization. Each of those characteristics can increase the efficiency of a
bioprocess. For example, monitoring can detect when a batch process is not
performing to specification, and control and optimization allow efficient
operation. Current off-line methods to measure sugar concentrations lead to poor
process control, inefficient use of capital equipment, and the wasting of
expensive chemicals and energy due to over-compensation. For example, more
effective monitoring of carbohydrates for a corn stover biomass processing plant
could result in a conservative estimated annual savings of $690,000/year.
Projections of the "bio-based economy" are for an increasing volume of
chemicals, beyond pharmaceuticals, to be produced biologically from different
biomass feedstocks. Operation of those bioprocesses would be more
environmentally and economically sustainable with the continuous, on-line
monitoring provided by this sensor.