* 1346473
* STTR Phase I:  Production of Bio-adhesive from Animal Waste
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,06/30/2015
* Elham Fini, Bio-Adhesive Alliance Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 06/30/2015
* USD 225,000.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer Phase I project will result in the
development of a scalable prototype technology to transform swine manure into a
sustainable alternative for petroleum-based construction adhesives.
Thermochemical liquefaction processing of swine manure will be used to produce
bio-oil which will be chemically modified to produce adhesives. Treatment of
swine manure is a worldwide issue; current practices have high cost, both
environmentally and economically. The proposed technology addresses these
problems by converting swine manure into bio-adhesives which are then used as
liquid asphalt for construction applications. The price of liquid asphalt has
increased dramatically (by 150% over the past nine years), as refineries are
decreasing asphalt production by converting their asphalt binder into synthetic
fuel and selling it at a much higher price. The specific objective of this
project is to determine the commercial feasibility and to scale up bio-adhesive
technology via the design and construction of a pilot plant. The pilot plant
will be further used to determine optimum heating and cooling rates to develop
bio-adhesives with specified rheological characteristics by relating the
molecular structure of the bio-adhesive to its mechanical properties, on one
hand, and to the bio-adhesive processing parameters from the other side.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is
to create a novel and transformative approach to develop sustainable
construction adhesives, while also sequestering carbon from manure and providing
a sustainable solution to manure management. Currently, more than 6 billion
gallons of swine manure are produced annually in the U.S., and all of this waste
must be treated. More than 90% of swine manure is stored in lagoons, with the
remainder sold to farmers as fertilizer - with added costs to the hog farmers to
store and deliver it. The proposed process will also create a source of revenue
for farmers and lead to new jobs related to production of bio-adhesives and
their applications. Finally, this technology can lead to a reduction of the U.S.
dependence on foreign petroleum resources.