* 1346583
* RCN-UBE: Northwest PULSE-A Community of Practice for Departmental Transformation Using Vision and Change
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2021
* Joann Otto, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Sophie George
* 06/30/2021
* USD 587,215.00

An award has been made to Washington State University to fund an RCN-UBE network
to promote the mission of the Partnership for Undergraduate Life Science
Education (PULSE). PULSE seeks to stimulate life science departments to
undertake the type of transformative changes recommended by Vision and Change in
Undergraduate Education: A Call to Action (AAAS, 2011). Fellows from two-year
colleges, liberal arts colleges, comprehensive universities and research
universities were selected as PULSE Leadership Fellows, and they worked during
the 2012-13 year to develop approaches to help departments implement
recommendations made in the Vision and Change report. Such improvements in how
biology is taught at all types of undergraduate institutions are expected to
lead to increases in: 1) student learning of core concepts in the life sciences,
2) retention rates for students in the life sciences, and 3) preparation for all
students to be more curious and scientifically literate citizens.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although individual faculty members have been very active
in instituting reforms in their classrooms, departmental and institutional
transformation has been more difficult. This proposal will address this
challenge by creating a network of institutions in geographical proximity so
they can support and advise one another as each moves to implement departmental
change. Tools and resources have been developed by the PULSE Leadership Fellows
that will be field-tested by the different types of participating institutions
in the Northwest. For example, rubrics for departmental self-assessment and
visits by trained Ambassadors will be provided to assist departments in adopting
reforms in how life science courses are taught. During each year of this award,
fifteen participating institutions from across the spectrum of Institutions of
Higher Education will identify teams of faculty, administrators, and students to
participate in on-line training sessions, in-person workshops, and follow up
activities, including a regional symposium for biology instructors. The NW PULSE
efforts target change at the department level and a key aspect is training in a
systems-thinking approach. This enables institutional teams to recognize their
department as a system whose behavior they can influence and helps them to
understand and identify leverage points, thus empowering them to act as change
agents at their home institutions. It is hoped that this Community of Practice
will increase awareness of the recommendations made in the Vision and Change
report, accelerate the pace of adopting those recommendations by different
departments, and lead to a better understanding of how change happens on diverse
campuses. Results from the network's activities will be shared with the life
sciences community, primarily via the www.pulsecommunity.org website and by
continued partnerships with other groups advocating for change in life science
education in the Northwest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded jointly
by the Directorate for Biological Sciences and the Directorate of Education and
Human Resources, Division of Undergraduate Education in support of efforts to
address the challenges posed in Vision and Change in Undergraduate Education: A
Call to Action http://visionandchange.org/finalreport/