* 1346572
* ChemMatCARS: A synchrotron X-ray national facility for chemistry and materials research at the Advanced Photon Source
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2019
* Matthew Tirrell, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 03/31/2019
* USD 6,500,000.00

The Division of Chemistry and the Division of Materials Research with support
from the MPS Office of Multidisciplinary Activities provides continuing support
to ChemMatCARS, a national user facility for frontier research in chemistry and
materials science employing synchrotron X-rays at the Advanced Photon Source,
Argonne National Laboratory. Various stations at ChemMatCARS serve a broad
national and international community of scientists. Research activities address
vital societal issues, including the development of new energy sources such as
solar-to-hydrogen production, biomolecular materials inspired by biological
processes, environmental remediation processes, and new materials and catalysts
important for a wide range of industries. The facility serves as a training
ground for researchers at all levels and carries out numerous activities to
develop and diversify the future STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This user
facility provides a unique high brilliance X-ray resource for the study of
advanced small-molecule crystallography, liquid surface and interface
scattering, and ultra-small to wide-angle scattering from bulk materials.
Advanced instrumentation at ChemMatCARS enables forefront research of ordered
and disordered solids, liquids and interfaces on the atomic, molecular and
mesoscopic length scales over a range of time scales from nanoseconds to
minutes. Users of ChemMatCARS take advantage of its unique capabilities to
address a wide variety of scientific problems. Research topics include studies
of interfacial chemistry important for environmental and life processes,
biomolecular materials, metal-organic frameworks for gas adsorption and
separation, inorganic materials for catalytic, electronic and magnetic
applications, photo-responsive materials for switches, sensors, and energy
production, directed assembly for tunable mesoscale structures, and new
processes and materials for energy production and storage.