* 1346191
* SBIR Phase I:  Cloud computing for real-time processing of photon light source data
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,06/30/2014
* Billy Poon, Billow, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 06/30/2014
* USD 150,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project proposes to use commercial cloud computing resources
for real-time processing of X-ray computed tomography data collected at a photon
light source facility. The amount of data being collected at photon light
sources is poised to increase dramatically due to improvements in detectors for
more rapid data collection and advancements in the underlying accelerator
technology for greater production of photons. As a result, storing and
processing data sets on a scientist's personal workstation or small computing
cluster will become impractical as data set sizes continue to grow much faster
than Moore's law. The proposed solution is to develop a persistent, managed
computing cluster in the cloud that can grow to meet the computational and
storage needs of scientists without them having to deal with managing physical
hardware. X-ray computed tomography is used as a test application where an
automated workflow can be developed that will store and analyze the collected
tomography data during the experiment with minimal user intervention.

The broader/commercial impact of a persistent, managed computing resource in the
cloud is providing scientists an affordable tool that can grow to meet their
computational and storage needs without the hassle of managing physical
hardware. Storing and analyzing data are routine tasks that are fundamental to
scientific research. As technology improves data collection rates and data
fidelity, scientists are dealing with larger and larger data sets. Some examples
of this growth include genomics, where the cost to sequence a genome has dropped
precipitously, astronomy, where powerful telescopes can quickly capture high
resolution images, and high energy physics, where data sets need to be reduced
in real-time so that their sizes are more manageable. This dramatic increase is
contributing to the "Big Data" problem that scientists are facing as their
traditional data processing tools are no longer sufficient to tackle these data
sets. By taking advantage of the economies of scale achieved by cloud service
providers, Billow can provide reliable storage and high availability computing
at a lower cost. This approach allows scientists to focus on the science by
giving them the necessary tools to analyze their data and develop new data
analysis algorithms.