* 1346472
* STTR Phase I:  Carbon Nanotube Enabled High-Temperature Wireless Sensor System
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Michael Kranz, EngeniusMicro LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2014
* USD 224,999.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer Research (STTR) Phase I project will
develop innovative sensors based on vertically aligned carbon nanotube (CNT)
diode structures to increase the range and performance of wireless
microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) sensors in high-temperature environments.
Currently, wireless sensors are limited by the need to protect the electronics
from the sensor environment. This research will develop sensor architectures
that utilize CNT structures with non-linear electrical behavior to improve
sensor performance under harsh conditions. This effort will develop
nanostructured materials that survive extended lifetimes in high-temperature
environments, and affordable fabrication approaches that integrate these
structures into high-temperature MEMS. The Phase 1 effort will investigate high-
risk concepts including the performance limits of high-temperature CNT-based
electronics in wireless sensing and the microfabrication techniques to integrate
these structures onto a sensor device. A majority of the work proposed focuses
on fabrication validation and experimental verification, where the remainder
will include modeling and design of the CNT-based sensors. If successful, this
research will enable new in-situ health monitoring capabilities at high-
temperature. This technology is highly scalable and will provide these benefits
at low capital cost and low ongoing cost. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial benefit of this project lies in the extension of extension of
wireless MEMS sensor technology to higher temperature operation and the cost
savings and energy savings that can be gained through the resulting increase in
industrial process efficiency. Because the target market is high-temperature
industrial process and system monitoring, such as in the energy, oil and gas,
and turbomachinery industries, these sensors would permit savings in terms of
production time, reduced downtime, and the energy required to maintain process
and equipment temperature. Within certain situations, this sensor technology
would enable wireless point measurements that are currently not feasible or
affordable. Relevant and affordable monitoring solutions for low- to medium-cost
industrial equipment will be beneficial to rural facilities and small-scale
manufacturers who tend to use older technology, maintain small capital budgets,
and operate under tight cash-flow restrictions. The broader impacts of this
technology to science and education include advancing existing micro- and nano-
sensor technology and funding for continued research and education in RF
sensors, electronic packaging, and nanostructured materials.