* 1346055
* SBIR Phase I:  Radiation Hardened Integrated Circuits for CT Scanners with Reduced Radiation Exposure
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,06/30/2014
* Emily Donnelly, APOGEE SEMICONDUCTOR, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 06/30/2014
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project targets
development of a radiation-hard IC design technology at the transistor level.
This will enable the design and production of radiation-hard devices using
standard CMOS processing, with an order of magnitude improvement in radiation
tolerance compared to standard transistor designs. The proposed approach uses
innovations in IC transistor design and layout methods which, while maintaining
the performance of standard CMOS integrated circuits, greatly increase their
radiation tolerance. The ability to use existing advanced CMOS IC designs and
processes will enable better performance from the electronics and extend
electronics life in high-radiation applications. An early application of this
technology will be the signal processing electronics used in CT scanners, with
an objective of reducing radiation exposure experienced by patients and medical
personnel during CT scans. This project will enable production of sensor signal
processors that could be positioned as close to the X-ray detectors as desired,
directly in the X-ray beam path, and ultimately integrated with detectors. The
objective of this Phase I project is to provide proof-of-concept of methods to
greatly improve the radiation tolerance of integrated circuits in designed in
standard CMOS, for use in CT-scanner electronics and other high-radiation
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of
this project will be to provide CT-scan equipment manufacturers the capability
of building CT-scanners offering significantly reduced exposure by enabling the
placement of detector electronics in direct proximity to X-ray detector rows.
The key to the ability to address the market for CT scan equipment electronics
with this improved radiation exposure technique is the ability to design
radiation-hard ICs in standard semiconductor processes. This project targets the
improvement of IC radiation hardness by the use of design techniques within
existing commercial processes, rather than by developing costly new processes.
Dose reductions in medical and dental X-rays, body scanners used for national
security, and related systems would reduce societal health risks and the
incidence of cancer. The project will enhance scientific and technological
understanding of radiation effects on CMOS integrated circuits, as well as
providing methods to improve their radiation tolerance. Radiation-hard
electronics could be more easily developed for a wide range of applications
where reliability is essential.