* 1346826
* Functional characterization of Optimus prime
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2019
* David Featherstone, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Evan Balaban
* 06/30/2019
* USD 397,802.00

Genome sequencing has provided a "parts list" for all life. The next great
challenge is understanding what all those parts do. Toward this end, Dr.
Featherstone is leading biology students to systematically search the genome for
previously overlooked 'parts', with a specific focus on discovering
uncharacterized genes required for brain development. Using this approach,
Featherstone?s group discovered a fundamentally new type of protein that they
named 'Optimus prime' (OPr). This project will focus on characterizing the
function of OPr in order to expand our understanding of normal brain
development. Since human OPr has been linked to autism, bipolar disorder, and
migraine, the work also has potential to inform our understanding of certain
neurological diseases The project will provide training for a diverse group of
students, including students from populations underrepresented in scientific
disciplines and scientists who would otherwise not have access to leading
research facilities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; OPr was discovered using genetic and
biochemical screens in Drosophila melanogaster, which for over a century has
proven an ideal tool for basic biological discovery. Preliminary studies suggest
that OPr associates with specific glutamate receptor subunit mRNAs to control
glutamate receptor subunit protein production and synaptic receptor subtype
composition ? processes which are universally recognized as important for brain
development and plasticity, but which are still very poorly understood. To test
this idea, Dr. Featherstone and his team of students will engineer Drosophila
completely lacking the OPr gene and then assay glutamate receptor production and
function using a variety of powerful techniques. This will determine the
functional role of OPr in the developing brain. In a separate line of
experiments, Dr. Featherstone and his team will examine the biochemical and
spatial relationship between OPr and mRNA, to better understand, at a molecular
level, exactly how OPr works.