* 1346952
* Travel Support for Workshops in Heat and Mass Transfer
* ENG,CBET
* 12/01/2013,11/30/2014
* Debjyoti Banerjee, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 11/30/2014
* USD 39,950.00

1346952 &lt;br/&gt;PI: Banerjee&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will provide
travel support for US Scientists to attend workshops, organized under auspices
of ISHMT (Indian Society for Heat and Mass Transfer) and ASME (American Society
of Mechanical Engineers), at the Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) from Dec.
28-31. The workshops are centered on five topical areas related to thermal
fluids science and engineering and multiphase flow phenomena and are designed to
nurture discussions on the major challenges in this area with the intent of
initiating new collaborative teams and sustaining past Indo-US research
collaborations. The US participants have varied levels of experience - ranging
from graduate students to early career academicians to senior faculty members
and reputed industrial practitioners (including women and minorities). Engaging
researchers early in their career will facilitate long term collaborations
enabling a globally-engaged workforce. Topics covered in the workshops encompass
both fundamental and applied aspects of emerging technologies that are impacted
by heat and mass transfer. In addition to enriching the cross-cultural and
educational experiences of the participants, the workshops will also augment
Indo-US cooperation through information sharing, germinating institutional
links, and sparking new research topics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A website will be
developed by the PI at Texas A&amp;M University for wider dissemination of the
report on the workshop outcome that will be submitted to NSF. The report will
also include discussions on the experience of the US delegates. The report will
be highlighted in panel discussions and presentations at the International Heat
Transfer Conference (IHTC 2014) in Japan for publicizing the collaborative
research activities internationally among the broader scientific community for
enhancing participation in the future. The recent spurt in the R&amp;D
investments in India and other Asian countries can be leveraged effectively by
joint Indo-US collaborative ventures. This will help the researchers based in
the US to maintain their research effectiveness and impact by leveraging
collaborations with prominent research programs in India and researchers from
other Asian countries. Women and minority participants at the workshops will add
to the diversity.