* 1346523
* STTR Phase I:  Engineering a recombinant methane monooxygenase to convert methane to methanol for the production of fuels and chemicals
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Barry Olafson, Protabit LLC
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 12/31/2014
* USD 230,000.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer Phase I project aims to engineer enzyme
variants that will facilitate the complete bioconversion of methane into fuels
and high-value chemicals such as isobutanol and 1,4-butanediol. The abundance
and low cost of natural gas has stimulated interest in developing biosynthetic
pathways to achieve these conversions, and methane monooxygenases (MMOs) from
methanotrophic bacteria could provide the first step in such a pathway by
converting methane to methanol. However, genetic manipulation of methanotrophic
bacteria is difficult?a soluble, active recombinantly-expressed MMO is needed
for pathway engineering. Currently, the only recombinant MMO (spmoB) expresses
insolubly in low yields and with low activity. This project aims to use
computational protein design (CPD) and high-throughput screening to engineer
active variants of spmoB that are amenable to soluble expression in a
recombinant host. In Phase II, these improved variants will serve as a platform
for further engineering to enhance MMO catalytic activity. Solubly expressed
recombinant spmoB variants will greatly facilitate mutagenesis studies and
structural characterization, leading to a better understanding of requirements
for MMO activity, reductant binding, and substrate specificity. This work should
also shed light on mechanisms of other enzymes in this family including ammonia
monooxygenases and related hydrocarbon monooxygenases. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact/commercial potential of this project is substantial. If
successful, we will have developed a platform for optimizing an MMO for
industrial use. An optimized MMO would reduce the use of dirty, expensive
chemical catalysts and decrease the cost of transforming stranded or flared
methane into methanol. Improving the cost effectiveness of methane oxidation
will in turn decrease the cost of downstream products such as isobutanol and
1,4-butanediol and diminish greenhouse gas emissions. Global gas flaring wastes
~$100 billion and emits ~360 million tons of CO2 into the atmosphere yearly. By
facilitating the conversion of stranded or flared methane to fuels and
chemicals, this research can decrease U.S. dependence on foreign oil, reduce our
carbon footprint, and spur domestic manufacturing, investment, and job creation.
In addition, this work may further the use of computational-based protein
engineering?this approach can reduce research costs by shifting experimental
screening efforts to the software platform. The sequences output by CPD are
enriched in functional variants, which can accelerate the discovery of
new/improved proteins and speed our understanding of the mechanisms involved in
protein function. This project could thus further our understanding of MMOs and
other proteins, and facilitate economic, energy, and environmental
sustainability.