* 1346564
* CIF: Medium: Collaborative Research: Information Theory and Statistical Inference from Large-Alphabet Data
* CSE,CCF
* 01/01/2013,10/31/2016
* Mokshay Madiman, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* richard brown
* 10/31/2016
* USD 351,672.00

Statistical analysis is key to many challenging applications such as text
classification, speech recognition, and DNA analysis. However, often the amount
of data available is comparable or even smaller than the set of symbols
(alphabet) constituting the data. Unfortunately, not much is known about optimal
inference in this so-called large-alphabet domain. Recently, several promising
approaches have been developed by different scientific communities, including
Bayesian nonparametrics in statistics and machine learning, universal
compression in information theory, and the theory of graph limits in mathematics
and computer science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators study the problem
drawing from these multiple perspectives, but with a particular focus on
developing the information theoretic approach. The research studies analytical
properties of the "pattern maximum likelihood'' estimator, which performs well
in practice but is not understood theoretically, and also explores computational
speedups. Moreover, it attempts to delineate which problem classes are better
handled by Bayesian nonparametric techniques and which by the pattern approach,
and explores links between these approaches. The investigators use the resulting
theory for automatic document classification, allowing for more automation in
storing, retrieving, and analyzing data. Furthermore, the investigators use the
theory to study genetic variations, whose link with disease diagnosis is a
crucial step in the systematic quantification of biology that is playing an
increasingly important role in medical advancement. The research also brings new
courses to the classroom, with a special outreach effort to involve women and
under-represented minorities, including through the Native Hawaiian Science and
Engineering Mentorship Program.