* 1346813
* Spring Soil Temperature Anomalies in the Western United States and Summer Droughts in the Southern Plains
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2018
* Yongkang Xue, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 05/31/2018
* USD 615,459.00

This project seeks to understand the causes of precipitation variability in the
US Southern Plains (roughly equivalent to Nebraska, Missouri, Oklahoma,
Arkansas, Texas, and Louisiana). This area is among the most drought-prone in
the US, and droughts in the region have substantial economic impacts. This
project examines the hypothesis that Spring subsurface soil temperature
anomalies in the Western US in produce rainfall changes in the Southern Plains
in the subsequent summer. The hypothesized relationship is such that warm
subsurface soil temperature in the West, through its manifestation in warm land
surface temperature, generates a cyclonic circulation in the overlying
atmosphere, which propagates eastward to produce enhanced June rainfall to the
east and south of the soil temperature anomaly, with the opposite result (i.e.
drought) for cold subsurface soil temperature. A further issue to be examined in
the project is the effect of frozen soil on the precipitation response to soil
temperature. The project tests the extent to which a better representation of
frozen soil in regional climate models (RCMs) can lead to a stronger
relationship between Western soil temperature and Southern Plains precipitation
simulated by the model.

Preliminary work for the proposal has shown evidence for the effect of
subsurface soil temperature, and work performed under the project will follow up
with a set of model simulation experiments. The experiments will be conducted
with a model configuration in which a global atmospheric model (the NOAA/NCEP
Global Forecast System model, or GFS) will be combined with an RCM known as the
Weather Research and Forecasting (WRF) model, in which land surface processes
are simulated by the Simplified Simple Biosphere (SSiB) model. Experiments
typically use imposed sea surface temperatures and sea ice to produce a global
simulation for a particular year using the GFS model, which is in turn used to
specify lateral boundary conditions for WRF simulations. The experiments test
the influence of all local and remote effects on Southern Plains precipitation,
including soil conditions in the Western states and also sea surface temperature
(SST) fluctuations. SSTs, including those associated with El Nino can affect
Southern Plains precipitation both directly and indirectly, through their
influence on soil temperature to the West.

The work has broader impacts due to the economic and societal impact of drought
in the Southern Plains and the desirability of better methods to predict the
extent and duration of droughts. The project will also support a post-doctoral
researcher, thereby supporting the next generation of scientists in this
research area.