* 1346898
* Catalyzing new international research collaboration in molecular polymer composites reinforced with in situ low-Tg phosphate glass fibers
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/2014,02/29/2016
* Joshua Otaigbe, University of Southern Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 02/29/2016
* USD 59,369.00

This award will catalyze a synergistic international collaboration to enable new
international cooperative research on in situ molecular polymer composites with
researchers from the University of Southern Mississippi and University of Lyon.
The research will be jointly conducted in the European Synchrotron Radiation
Facilities in Grenoble (near Lyon), providing opportunities for graduate and
undergraduate students to enrich their research and education with international
collaborative activities. The uniqueness of the research lies in the potential
ability to structure the molecular polymer composites in situ using flow and
deformation-induced orientation of the dispersed phosphate glass phase which
offers a distinctive transformative alternative to conventional composites
materials processing and use. The research will benefit from the individual
expertise and the facilities available at the U.S. and the French collaborators'
institutions, providing students with a critical and unique suite of
complementary research capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research has far
reaching societal benefits, potentially creating a new class of advanced
materials that may find uses in a number of high-end applications including
biomedical parts (e.g., rebuilding teeth and bones), optoelectronic components,
and automotive parts. The educational broader impact of the international
collaborative research is achieved via an exchange of broad-based research
knowledge and opportunities for students at the graduate and undergraduate
levels to experience collaborative research in highly advanced facilities
focused on each area of expertise. The international experience will be extended
to students at the individual institutions through presentations led by the
participants and it will integrate research and education through enhancement of
infrastructure for research &amp; education, and international student
exchanges, providing students with the capabilities for future international
collaborative success.