* 1346109
* SBIR Phase I:  An innovative point-of-care device that can rapidly detect and diagnose trauma-induced coagulopathy
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,09/30/2014
* Ari Karchin, Stasys Medical Corp
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 09/30/2014
* USD 149,993.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will facilitate
technological development of a point-of-care device to measure the forces of
platelets from whole blood during clotting. Trauma accounts for nearly 5 million
deaths per year worldwide and 17 deaths per hour in the U.S. These deaths arise
from an extensive loss of blood due to trauma-induced coagulopathy (TIC), which
is a systemic impairment of hemostasis (blood clotting) caused by severe injury.
The current SBIR Phase I award will fund a feasibility study on the ability to
measure platelet forces during coagulation by a magnetic-based sensor. The
specific technical goal of this SBIR Phase I proposal is to improve the signal
detection of our magnetic-based sensor. Successful completion of these
objectives will enable a Phase II project that will demonstrate the ability of
this technology to detect clotting dysfunction in trauma patients on a
personalized basis, as well as patients on anti-platelet and or anti-coagulation
medications.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will be to reduce
preventable deaths of often young, productive members of society. Trauma is the
most imporatn cause of death among young people (age group 1-45 years) and costs
$135B in healthcare dollars annually. Excessive bleeding in a trauma patient is
a major reason for deaths and medical costs. Excessive bleeding is often made
worse by coagulopathy, which is the inability of a patient?s blood to coagulate
and properly seal bleeding wounds. Currently, acute trauma-induced coagulopathy
(TIC) occurs in 1 in 4 severe trauma cases, but is hard to detect and treat. As
a consequence, an emergency department physician must make a semi-blind decision
on which transfusion products or drugs to administer to a patient in order to
stop the bleeding based upon their training, past experience, and vague clinical
guidelines and must act upon their decision within the ?golden hour? (i.e.
roughly 60 minutes after injury) to have the best likelihood to save lives,
reduce morbidity, and reduce hospital costs.