* 1346440
* STTR Phase I:  Development of Bio-compatible and Bio-safe Cell Sorters
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,06/30/2015
* Tony Jun Huang, Ascent Bio-Nano Technologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2015
* USD 269,999.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project will demonstrate
the feasibility of microfluidic-based, bio-compatible, bio-safe, fluorescence-
activated cell sorters. Cell sorters are powerful, high-throughput, single-cell
characterization and purification tools that are vital for labs in fields such
as molecular biology, pathology, plant biology, stem cell biology, and medical
diagnostics. Despite their significant impact, current commercial cell sorters
have a variety of drawbacks. High instrument costs (average cost: ~$500,000),
high maintenance (maintenance cost: ~$30,000 per year; highly trained personnel
needed), significant biosafety concerns, and reduction of cell viability and
functionality make conventional cell sorters less effective in many applications
and inhibit their widespread use. To address limitations of existing cell
sorters, an innovative approach is proposed that features two key technologies:
1) a "microfluidic drifting" based cell-focusing technique; and 2) a cell-
deflection technique using chirped interdigitated transducers (IDTs). The
proposed microfluidic cell sorter eliminates the generation of hazardous
aerosols and preserves high cell viability and functions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this project,
if successful, will be the development of the most bio-compatible and bio-safe
cell sorters for researchers and scientists. According to a 2011 BCC research
report, the instrument market for flow cytometers and cell sorters accounted for
$1.4 billion in 2010 and is expected to grow at a CAGR of 9.8% from 2010 to 2015
($2.2 billion). The served available market (SAM) is estimated to be ~$200
million. Compared with the existing cell sorters, the proposed microfluidic cell
sorter will have the following advantages: 1) high bio-compatibility; 2) high
bio-safety; and 3) low costs and low maintenance. In addition, the cell sorter
will be more accessible to researchers and address existing unmet needs in the
market (e.g., sorting fragile or sensitive cells while preserving high viability
and functions). It will accelerate research findings and improve diagnostics and
therapeutics. It will also create more job opportunities as the company grows.