* 1346666
* Scaling Terabit Networks: Breaking Through Capacity Barriers and Lowering Cost with New Architectures and Technologies
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2013,04/30/2014
* Daniel Kilper, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Lyles
* 04/30/2014
* USD 48,955.00

This project is for a workshop on "Scaling Terabit Networks: Breaking Through
Capacity Barriers and Lowering Cost with New Architectures and Technologies," to
be held at the Optical Society of America (OSA) headquarters in Washington, DC,
on September 19-20, 2013. The goal of the workshop is to develop a set of "grand
challenges" for the optical networking community. This will be accomplished by:
exploring how new network architectures driven by changing traffic patterns,
virtualization and programmability drive new requirements for the optics, and
how emerging photonic components can help scale these architectures to terabit
capacities; rethinking the operating system interface and application interface
to the network; exploring what physical layer phenomena and characteristics need
to be communicated to the higher layers and what higher-layer functions can
benefit from physical layer intelligence; and understanding how optics and
electronics will be used together in the future and what their respective
metrics will be when used together in an optical networking
context.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addressing these technical areas, the workshop
will be organized to achieve the following objectives: identify the
technological challenges facing terabit networks and continued network scaling;
establish key metrics, targets, and capabilities for efficient and scalable
terabit networking; set research priorities and requirements within optical
networking to enable efficient and scalable terabit networking; and identify
application drivers and early adopters of this new
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ultra-high capacity optical networks are the
key enabler of the ongoing revolution in data-driven science. They are also part
of critical infrastructure technologies that the United States needs to maintain
national competitiveness and national security. By informing both the U.S.
research community as well as NSF and other Federal agencies about key research
problems and opportunities, this workshop will support U.S. national interests.
The final workshop report will be made publicly available.