* 1346387
* CAREER: A novel space-creation concept to enhance the survival and functionality of transplanted human stem cells
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2014
* Xuejun Wen, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Friedrich Srienc
* 07/31/2014
* USD 242,691.00

CBET-0748129&lt;br/&gt;Wen&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cell replacement therapy
represents one of the most promising treatments for many diseases and injuries.
Recent discovery of the in vitro protocols necessary to derive dopaminergic (DA)
neurons in large quantities from both human embryonic stem cells and adult stem
cells has made it possible to ultimately cure Parkinson's disease (PD). However,
the efficacy of stem-cell transplantation has been significantly compromised by
poor cell survival and functionality in vivo, due primarily to the formation of
an inhibitory extracellular matrix (ECM)-rich scar tissue at the transplantation
site as a result of host tissue inflammatory response associated with the
transplantation procedure. This project is to develop clinically applicable cell
replacement therapy for the treatment of neurodegenerative diseases. In this
project, the Principal Investigator (PI) plans to achieve this goal by improving
the survival and functionality of transplanted human adult stem cell-derived DA
neurons in cell replacement therapy for PD based upon a novel space-creation
concept.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this project will affect multiple
scientific and technological communities, including tissue engineering,
neuroscience, and developmental biology. Graduate, undergraduate, and high
school students will be trained, motivated, and prepared for life-long careers
in biomedical research by gaining experimental skills, technical and academic
competencies, and readiness. Active involvement of students from diverse
backgrounds, women, and underrepresented minority groups; presentation of
research results in coursework; and their dissemination into the community
through outreach activities will promote campus diversity and benefit
society.&lt;br/&gt;