* 1346603
* EAGER: Ultra-sensitive Atomic Magnetometer based on Fiber-optic Sagnac Interferometer
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2015
* Jing Xia, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Mona Zaghloul
* 07/31/2015
* USD 138,479.00

Ultrasensitive magnetometers have a wide range of applications, ranging from
tests of fundamental&lt;br/&gt;symmetries in physics to mineral exploration in
geology to the detection of explosives and&lt;br/&gt;landmines in national
security. In particular, a magnetometer with femto-Tesla (fT or
10E-15&lt;br/&gt;Tesla) magnetic field sensitivity can be used to image brain
magnetic fields and study brain&lt;br/&gt;activities (magnetoencephalography or
MEG). Using the EAGER Grant, we will develop the technological base for future
developments of single fiber based non-cryogenic low cost MEG systems as well as
magnetic microscopes, both with ultra-high sensitivity and ultra-fast frame
rate. These will help us to understand&lt;br/&gt;brain circuitry at both
macroscopic and microscopic levels. Intellectual Merit: The loopless fiber-optic
Sagnac interferometer was co- developed by the PI and has demonstrated
unprecedented Faraday sensitivity even at DC. In this project, this technique
will be used for the first time to improve the sensitivity of SERF magnetometer
towards its quantum limit, surpassing any existing magnetometers. As a result of
the intrinsic fiber-optic design, the sensor end of the magnetometer can be
positioned at will, and can be miniaturized to chip level for observing neural
activities of single cells. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project will help
to develop novel scientific tools for elucidation of brain circuitry mechanism,
and will make MEG cheaper thus more accessible for various functional brain
disorder diagnosis. The project will provide integrated and rigorous trainings
for graduate and undergraduate students of quantum physics, opto-electronics,
biophysics and scientific communication. It will also contribute to the
development of several courses the PI teaches at UCI. Graduate and undergraduate
students from underrepresented groups are especially encouraged to take part in
both research and outreach activities