* 1346430
* STTR Phase I:  A novel biomimetic nanofiber coating on dental implants for gingival regeneration
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Qing Liu, 3D Biotek, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2014
* USD 225,000.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer Research (STTR) Phase I project is
seeking to develop a novel cost-effective strategy to modify dental implants
with biomimetic nanofibers for controlled regeneration of gingival tissue. In
order to seal the dental implants from bacteria and consequently protect the
crestal bone from infection-induced deterioration, there is an unmet need to
promote a prompt and effective attachment of gingival tissue onto the implant
surface. The project proposes to coat aligned biomimetic nanofibers onto the
collar of dental implants for rapid adhesion and controlled growth of gingival
cells along the fibers. It is anticipated that an accelerated formation of new
gingival connective tissue will take place right onto the biomimetic nanofibers,
leading to a proper seal of dental implants from oral cavity. The same aligned
nanofibers can be useful to modify other implant surfaces for guided accelerated
tissue regeneration.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is that the proposed
cost-effective biomimetic nanofiber coating will provide a competitive solution
to a common problem, i.e., infection-induced implant failure. This type of nano-
fiber coated dental implants has a great potential to penetrate the rapidly
growing dental implant market which is projected to be $8.1 billion by 2015.
Teaming up with the leading industry partners will facilitate the
commercialization of this novel technology upon completion of the proposed
studies.