* 1346655
* WORKSHOP: Doctoral Consortium for the International Conference on Multimodal Interaction (ICMI 2013)
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2016
* Carlos Busso, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 06/30/2016
* USD 17,840.00

This is funding to support participation by about 6 graduate students from U.S.
institutions, along with 5-6 senior members of the ICMI community (faculty and
industry researchers, who will receive partial support only), in a Doctoral
Consortium (workshop) to be held in conjunction with and immediately preceding
the 15th International Conference on Multimodal Interaction (ICMI 2013), which
will take place December 9-13, 2013, in Sydney, Australia, and which is
organized by the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM). The ICMI conference
series is the premier international forum for multidisciplinary research on
multimodal human-human and human-computer interaction, interfaces, and system
development. The conference focuses on theoretical and empirical foundations,
component technologies, and combined multimodal processing techniques that
define the field of multimodal interaction analysis, interface design, and
system development. Topics of special interest to the conference this year
include multimodal interaction processing, interactive systems and applications,
modeling human communication patterns, and data, evaluation and standards for
multimodal interactive systems. ICMI 2013 will feature a single-track main
conference which includes: keynote speakers, technical full and short papers
(including oral and poster presentations), special sessions, demonstrations,
exhibits and doctoral spotlight papers. The ICMI 2013 proceedings will be
published by ACM The ICMI proceedings will be published by ACM Press and
included in the ACM Digital Library. As a further incentive for high-quality
student participation ICMI will be awarding outstanding paper awards, with a
special category for student papers. More information about the conference may
be found online at http://www.acm.org/icmi/2013. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal
of the ICMI Doctoral Consortium is to provide PhD students with an opportunity
to present their work to a group of mentors and peers from a diverse set of
academic and industrial institutions, to receive feedback on their doctoral
research plan and progress, and to build a cohort of young researchers
interested in designing multimodal interfaces. Student participants will present
their ongoing thesis research as a short talk at the Consortium and also as a
poster at the conference Doctoral Spotlight Session. This year, the organizers
seek to expand the scope of the Doctoral Consortium to provide more
opportunities for interaction between the students and senior members of the
field; to this end, the program will also include a lunch on the day of the
workshop for students and mentors, a career panel that will provide the students
and mentors the opportunity to ask and answer questions and discuss challenges
and opportunities in the field, and a dinner that will provide the students with
the opportunity to hold informal conversations among themselves as well as with
the organizers and mentors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The Doctoral
Consortium will give student participants exposure to their new research
community, both by presenting their own work and by observing and interacting
with established professionals in the field. It will encourage students at this
critical time in their careers to begin building a social support network of
peers and mentors. The organizers will take steps proactively to achieve a
diversity of research topics, disciplinary backgrounds, methodological
approaches, and home institutions among the students. Priority will be given
first to minority students, female students, students from geographically
underrepresented states, and finally to students whose advisors or departments
have insufficient funds to support their participation in the conference. To
further increase diversity no more than two students will be invited from any
given U.S. institution of higher learning.