* 1346484
* STTR Phase I:  Serious Game for Energy Science
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Jana Willis, Tietronix Software, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 12/31/2014
* USD 224,497.00

This STTR Phase I project, Serious Game for Energy Science (SGES), proposes to
address the question 'Can a serious game in Science, Technology, Engineering and
Math (STEM), with artificial intelligence and teacher controls, engage the
learner, impact student problem-solving abilities, increase interest in STEM-
related activities/fields, and positively impact student learning outcomes in
science, math, and reading comprehension?' Educational institutions have seen
increased demand for technologies impacting learning outcomes and promoting STEM
interest. As gaming becomes more broadly accepted, there is greater demand for
Serious Games - games built specifically to enhance learning. This research
innovation will develop two components to be modeled in STEM serious game
development: (1) artificial intelligence, and (2) instructional management tool
for teachers. SGES will accomplish this innovation as well as contribute to, and
advance, the body of knowledge in Serious Game development. SGES research
objectives are to determine the effects of a serious game in Energy Science on
students: engagement, problem-solving abilities, interest in STEM-related
activities and fields, and learning outcomes in science, math, and reading
comprehension. Students will be inspired to learn about energy science, energy
production, and environmental impacts by being immersed in an interactive world
with interesting characters and engaging story
objectives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader/commercial impact of Serious Game
for Energy Science (SGES) is an expandable model adaptable to learning
objectives across grades levels and content areas. This research will establish
models for artificial intelligence and teacher controls in serious games, and
support teaching science, math, and reading comprehension with gaming. This will
impact the commercialization of serious games in any science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) topic. With the increase use of serious games
in learning, development of this projects' research-based model will increase
the economic competitiveness of the United States in the serious games market
sector. Innovative serious games like SGES can potentially increase
knowledge/interest in STEM related skills/careers addressing national needs for
STEM graduates in the workforce. SGES will enhance math, science, environmental
literacy, and reading comprehension through student exploration of energy
science, energy production, and environmental impact using problem-solving,
critical thinking, communication, and collaboration skills. The project research
results will impact the number of students entering STEM related careers or
graduating with STEM degrees by engaging them through game play. The SGES
project aims to improve STEM education for all grade levels and improve educator
development by providing educators with an effective use of technology in the
classroom.