* 1346253
* Collaborative Research: Terrestrial Linkages to Microbial and Metazoan Communities in Coastal Ecosystems of the Beaufort Sea
* GEO,OPP
* 04/29/2013,08/31/2014
* Byron Crump, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Neil R. Swanberg
* 08/31/2014
* USD 74,801.00

Coastal ecosystems of the Arctic receive extraordinarily large quantities of
terrestrial organic matter through river discharge and shoreline erosion. The
fate of this organic matter is of local interest as it relates to biological
production in the coastal ocean. It is also of broader interest with respect to
global biogeochemical cycling. The prevailing paradigm is that terrestrial
organic matter inputs to the Arctic Ocean are highly recalcitrant. However, most
studies supporting this paradigm have been conducted during mid- to late-
summer. This effort is based on the premise that terrestrial organic matter, in
both dissolved and particulate form, provides an important carbon and energy
subsidy that supports and maintains heterotrophic activity and food webs in
coastal waters during much of the year. The work will focus on a set of 12 field
sites along the Alaskan Beaufort Sea coast, in the vicinity of Barter Island and
the Inupiaq village of Kaktovik. Comparisons among sites ranging from lagoons to
open coastal systems that receive differing amounts of freshwater runoff and
also differ markedly in their exchange characteristics with shelf waters will be
used to examine linkages between biological communities and organic matter
inputs from land. Examining these linkages will help determine how seasonally
distinct terrestrial inputs of water and organic matter influence microbial and
metazoan communities in coastal waters of the Alaskan Beaufort Sea. Researchers
will address this question thorough a seasonally explicit sampling program that
includes field trips during the 9-month ice covered period as well as summer.
Measurements of water and sediment chemistry, benthic and water column community
characteristics, and natural abundance isotopic tracers will be used to evaluate
the importance of terrestrial inputs under different hydrologic/hydrographic
conditions.

Understanding the fate of terrestrial carbon in arctic coastal waters is
especially important now, as the arctic system enters a period of rapid climatic
change. Changes in terrestrial organic matter export could influence total
production as well as the relative roles of autotrophy and heterotrophy in
arctic coastal waters. Such shifts have consequences for local human populations
that use coastal food webs for subsistence and for the broad scientific
community interested in land-sea coupling. This work focuses on fundamental
questions about the fate of terrestrial organic matter in arctic coastal waters
that must be answered before we can effectively consider future changes in land-
sea coupling in the Arctic.

This collaborative project will support the dissertation research of two
graduate students and two post-doctoral associates and also continue a very
successful K-12 outreach program, entitled ?Climate Change in the Arctic: An
Interactive Program Linking Scientists with K-12 Students? that includes the
establishment of a summer field science program for native Kaktovik K-12
students. The Village Council has expressed keen enthusiasm to involve middle
school students in hands-on science activities that can be provided in
conjunction with teachers from the Kaktovik school district.