* 1346309
* STTR Phase I:  Nanofiber Fabrication vis Melt Coextrusion for Fuel Filter Membranes
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Eric Baer, PolymerPlus LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 12/31/2014
* USD 225,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project is geared toward
the production of previously unprocessible polymer composite fiber materials
aimed at improving performance in membrane and fuel filtering applications
through environmentally friendly melt coextrusion processing of polymer fibers.
This melt process strategy offers a unique opportunity to fabricate nanofibers
that is typically processed by many solvent-based techniques. This proposed STTR
program will demonstrate processing of novel composite, micro- and nanolayered
fiber materials via a solvent-free fabrication process capable of continuous
mass production and membrane formation at a potentially lower production cost
than the current state-of-the art manufacturing methods. The unique ability of
the polymer layering coextrusion process enables the combination of dissimilar
polymer materials, creating composite multifibers of specific size and aspect
ratio, hydrophobicity and hydrophilicity. Through proof-of-concept fabrication
and optimization trials to melt process the polymer fibers, this project will
demonstrate the ability of these materials to fill the void of easily
processible, tailorable hydrophobic/hydrophilic fiber materials that are
suitable for use in the $12.5 billion/year membrane market, specifically for
fuel filter membranes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial
potential of this project includes initial applications in the membrane and
filtration industry. Other applications expected in the field of medicine and
biology are scaffolds for cell culture, tissue engineering, and drug delivery
platform. Mechanically robust, highly oriented fibrous systems can also be used
for clothing and packaging. Novel nanofiber fabrication approach will create a
scalable process, which has a potential to create jobs in the United States.
Because it is a solvent-free process, this technology is environmentally
friendly and, therefore, will reduce carbon footprint and product cost. This
program will also contribute to the education of engineering college students
through the extensive use of co-op conducting research. The students will be
hired from universities for varied duration of 4 to 12 months for this project.
In addition, this STTR program also offers a unique opportunity to graduate
students from area Universities to work with R&amp;D companies and earn valuable
experience. This strongly supports the NSF mission of developing the U.S.
science and engineering workforce.