* 1346483
* STTR Phase I:  Self-Assembled Conductive Polymer Nanostructures as Coating Additives for Carbon Fiber Reinforced Composite Aircraft
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Lilo Pozzo, PolyDrop
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2014
* USD 225,000.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer Phase I project aims to demonstrate the
feasibility of new nanostructured conductive additives for use in antistatic
aerospace high-performance coatings. Static charge buildup from the environment
is a critical problem for vehicles which utilize lightweight components
constructed from non-conductive plastic or composite materials. Static charge
buildup interferes with electronic components, such as distributed sensors, so
that mitigation of this effect is essential for safe vehicle operation. This
project will characterize and correlate the structure and properties of new
conductive polymer nanostructures that are synthesized from inexpensive raw
materials and dispersed in organic solvents for direct incorporation into
commercial paint formulations. These new additives are based on the synthesis of
self-assembling nanostructures from conductive polymers and structure-directing
agents. When successfully incorporated in commercial paints and primers, the
host's conductive properties are enhanced without compromising adhesion and
durability. In this project, the research team will develop technical plans for
the scalable and economic synthesis of polymer additives, control and optimize
the nanostructure of the additives to maximize conductivity at low
concentrations, enhance the electrical conductivity through chemical doping, and
demonstrate successful incorporation in commercial coatings while preserving
performance specifications.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project relates to enabling the
increased adoption of lightweight carbon reinforced composites and plastic
structural materials in the aerospace industry. The design of lightweight
vehicles using these components, which requires high-performing antistatic
coatings, will lead to large reductions in fuel consumption and carbon emissions
in transportation. In 2011, emissions from transportation accounted for 28% of
U.S. greenhouse gas emissions. Modern aircraft designs, utilizing composite
materials, show more than 20% reduction in fuel consumption compared to
traditional vehicles. Imminent increases in fuel efficiency standards in
automobiles will also drive manufacturers to adopt the use of composite
materials. The development of robust antistatic coatings is essential to
enabling these new lightweight material technologies. Coatings containing
polymer nanostructures will provide improved charge dissipation, reduced weight,
improved durability, and will cost less than competing materials. Success in
aerospace applications will could also enable the adoption of these technologies
in other sectors (e.g. automobile), expanding the economic and ecological
benefits and providing follow-on commercial opportunities.