* 1346245
* EAGER: Efficient Monitor-Based Synchronization Mechanisms for Concurrent Programs
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Vijay Garg, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2016
* USD 165,000.00

Programming multicore processors is a challenging task due to bugs
resulting&lt;br/&gt;from concurrency and synchronization. A fundamental reason
for the difficulty&lt;br/&gt;is that current programming mechanisms require
programmers to manually&lt;br/&gt;coordinate synchronization between threads
running on these systems.&lt;br/&gt;Consequently, concurrent systems are prone
to bugs due to faulty&lt;br/&gt;synchronization problems such as missing, wrong,
or lost notifications for&lt;br/&gt;threads. Moreover, these bugs are hard to
find during testing because they may&lt;br/&gt;appear only under a rare schedule
of events. Current programming mechanisms&lt;br/&gt;also limit the amount of
concurrency in threads to ensure that a shared&lt;br/&gt;variable is not updated
by multiple threads. As a result, many concurrent&lt;br/&gt;systems slow down
due to sequential bottleneck of accessing shared variables.&lt;br/&gt;This
project is expected to fundamentally change the way
synchronization&lt;br/&gt;mechanisms (such as monitors) are written and
implemented. It will lead to&lt;br/&gt;better understanding of how conditions in
a multithreaded program can be&lt;br/&gt;evaluated efficiently. As a result, the
concurrent programming systems will&lt;br/&gt;become more reliable and faster.
The impact on society is expected to be large&lt;br/&gt;because all new systems
are based on concurrent programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is developing
new synchronization mechanisms with two fundamental&lt;br/&gt;goals. The first
goal is to make synchronization as simple and intuitive as&lt;br/&gt;possible
for programmers. Current (monitor based) synchronization&lt;br/&gt;mechanisms
require programmers to explicitly signal threads that may be
waiting&lt;br/&gt;on certain conditions. In the synchronization mechanism
developed in this&lt;br/&gt;project, there is no notion of condition variables
and it is the responsibility&lt;br/&gt;of the runtime system to automatically
signal appropriate threads. Analogous&lt;br/&gt;to automatic garbage collection
in Java, the project is designing efficient&lt;br/&gt;algorithms and techniques
for automatic signaling. The project is&lt;br/&gt;investigating techniques to
deal with fairness and exploitation of runtime&lt;br/&gt;information such as
idle cores for effective and efficient automatic signaling.&lt;br/&gt;The second
goal is to increase the concurrency in implementation of
monitor&lt;br/&gt;without requiring programmers to do any additional work and
without violating&lt;br/&gt;the guarantee provided by the monitor that execution
of its methods is&lt;br/&gt;equivalent to one in which there is at most one
thread in the monitor at any&lt;br/&gt;time. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is also
a strong educational component for this project. Synchronization is a
fundamental topic&lt;br/&gt;in computer science education and is taught in all
operating system courses. By&lt;br/&gt;eliminating manual signaling from these
courses, students would get more time&lt;br/&gt;to focus on higher level
concurrent programming concerns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;