* 1346700
* Group Travel to Attend 4th ASME Micro/Nanoscale Heat &amp; Mass Transfer International Conference
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2014
* Yogesh Jaluria, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Ruey-Hung Chen
* 08/31/2014
* USD 12,000.00

Proposal Number:1346700&lt;br/&gt;PI: Jaluria&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Support is
requested for travel of U.S researchers to the ASME Micro/Nanoscale Heat &amp;
Mass Transfer International Conference, that will be held in Hong Kong, on
December 11-14, 2013. This is the fourth conference in a series of international
conferences held on this topic, the last three being held in Taiwan, China and
Atlanta. The conference provides an excellent venue for interaction with
researchers from academic and research institutions, as well as from industry,
around the world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A wide range of topics will be covered,
ranging from microfluidics, nanofluids and manufacturing to diagnostics and
applications. Research presented will include both fundamental issues at these
small scales, and their applications in heat transfer enhancement, biomedical
systems, electronic devices, materials processing, drug delivery, and
diagnostics. It is important to bring researchers in these diverse fields
together to exchange ideas for future growth and application in this and related
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal is requesting travel support to
partially defray the travel of researchers from USA to attend this conference.
Students, post-doctoral fellows, minorities and women, in the broad area of
micro/nanoscale transport, will have priority. Invited speakers will also be
covered through modest financial support.