* 1346852
* Collaborative Research: Workshop on perfSONAR based Multi-domain Network Performance Measurement and Monitoring
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2015
* Douglas Swany, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* John Brassil
* 09/30/2015
* USD 76,811.00

perfSONAR (http://www.perfsonar.net) is a set of community-developed protocols
and a widely-adopted infrastructure for multi-domain network performance
monitoring, facilitating the ability to collect and share measurement data
relevant to solve end-to-end network performance problems and to enable network-
aware applications. The first perfSONAR workshop was successfully held 8-9 July
2010 in Arlington, VA. This project will organize and hold the Second perfSONAR
workshop to be held February 20-21 2014 at at the NSF in Arlington VA, open to
members of the perfSONAR community. The goal of the second workshop is to build
upon the first workshop outcomes and capitalize on the inherent flexible multi-
domain nature of the perfSONAR protocols and infrastructure. The intended focus
is to cross-fertilize ideas from a variety of stakeholders that include:
researchers, applications developers, network operators, network managers, and
others with an interest in network research and performance
measurement/monitoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop goals
include:&lt;br/&gt; 1. Identification of unimplemented techniques and network
research focus areas with existing ideas that can help solve problems of R&amp;E
networks, as well as open research questions focused on solving real world end-
to-end performance problems;&lt;br/&gt; 2. Identification of required perfSONAR
infrastructure components for network operators, end users, network researchers,
and virtual organizations, and any missing components;&lt;br/&gt; 3. Operational
requirements, federation policies and best practices for ongoing and on-demand
measurements end-to-end, cross-domain, and transoceanic links; and&lt;br/&gt; 4.
Creating a larger perfSONAR community seeded by the workshop participants,
including strategies for engaging new network researchers, new domain science
researchers, new science communities, and new
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;perfSONAR is a tool supporting multiple high-
priority programs in multiple U.S. agencies. It is a key tool for network
diagnostics for in the High Performance Computing community. As such
enhancements to the perfSONAR framework have direct impacts on projects across a
wide range of disciplines. The output of the workshop will be a report suitable
for archival within the ACM Digital Library. The report will summarize the
discussions and recommendations of participants in accordance with the
aforementioned workshop goals, and could serve to inform and guide future
community actions.