* 1346756
* EAGER: Memory Models: Specification and Verification in a Concurrency Intermediate Verification Language (CIVL) Framework
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2016
* Ganesh Gopalakrishnan, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 07/31/2016
* USD 300,000.00

The nation's economic progress and national security are critically dependent on
maintaining a trajectory of steady advances in computing. Such advances are
crucially dependent on the use of multiple processing units that are programmed
using parallel programming languages. As these parallel processing systems find
uses in critical applications such as national security infrastructures, medical
devices, airplanes, and computing installations that predict our weather, they
must be highly reliable as well as energy efficient. Unfortunately, today's
multi-processors are extremely difficult to reliably employ and to efficiently
program using current parallel programming languages. In addition to the
generally recognized difficulty of writing parallel programs, one of the central
unresolved difficulties is the development of a clearly defined shared memory
semantics that allows sufficient parallelism. This semantics dictates how the
computing elements exchange data, as well as how compilers can safely optimize
parallel programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work primarily focuses on
addressing critical problems relating to concurrent shared memory interactions
in parallel programs. It helps advance the current state of the art by
developing a collection of mathematical models for clearly defining these
interactions. These mathematical models will form the bedrock for developing
parallel processors as well as compilers that reliably translate user intentions
into correctly functioning computing systems. A central emphasis of our work is
that it uniformly addresses the multiplicity of parallel processing element
types as well as computer languages by erecting these mathematical models based
on a Concurrency Intermediate Verification Language. An equally important
feature of this work is that this understanding of memory consistency models
directly translates into rigorous error-checking tools to avoid egregious
mistakes in deployed computer software. A key aspect of this project is the
development of such error-checking tools for parallel programs and demonstrating
the effectiveness of these tools on realistic programs acquired from national
labs and industrial partners.