* 1346768
* Student Travel Support for 2014 International Symposium on Flexible Automation; Kobe, Japan; 14-16 July 2014
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,01/31/2017
* Ming Leu, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Steve Schmid
* 01/31/2017
* USD 25,000.00

This grant will provide travel support for a group of approximately 20 students
from the United States to attend the 2014 International Symposium on Flexible
Automation to be held in Kobe, Japan on July 14-16. The Symposium will consist
of three days of technical presentations, panel discussions, and keynote
speeches, followed by post-symposium technical tours of major university
research laboratories and industry production facilities in Japan. The focus of
panel discussions will be on Green Innovation in Flexible Automation. Some of
the organized sessions include Sustainable Green Engineering, Design and Control
for Electrified Vehicles, Manufacturing Systems, Production Planning and
Scheduling, Digital Design and Digital Manufacturing, Machine Tools and Cutting,
Precision Machinery System and Micro/Nano Technologies, Machine and Robot
Control, Medical/Nursing Applications and Bio-manufacturing, Additive
Manufacturing, Simulation and Computer aided engineering, and Agricultural
Machine and Plant Factory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant will stimulate
technical discussions between students from US institutions and world-renowned
researchers in the field of flexible automation, allowing the students the
opportunity to network with researchers and students from other countries to
forge future international collaborations. Other benefits to the U.S. students
attending the 2014 International Symposium on Flexible Automation include the
knowledge gained from the technical presentations and discussions on the various
processes, systems, and underlying principles of flexible automation, as well as
the panel sessions focusing on green innovation in flexible automation. The
students will gain first-hand knowledge of the current state-of-the-art in the
research, development, and implementation of flexible automation technologies in
Japan via tours to various university research laboratories and industry
production facilities following the Symposium.