* 1346416
* STTR Phase I:  Fully Implantable, Ultra-Flexible Wireless Electrode Array for Brain Activity Mapping
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Maysam Ghovanloo, Premitec, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2014
* USD 212,116.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer Research (STTR) Phase I project proposes
to develop and commercialize a fully implantable, integrated, ultra-flexible
device for high-bandwidth bidirectional interface with the central nervous
system aimed at brain-computer interfacing (BCI) and neurobiology research
applications. The device will incorporate the implantable component of the
multichannel wireless implantable neural recording and stimulating system
(WINeRS developed under NSF funding at Georgia Institute of Technology) with a
microfabricated high-density electrode array and planar spiral coils (PSC) in a
single flexible substrate. This implantable unit will operate in conjunction
with the existing WINeRS external unit, slightly modified for compatibility with
the PSCs. Such a device will allow unrestricted movement of animals during
recording sessions with no tethering effects, and require no transcutaneous
wired connections thus reducing associated risks of infection or irritation.
While the initial application will be micro-electrocorticography (?ÝECoG) to
support brain activity mapping (BAM) in freely roaming animal models, the
technology developed will be crucial for a broad range of wireless neural
interface challenges in both the central and peripheral nervous system.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is
both a wireless recording device for the animal research market and (perhaps
more importantly) critical technology for next generation neural interface
devices for human applications. By tightly integrating the ultra-flexible
electrode array, IC, and coils required for power and bidirectional data
telemetry into a single flexible unit, the proposed ?ÝECoG device will represent
a significant advancement in tools available for BCI, BAM, and other
neurobiology research. The advanced biocompatible packaging technology results
in the IC being thinned to the point of flexibility (25?Ým) and fully embedded
within the device ¡V the packaging is the device. The high-density connection
scheme allows &gt;1000 electrodes to be connected to the IC for high-bandwidth
neural interfacing. The technology developed will be directly applicable to a
broad range of neural interface devices for the central and peripheral nervous
system ¡V key components of brain-machine interfaces (BMI) to restore motor and
sensory function to people afflicted with nerve damage from injury, stroke, or
neurodegenerative diseases. Thus, the devices developed will be of immediate
interest to biomedical researchers for animal studies and the technology of
future interest to medical device manufacturers for advanced prosthetics.