* 1346495
* STTR Phase I:  Pulsed Laser Polishing
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2014
* William Dinauer, LasX Industries, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 12/31/2014
* USD 220,971.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will enable
development of pulsed laser micro polishing equipment and the software needed to
use and control the equipment. To obtain a desired level of polishing (a mirror
finish for example), many decisions must be made such as the path of the
polishing laser over a surface to be polished, the speed with which the laser
beam moves, the diameter of the laser beam, and the laser power setting. These
decisions are physically related in complex ways, and careful equipment design
and software development is needed to produce a cost-effective laser micro
polishing machine. In this project, models will be created and experimentally
validated that predict surface roughness after pulsed laser micro polishing has
been performed. The models also will recommend the laser path, beam diameter,
etc. that will produce the desired results based on the original surface and the
desired surface. The software models will be integrated with a cost-effective
laser micro polishing equipment design that can be applied to a variety of
customer-specific polishing applications and to stand-alone laser polishing
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential
of this project is to enable commercial automated polishing of manufactured
metallic parts. This is a challenge because the surfaces of these parts can be
relatively rough, which can negatively affect part shape, cause friction between
contacting surfaces in devices, make appearance unacceptable, etc. Unlike
traditional polishing methods (chemical etch, abrasive slurry, electro
polishing, etc.), pulsed laser micro polishing is a method by which the rough
surfaces on precisely selected areas on parts can be quickly polished using
automated equipment. Laser polishing can be over 10 times faster than manual
polishing, and surfaces can be polished without changing shape, creating
hazardous waste, or leaving chemical residues. For example, titanium and
stainless steel components are common in medical devices, and these components
cannot be chemically contaminated. Polishing a mirror finish on molds for
advanced lighting devices without changing their shape can lead to significant
increases in efficiency of household lighting. Thousands of smaller mold makers
in the United States seek lower costs and replacement of manual polishing with
automated polishing.