* 1346847
* CISE REU Evaluation Toolkit Expansion Project
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Audrey Rorrer, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 09/30/2017
* USD 149,999.00

This project will provide long-term support for external evaluation activities
and services for the Computing and Information Sciences and Engineering Research
Experiences for Undergraduates (CISE REU) community. This project will address
the ongoing need among principal investigators who are fulfilling CISE REU Site
program evaluation efforts by providing an evaluation toolkit that facilitates
evaluation reporting while strengthening research about undergraduate research
program outcomes. The primary purpose of the evaluation toolkit is to provide
targeted instructional resources and tools for quality program evaluation that
balance the desire for standardized assessment along with the responsibility to
account for individual program contexts. Toolkit contents include instructional
materials about evaluation practice, a standardized applicant management tool,
and a validated modulated outcomes measure. Services associated with the toolkit
are providing a Common Application for site recruiting, a Shared Applicant Pool
for principal investigators to share applicants across sites, delivery of an
online student survey known as the A la Carte Student Survey, and corresponding
responses to REU Site principle investigators. Project expansion will continue
these tools and services as well as expand to include a Faculty Career Impact
Survey, Student REU Alumni Survey, and a study of site organizational
characteristics. The benefits of the toolkit are in providing cost effective,
sustainable evaluation tools, a community forum for program evaluation, and
aggregate measurement of key program outcomes indicators for the national
program. The evaluation toolkit project balances the need for individual site
context evaluation with the need for broader, generalizable program impact
evaluation.

Intellectual Merit The intellectual merit of this project resides in the
contributions to understanding the impact of undergraduate computing research
programs for both students and faculty participants. The comprehensive program
evaluation will inform collective efforts to recruit undergraduate students to
doctoral programs. The program evaluation will generate knowledge about features
of REU Site structure for enhancing student learning outcomes and motivating
individuals to pursue advanced degrees and careers in research. The knowledge
generated by this study will also provide insights about how faculty engage in
REU Sites and the impact on their careers.

Broader Impacts The broader impact of the project will be evidenced by the
instruments and online tools developed by this project that will benefit any
researcher involved in supporting research experiences for undergraduates. This
will enable formative improvements for numerous REU programs, enrich REU
experiences for undergraduate students, and augment faculty capacity for leading
successful REU programs, thereby enhancing the graduate school pipeline and
faculty career development. In addition, the outcomes of the proposed project
will contribute to evaluation capacity building research for multi-site program
assessment.