* 1346690
* EarthCube Domain End-User Workshop: Community-Based Cyberinfrastructure for Polar Science Instrumentation, Technology, and Environmental Monitors
* GEO,OPP
* 10/01/2013,03/31/2015
* Alberto Behar, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Renee Crain
* 03/31/2015
* USD 35,233.00

The project consists in the organization of a workshop aiming at bringing
together scientists from the polar science domain&lt;br/&gt;and
cyberinfrastructure specialists. The goal is to gather requirements and develop
a vision for an advanced&lt;br/&gt;information and knowledge management system
that will transform the way instrumentation, technology,&lt;br/&gt;sensors and
environmental monitors are used in polar regions in the conduct of
science.&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will provide community feedback to the
EarthCube&lt;br/&gt;initiative and the Polar Cyberinfrastructure program to
design and develop the architecture of an Earth&lt;br/&gt;Science
cyberinfrastructure that is aligned with the end-users' needs for new systems
aimed&lt;br/&gt;data acquisition, field storage, transmission, security,
redundancy and the deployment infrastructure&lt;br/&gt;techniques and material
for these systems. The format will be the same as previous Earthcube sponsored
workshop. &lt;br/&gt;The workshop will target requirements on science-drivers on
the latest&lt;br/&gt;needs in instrumentation/sensing systems, field computing,
power: generation, handling, distribution&lt;br/&gt;&amp; storage, data:
storage, reliability and transmission, environmental enclosures, field
deployment&lt;br/&gt;techniques and other needs to design strategies for funding
opportunities that will support&lt;br/&gt;scientists and engineers to perform
outstanding and ground-breaking research in the polar&lt;br/&gt;regions. The
workshop will target a broad spectrum of&lt;br/&gt;polar scientists, with the
goal that a significant contingent of early career scientists
will&lt;br/&gt;participate.