* 1346976
* Causal Model Based Cue Weighting
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Daniel Oppenheimer, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Leland
* 07/31/2015
* USD 311,774.00

Within the field of judgment and decision making, two distinct approaches have
defined the debate over how people combine available information to form
judgments: linear models and heuristic models. Since linear models excel at
explaining judgment in some environments, and heuristic accounts are more
effective in other environments, many researchers have argued that people switch
between the different strategies depending on the particulars of the judgment
task. In this research, the PI develops and tests a model of causal reasoning
that subsumes both linear and heuristic models of judgments in a single, unified
framework. The PI will also test other implications of the model that previous
models have been unable to explain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In terms of
broader impacts, this research has implications across a variety of fields.
Medical diagnosis relies on doctors successfully assigning appropriate weights
to cues (symptoms). Judges and juries are asked to combine cues (evidence) to
make judgments of guilt and punishment. Investors look at cues such as various
market conditions to decide on investment strategies. Understanding cue
weighting has the potential improve the quality of important daily judgments.
Recognizing that judgments have significant consequences for decision-making in
a variety of domains, this research will examine how to leverage findings to
improve judgment in real-world areas of policy concern.