* 1346260
* Collaborative Research:   Developing New Science and Technology for Subglacial Studies of the Whillans Ice Plain and West Antarctic Ice Sheet
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2015
* Ross Powell, Northern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Clough
* 08/31/2015
* USD 1,890.00

Collaborative Research: Developing New Science and Technology for Subglacial
Studies of the Whillans Ice Plain and West Antarctic Ice Sheet is supported by
the Antarctic Integrated System Science (AISS) program in the Antarctic Sciences
Section of the Division of Polar Programs within the Geosciences Directorate of
the National Sciences Foundation (NSF). The funds will support the design,
construction, and deployment of a roving hot water drill and basal ice coring
equipment to be deployed in conjunction with the WISSARD (Whillans Ice Stream
Subglacial Access and Research Drilling) project during the 2013/2014 field
season. The roving hot water drill will be deployed at up to two locations in
each of two sites: in the vicinity of Subglacial Lake Whillans, and at the
grounding line where the drainage from Subglacial Lake Whillans empties into the
sub-ice shelf cavity. The ice coring equipment will only be used at the
grounding line location. All locations are at the edge of the Ross Ice Shelf,
connected to the West Antarctic Ice Sheet
(WAIS).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The new equipment will be used
to augment two on-going projects occurring in the Whillans Ice Stream area,
WISSARD, that focuses on understanding the biology, geochemistry, paleogeology,
and hydrological/glaciological interactions of the Whillans Subglacial system,
and a second project focused on the micro-earthquakes associated with the sticky
spots found in the Whillans area. The basal ice corer will add significant data
to the WISSARD project, and the roving drill will provide access holes to insert
within glacial seismometers that will allow a much better understanding of the
micro-earthquakes. The within glacial seismometers will build on the collection
of surface seismic data from 2012-13 that are characterized by repeated high
frequency events interpreted as basal earthquakes. These earthquake events were
not detectable at stations only 20 km away, so obtaining a better understanding
of these physical mechanisms will be very useful for understanding basal ice
motion and friction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: In addition to the
contributions to the understanding of ice dynamics mentioned above, future
availability of a roving hot water drill system and related coring capabilities
will result in increased research opportunities for researchers from a range of
disciplines interested in the interface between the base of the ice sheets and
the underlying substrate. The project will also support the development of the
US's technical expertise in hot water drilling. Finally, the project will
provide further funding of the public outreach and education started by the
WISSARD project. The WISSARD outreach and education activities have been
exceptional to date, and it is expected that additional activities enabled by
this new award will be exceptional as well.