* 1346113
* SBIR Phase I:  Low-cost Time-domain Reflectometer for Soil Water Content Reporting in Precision Agriculture
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,06/30/2014
* Scott Anderson, Acclima, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2014
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop new
technology for the separation of ultra-fast-rise-time incident and reflected
step functions needed for the development of an integrated differential Time
Domain Reflectometer (TDR) to be used in soil water content measurement. Because
of residual reflections from circuit board striplines terminated in variable
soil loads and reflections from wetting fronts and discontinuities in the soil,
the derivation of propagation time, permittivity and water content are subject
to errors caused by the vector addition of the spurious, shorter-term
reflections with the main reflection from the end of the waveguide. The
characteristics of the interfering spurious signals vary with the soil
environment. The overall waveform appearing at the TDR digitizer is a composite
image of an incident step, a reflected wave and the set of spurious signals. The
research required is that of characterizing the spurious signal patterns and of
developing machine learning and signal processing algorithms to remove their
impact from the derivation of reflected wave propagation time. Identification
and timing of wetting fronts will also be included to provide sensor users with
infiltration monitoring capability. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project is to provide an affordable and
easily deployed means of accurately measuring soil water content, including the
credible measurement of water uptake by food crops. This capability will
facilitate significant increases in water use efficiency - the foundation for
growing high quality food with less water. The value proposition to crop growers
is reduced marginal costs and increased crop yield and quality, with a potential
payback time of one to two growing seasons. Commercial adoption of soil moisture
sensing technology will help manage the increased cost and demand for fresh
water, of which over 70% of consumption goes to agriculture. The technology will
also provide a stable and credible measurement tool for studying and monitoring
watershed dynamics for flood and drought prediction, for monitoring dams,
mudslide areas and levees for potential failure and for studying the impact of
soil water dynamics on weather. Current tools for these measurements are either
heavily regulated (neutron probe), difficult to install (Time Domain
Transmissometer probe) or provide unstable readings with changing soil
electrical conductivity and compaction (capacitive probes).