* 1346220
* RCN-UBE Incubator: Growing a Physiology Education Community of Practice
* BIO,DBI
* 02/01/2014,01/31/2016
* Marsha Matyas, American Physiological Society
* Standard Grant
* christopher meyer
* 01/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

This incubator project is establishing the Physiology Educators Community of
Practice (PECOP) which centers primarily on undergraduate education, but
encompasses multiple teaching levels (K-12, grad/professional), including
international and novice educators. PECOP also promotes strong participation by
faculty at institutions serving underrepresented students. The American
Physiological Society (APS) has developed key components to support the PECOP,
including a National Science Digital Library with tools to build and support
teaching and learning communities (APS Archive of Teaching Resources,
www.apsarchive.org), online faculty development to promote online community
involvement, and new support for a biannual conference on teaching and learning
which will offer workshops and sessions for faculty from all types of
institutions. The conference serves as a forum to build the PECOP structure and
recruit participants, encouraging educators to interact, share resources, and
collaborate on an ongoing basis. It also provides an opportunity for physiology
educators to learn how to use scholarship of teaching and learning (SOTL)
methodologies to improve their teaching and offers teaching professional skills
training for new physiologists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RCN-UBE project is
using Archive community tools and the teaching conference to organize and launch
PECOP, a support community that provides resources, training, mentoring, and
community benefits for the teaching of physiology. In the organizational stages,
the project is recruiting Thought Leaders who will guide discussions at the
conference and online on key topics such as curriculum development, student-
centered learning, assessment, effective undergraduate research experiences, and
SOTL methods. Finally, the project is providing support to promote participation
in PECOP via regional and national meetings of physiology
educators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Intellectual Merit of this initiative is the
creation of an active community of practice (COP) that will increase the overall
impact and effectiveness of physiology, which is among the most common
undergraduate course topics worldwide. PECOP will encourage and support best
teaching practices, evidence-based teaching and preparation of new educators to
work with diverse students through training, resource sharing, and mentoring in
live and online settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts of PECOP lie in
its engagement of physiologists from diverse institutions, the support for
collaborations among new and experienced educators to share educational research
and best practices, and the important communication forum it provides across
educational levels (undergrad-grad-professional). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is funded jointly by the Directorate for Biological Sciences and the
Directorate of Education and Human Resources, Division of Undergraduate
Education in support of efforts to address the challenges posed in Vision and
Change in Undergraduate Education: A Call to Action
http://visionandchange.org/finalreport/.