* 1346069
* SBIR Phase I:  Ultra-softening polymers from engineered thiol-based resins for additive manufacturing
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Cary Baur, Syzygy Memory Plastics
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 12/31/2014
* USD 179,999.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will focus on the
understanding, development, and commercialization of new ultra-softening shape
memory polymer (SMP) systems for use as novel earpiece materials. Currently,
earpieces such as earphones and earplugs utilize tough, semi-rigid polymers that
are often poor fitting, uncomfortable and must be produced via conventional
molding technology. SMPs possess several key properties that render them
attractive alternatives to conventional materials such as their ability to
soften dramatically with heat and their ability to be optically cured. Through
adjustments in the composition of SMP systems, thermomechanical properties such
as the temperature and amount of softening can be significantly and controllably
tailored according to the intended application. The softening that the earpieces
experience after insertion will result in the ability to conform to the exact
shape of the ear canal, improving comfort and audio performance. Pending success
of this project, we will have developed the first shape memory material that can
be rapidly cured with light into complex 3-D shapes with sub 100 micrometer
feature sizes using stereolithography, which is viscoelastic at both room
temperature and body temperature and softens an order of magnitude between the
two. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of
this project is built around the fact that we are introducing a completely new
technology which will enable real time manufacturing of custom components with
application specific thermomechanical properties. While the overarching goals of
this proposal are specific to demonstrating custom ultra-softening viscoelastic
earpieces with superior comfort and audio quality with easy insertion, the
technology developed here will benefit numerous industries and society as a
whole. For example, we envision this technology being used in remote locations
where businesses have need for softening elastic and viscoelastic materials in
specified geometries such as gaskets, heat-shrinkable tubes, seals, grips, etc.
Furthermore, this technology could be monumental in the medical field by
enabling hospitals to create custom biomedical devices on-site as needed,
designed specifically for the patient. Eliminating the need to order specialty
parts from a separate location will reduce time and cost associated with medical
device implantation. In addition, a successful project will benefit the
scientific community by providing peer reviewed publications introducing novel
shape memory material with highly tailorable thermomechanical properties
according to composition, thus stimulating additional research in field of SMP
systems and applications.