* 1346600
* CAREER: Survivability and Selfcoexistence in the Battle of Cognitive Radio Network Societies
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2013,02/28/2018
* Shamik Sengupta, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* Monisha Ghosh
* 02/28/2018
* USD 388,113.00

Dynamic spectrum access (DSA) based on cognitive radio (CR) allows unused
licensed bands to be used by unlicensed (secondary) networks in an
opportunistic/dynamic manner under the provision that they would vacate upon the
return of the licensed users. DSA allows unlicensed users to share frequencies,
but the paradigm does not provide good protection from interference. This raises
serious challenge of self-coexistence among the secondary networks as well as
risks of disruption from malicious CR devices/networks through various non-
traditional spectrum attacks. This project studies the self-coexistence
challenges of CR networks under adversarial conditions and investigates inter-
disciplinary methodologies based on game theory, behavioral adaptation,
stochastic learning and network forensics that aid survivability of these
networks. To assess effectiveness, the mechanisms are implemented on CR
prototype testbed. The intellectual merit of this project lies in: 1)
constructing behavioral frameworks studying the evolutionary dynamics of
spectrum conflict, 2) systematically understanding the unique shadow-disruptive
nature of the malicious CRs exploiting the finest granularity of spectrum
agility, and 3) developing a suite of survival mechanisms against cognitive
disruptions and exploring their effectiveness. The project has broader impact on
wireless technologies/policies and is expected to help in the efficient and
secure design of future cognitive radios. This project is committed to tightly
integrate research and educational plans which revolve around student mentoring,
graduate/undergraduate curriculum enhancement and hands-on project based
learning taking feedback from research findings and K-12 outreach. Research
results will be disseminated through publications, seminars, and tutorials.