* 1346888
* EAGER: Modeling Network Dynamics in the Epileptic Brain to Develop Translational Tools for Seizure Localization and Detection
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2013,05/31/2015
* Sabato Santaniello, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 05/31/2015
* USD 150,724.00

Objective: Epilepsy affects 60 million people worldwide who suffer from
recurrent seizures, and 40% of patients do not respond to any drug therapy.
These patients would greatly benefit from closed-loop neuro-stimulation therapy
to suppress seizures, but the efficacy of such therapy critically depends on
whether the stimulus is administered close to the seizure origin (epileptogenic
zone, EZ) and immediately prior to or at seizure onset. This program develops
novel computational tools for effective EZ localization and seizure onset
detection from multi-channel intracranial EEG (iEEG) recordings.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The tools are derived by (i) analyzing the
dynamics of the brain network as a seizure approaches and (ii) developing a
model-based framework that combines multivariate statistics, Bayesian
estimation, and optimal control. The tools use iEEG recordings to (1)
reconstruct and track the topology of the brain network over time, and (2)
identify topological signatures that are specific of the seizure state and
uniquely localize the EZ. The rule that detects these signatures from sequential
iEEG measurements is adaptive and optimizes the trade-off between specificity
and sensitivity by minimizing a cost function of both the detection delay and
the probability of false positives. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
Multiple translational impacts will occur at the interface between engineering
and neuroscience. First, the proposed tools will allow more accurate EZ
localization and resection, more efficient review of iEEG signals, and more
effective treatments for seizure suppression (more effective placement of the
stimulation electrodes and more efficient neuro-stimulation devices). Overall,
these outcomes will reduce the hospitalization time and potentially avoid fatal
accidents to epilepsy patients, save lives, extend life-expectancy, and improve
the administration of drugs. Also, this program will introduce a transformative
detection paradigm that generalizes to any application involving hidden state
transition detection relevant to a wide array of disciplines (e.g., early
earthquake detection or threats detection). Finally, this program will support
the development of courses in multivariate signal processing and statistical
modeling at Johns Hopkins University and of outreach activities that will
inspire high school students (especially from minorities) from the Baltimore
metropolitan area to pursue a career in engineering.