* 1346150
* SBIR Phase I:  Thermal Engine with Metastable Power Extraction Step (TEMPES)
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,06/30/2014
* Greg Mungas, Firestar Engineering, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 06/30/2014
* USD 149,980.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop
critical measurements necessary for eventually producing a high efficiency
Thermal Engine with Metastable Power Extraction Step (TEMPES). The TEMPES
thermodynamic power cycle is designed primarily for low-temperature power
generation and waste heat recovery. The basic operating principle of the TEMPES
engine is a closed 2-cycle cylinder piston assembly that converts heat energy in
a working fluid to mechanical energy using an innovative thermodynamic power
cycle. The method of conversion from heat energy to work is accomplished via
formation of metastable non-equilibrium states in a portion of the thermodynamic
cycle. Unlike states that are thermodynamically equilibrated, metastable states
incorporate a temporal component and history required for fixing the state.
Metastable state formation and state trajectories have been previously
demonstrated in our lab providing a means for conducting a preliminary analysis
of a theoretical TEMPES power cycle. The awarded research work will expand this
knowledge base by producing an experimental set-up more closely tailored to
closed cycle configurations for ultimate power generation. This experimental
configuration will allow detailed characterizations of metastable states and the
mechanisms by which these states form and collapse back into equilibrated
thermodynamics states.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial
potential of this project is related to the vast supply of low grade waste heat
that could be converted into useful energy. The TEMPES technology can be the
core of a scalable electricity generation system using low-grade waste heat as
its primary energy source. Recovery of low-grade waste heat can potentially
reclaim trillions of BTUs annually from industrial waste heat sources,
concentrating solar plants, geothermal plants, and waste-water treatment
facilities and convert this energy back into useful work. Low temperature power
conversion technology at temperatures &lt;350 C is enabling for waste heat
recovery power generation, solar trough power generation, and geothermal power
generation at both consumer level and large grid scale energy applications.