* 1346596
* EAGER: Advanced Energy-Efficient Smart Buildings: Solar Energy Conversion by Next-Generation Construction NanoMaterials
* ENG,EFMA
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2015
* Touradj Solouki, Baylor University
* Standard Grant
* Garie Fordyce
* 07/31/2015
* USD 52,670.00

This proposal was submitted for an EAGER grant; it seeks funding for a US-Turkey
Collaborative research initiative. The application entitled, "Advanced Energy-
Efficient Smart Buildings: Solar Energy Conversion by Next-Generation
Construction NanoMaterials," was submitted by Touradj Solouki from Baylor
University. This EAGER request will support a collaborative approach to enable
NOx abatement using hybrid, nanomaterial-based photocatalysts, optimized for
ambient conditions, without the incorporation of expensive platinum group
metals. It is anticipated these new photocatalysts could be mixed with
conventional construction materials to improve air quality in and around
buildings. The work leverages the complementary skills and high resolution
spectroscopic/spectrometric capabilities of the US and Turkish investigators and
their individual facilities.

The research is expected to produce cost-effective smart building materials that
will use solar energy to clean the air and help to minimize air pollution.
Moreover, research in this area will offer interdisciplinary training
opportunities for students and scholars that will be involved in high-quality
and meaningful research experiences, develop their expertise, and broaden their
knowledge through shared and open-access facilities. Successful implementation
of the research design will foster innovative research and serve as a model for
future international collaborations.