* 1346307
* STTR Phase I:  Efficient Mid-Infrared Interband Cascade Lasers
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Rui Yang, Applied Quantum Enovation LLC
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 12/31/2014
* USD 225,000.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project will develop
efficient interband cascade lasers based on innovative hybrid waveguides using
dielectric and metal layers. The hybrid-waveguide interband cascade lasers will
be much less demanding in the growth of device structures and will have
efficient continuous wave operation in a wide range of wavelengths, as well as
more capabilities such as a wide tuning range and mode selection. Furthermore,
hybrid-waveguide interband cascade lasers can have significantly enhanced
thermal dissipation compared to current interband cascade lasers that use
superlattices as cladding layers. The success of this research project will not
only realize efficient hybrid-waveguide interband cascade lasers with low power
consumption, it will advance the understanding of how hybrid waveguides can
significantly improve the device performance of interband diode lasers. These
efficient IC lasers, with such low power consumption, will greatly benefit many
useful applications such as chemical sensing, especially where mid-infrared
systems must be operated with batteries and energy cost/availability is a
concern, including field applications with constraints on size and electric
power. The availability of high-performance hybrid-waveguide interband cascade
lasers will significantly enhance the capabilities of mid-infrared laser
instruments and their applications in many areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact/commercial potential of this project will generate new cutting-
edge knowledge toward improved design and understanding of quantum semiconductor
structures and devices. The realization of energy-efficient interband cascade
lasers in the entire mid-infrared wavelength region will have significant impact
on many biomedical, industrial, earth science, space exploration, defense and
homeland security applications. The availability of efficient mid-infrared
interband cascade lasers will further stimulate the expansion of the commercial
mid-infrared market and even help to create new applications.