* 1346681
* Collaborative Research: Multi-Accuracy Bayesian Models for Improving Property Prediction of Nanotube Buckypaper Composites
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2013,07/31/2014
* Chun Zhang, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Diwakar Gupta
* 07/31/2014
* USD 99,808.00

This collaborative research between Florida State University and Texas A&amp;M
University is to develop multi-accuracy predictive models that can enhance the
prediction capability for bukypaper-based composite properties. The team will
investigate proper modeling strategies to integrate the multi-accuracy
information as well as the solution techniques that address the associated
computational and design issues in order to guarantee the method's efficiency
and practicality. Currently, a few mechanics models are available for making
property predictions for bukypaper-based composites but most of them suffer from
having low accuracy due to model inadequacy and uncertainty. The outputs from
the mechanics models and actual physical experiments constitute a set of multi-
accuracy information sources, reflecting the same physical properties from
different perspectives. Our conjecture is that combining the multi-accuracy
outputs could help enhance the desired property predication for bukypaper-based
composites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The successful development of this new
methodology will potentially enable stable, repeatable, and scalable production
processes for bukypaper-based composites, which are one of the most sought-after
nano-materials, due to its properties unfound in traditional materials and
applicability to a broad array of applications. The High-Performance Material
Institute (HPMI) at Florida State University, with which the lead PI is
affiliated, is one of the best research facilities in the nation in terms of
buckypaper R&amp;D and prototype production capabilities. Predictive models are
the cornerstones for enabling any attempts of process and quality control in
nano-manufacturing because only with these models can people identify the
critical process variables for taking in-process measurements, or making
adjustments, in order to yield expected outcomes.