* 1346800
* Workshop for Women in Machine Learning
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2013,09/30/2016
* Katherine Heller, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 09/30/2016
* USD 40,002.00

Since 2006, the annual workshop for Women in Machine Learning (WiML) has brought
together female researchers in industry and academia, postdoctoral fellows, and
graduate students from the machine learning community to exchange research ideas
and build mentoring and networking relationships. The one-day workshop has been
especially beneficial for junior graduate students, giving them a supportive
environment in which to present their research (in many cases, for the first
time) and enabling them to meet peers and more senior researchers in the field
of machine learning. The networking opportunities provided by the workshop have
also helped senior graduate students find jobs following graduation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This workshop will advance machine
learning knowledge and foster collaboration within the machine learning
community. As invited speakers, established researchers at top universities and
research labs will teach workshop participants about cutting-edge ideas from
diverse areas of machine learning. Students will present their own research and
receive valuable feedback from both senior researchers and their peers. By
enabling women at all stages of their careers in machine learning to exchange
research ideas and form new relationships, we expect that new connections and
research collaborations will be established, thereby advancing the state-of-the-
art of the field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: This workshop will
provide a forum for female graduate students, postdoctoral fellows, junior and
senior faculty, and industry and government research scientists to exchange
research ideas and establish networking and mentoring relationships.
Undergraduates, particularly those who are interested in pursuing graduate
school or industry positions in machine learning, are also welcome to attend.
Bringing together women from different stages of their careers gives established
researchers the opportunity to act as mentors, and enables junior women to find
female role models working in the field of machine learning. The workshop will
also benefit the wider machine learning community: Firstly, the WiML website,
which lists all previous workshop presenters, serves as a useful resource for
organizations looking for female invited speakers. Secondly, co-locating with a
major machine learning conference enhances the visibility of female researchers
among the wider machine learning community. Thirdly, travel funding provided to
workshop participants also facilitates their travel to the co-located
conference, which for some participants would otherwise not be possible.
Finally, all workshop materials (slides, abstracts, etc.) will be made available
on the workshop website in order to ensure broad dissemination.