* 1346584
* RCN-UBE Incubator: An online networking hub for collaboration, discovery, and synthesis in quantitative biology curricula
* BIO,DBI
* 01/15/2014,01/31/2016
* Carrie Diaz Eaton, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* christopher meyer
* 01/31/2016
* USD 49,971.00

The purpose of this RCN-UBE incubator project is to create a central online hub
for biologists and mathematicians to collaborate to improve students'
understanding of quantitative reasoning. While online resources such as
repositories of classroom materials exist to help instructors modify their
curricula, there is no central location where instructors can come together to
work on interdisciplinary teaching. QUBES (Quantitative Undergraduate Biology
Education and Synthesis) will be a streamlined educational repository with a
direct link to a Facebook-like social interface, which would allow individuals
to discuss different teaching submissions, pedagogies, and philosophies in an
efficient manner. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The QUBES hub will
provide an online nucleus of collaboration, discovery and synthesis in
quantitative biology curricula. This goal will be facilitated by extensive
collaboration with multiple professional societies (e.g. Society for
Mathematical Biology, Mathematical Society of America, National Institute for
Mathematical Biology and Synthesis) who share in this common goal. During the
funding period, curricular development needs will be identified from the
community via multiple meetings with organizations and undergraduate life
science educators. Popular existing standards (e.g. CCCS), or the development of
new standards, will be used for all material to allow for maximal sharing of
resources with other resources/software. The website will be a place where
instructors can go to prepare and collaborate on course design, with emphasis on
maximal sharing of material and expertise via inclusion of a social networking
component. Association with scientific societies and presence at meetings will
solidify the long-term survival of the website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: QUBES will be constructed using all open source components whose
software will be completely community designed and maintained. Expected learning
outcomes for biology majors will be created and molded into a curricular
standard that will be referenced by all learning materials on the website. All
forms of curricular materials (e.g. class and lab modules, classroom ready
datasets, lecture notes, question sets, and videos) will be housed on-site in a
repository or links provided to existing off-site repositories, with comments
and ratings via the user community to help in discovery and validation. QUBES
will facilitate the creation of a community of quantitative biology educators
who will benefit from having access to an easy-to-use and navigable web-based
portal for enabling meaningful collaborations in curriculum
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded jointly by the
Directorate for Biological Sciences and the Directorate of Education and Human
Resources, Division of Undergraduate Education in support of efforts to address
the challenges posed in Vision and Change in Undergraduate Education: A Call to
Action (http://visionandchange.org/finalreport/).