* 1346063
* SBIR Phase I:  HydroElastic Hydroforming
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,09/30/2014
* Michael Ellis, Ellis Industrial Design, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 09/30/2014
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to support the
North American automakers? need to develop and implement new technologies that
will allow them to form the light weight, high strength metals required to
support the 2025 56 mpg CAFÉ standard. This research?s objective is to study a
proposed hydroforming machine design concept to support that need with a machine
constructed from a novel type of composite intensive fabrication. The project
seeks to research the design for strengths and weaknesses and to propose a final
concept proposal that has been validated through simulation to be suitable,
viable and beneficial for forming OEM sheet metal panels. This project will
create a robust prototype design suitable for production and an associated
scheme of construction. It will use software to simulate the designs and report
the projected performance properties of the envisioned concept design. In
addition, it will construct a 1/5th scale prototype that will be used to
physically validate the pressure containment system and material formability
assumptions. If successful, the research will produce a viable, validated design
that demonstrates the concept's suitability and readiness for full scale
prototype implementation and development testing in Phase II.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project is to enhance scientific knowledge in the understanding and in the use
of high strength polymer fibers in machine presses to contain fluids under high
compressive pressure and direct those forces towards producing controlled
hydroelastic deformation in metals. It is also to demonstrate how this can be
done at cycle rates that are usable by the Automotive Industry. If successful,
this will encourage prototype and low volume automotive production, potentially
stimulating economic vitality in underserved and underutilized communities such
as Detroit's Inner city through direct and indirect job creation.