* 1346608
* Dynamics of Electronically Excited States - Biomolecules in the Gas Phase
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2012,08/31/2015
* David Pratt, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2015
* USD 81,993.00

In this award, funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the
Chemistry Division, Prof. David W. Pratt of the University of Pittsburgh and his
undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral research students will conduct high
resolution electronic, vibrational, and rotational spectroscopic measurements of
gas phase biomolecules in the collision-free environment of molecular beams and
supersonic jets. Single frequency, CW ring dye lasers operating in the UV and
chirped-pulse Fourier transform microwave (CP-FTMW) techniques will be employed
to characterize amino acids, small peptides, and nucleic acid base pairs, both
as isolated species and in combination with weakly bound solvent
molecules&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The Pratt research group will determine the
structures, electric dipole moments and dynamical properties of all species
along thermally accessible vibrational coordinates, including chemically
reactive ones, in the gas phase. These species include "foldons", short
sequences of amino acids that initiate the folding of large proteins; the
chromophore of green fluorescent protein; chiral molecules active in tasting and
smelling; and water clusters containing different biomolecules. They will focus
on the intrinsic secondary structures of such species and their charge
distributions in both electronic ground states and excited states, thereby
establishing a link to photobiology and the light-induced redistributions of
charge that are essential to biological function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Besides
the broader scientific impacts of the research being supported, Prof. Pratt
continues to provide excellent scientific training to his research students. He
is actively involved in developing curricular materials for undergraduates not
majoring in the sciences. Additionally, Prof. Pratt is currently working with
the University of Pittsburgh's Learning &amp; Research Development Center, the
School of Education and the Pittsburgh Board of Public Education to provide
professional development opportunities for middle school science teachers in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.&lt;br/&gt;