* 1346254
* STTR Phase I:  Conversion of Enhanced Copper Foils to Wire Forms
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Frank Kraft, NanoRidge Materials
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 12/31/2014
* USD 224,994.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer Phase I project will substantially
advance 1) approaches to combine carbon nanotubes (CNT) into metal matrices, 2)
processes to convert copper/CNT composites into wire while preserving CNT
integrity, 3) methods to induce CNT alignment during either nanocomposite
production or extrusion in order to optimize electrical conductivity, and 4)
process control to ensure that the technology can be scaled to industrially-
relevant volumes. The largest challenge in this proposed research is
understanding the role of CNT alignment as it pertains to electrical
conductivity and controlling the alignment to produce the desired results. The
research objectives seek to solve that challenge through inducing CNT alignment
during the Cu/CNT production and also during the subsequent extrusion into wire.
The anticipated results are 1) a Cu/CNT wire that exhibits an electrical
resistivity of 1.30 x 10-6 Ohm.cm (100% IACS - 1.68 x 10-6 Ohm.cm) @ 20 deg C,
and 2) a well-defined process that can consistently produce that performance at
industrial volumes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential
of this project includes the development of a copper conductor with superior
electrical performance which will have significant commercial and societal
value. Copper is the world?s most widely used electrical conductor, consuming
approximately twenty-five billion pounds of copper annually. However, no
significant improvement in the electrical performance of copper has been
realized since the International Annealed Copper Standard (IACS) established the
electrical resistivity to be 1.68 x 10-6 Ohm.cm in 1913. The benefits of an
enhanced copper conductor will be most highly valued in applications requiring
increased electrical conductivity, current capacity, thermal conductivity, and
tensile strength. Key markets for early adoption of this technology include
electrical transmission, electric motors, transformer windings, subsea oil and
gas, electronics, and aerospace. In total, the estimated market potential for
the Cu/CNT wire product enabled by this research is on the order of two billion
pounds per year. It is for these reasons that the International Copper
Association describes the output of this project as "an advanced copper-carbon
nanocomposite material that would truly have a transformative effect on a broad
area of technology and would be of immense benefit to society".