* 1346496
* STTR Phase I:  Eco-Friendly Mass Production of Highly Conductive Graphene Sheets with Controlled Structures
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Yongqiang Wang, Ocean NanoTech, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 12/31/2014
* USD 225,000.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project aims to develop
an efficient, rapid, and eco-friendly approach for mass production of highly
conductive solution phase graphene with controlled structures. Most of the
commercial available solution phase conductive graphene sheets are either highly
defective reduced graphene oxide (r-GO) or non-defective pristine graphene
sheets. They are either dispersed in special organic solvents or aqueous
solutions with the help of surfactants for stabilization. Most of the production
processes involve toxic chemicals or release toxic substances as byproducts,
causing potential hazard to our environment. The study of novel green microwave
oxidation chemistries proposed in this project will lead to rapid (tens of
seconds), direct (without requirement for post reduction), and low cost
fabrication of highly conductive, clean (without requirement for surfactants and
stabilizers), and low oxygen containing graphene sheets with controlled lateral
dimensions and molecular structures. The success of the project will leads to a
series of new graphene products which are different from both rGO and pristine
graphene sheets while combining many of their merits and can be used for the
research society to fabricate highly conductive graphene sheets with tailored
structures for best fit a broad spectrum of
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of
this project is the great potential to enable cost effective mass production of
highly conductive graphene sheets with unique molecular structures and
controllable sizes. Given the known wide potential application of graphene in
energy generation and storage, catalysts, electronics, coating, sensors, etc,
the commercial available of these graphene sheets with well-defined structures
will speed up the scientific understanding and technological developments in
these broad areas. This project could also greatly benefit our society with the
environment friendly and low energy consumption approach for the mass production
of these materials.