* 1346559
* RCN-UBE:  Network for Integrating Bioinformatics into Life Sciences Education (NIBLSE)
* BIO,DBI
* 02/01/2014,01/31/2017
* Eric Triplett, University of Nebraska at Omaha
* Standard Grant
* christopher meyer
* 01/31/2017
* USD 49,890.00

The long-term goal of this project is to establish bioinformatics as an
essential component of undergraduate life sciences education by creating a
network of investigators to articulate a shared vision of the extent to which,
and how best to, integrate bioinformatics into life sciences curricula. This
RCN-UBE incubator project is facilitating initial networking efforts by
convening faculty from a group of diverse institutions for a two-day workshop to
explore core issues related to the accomplishment of the long-term goal. At the
workshop, the group is focusing on how best to facilitate effective
communication and enhance opportunities for collaboration by discussing current
needs, resources, and opportunities in each of the following areas: 1)
curriculum/pedagogy and assessment, 2) professional development, and 3)
dissemination. Expected outcomes of the workshop include an online list of
resources and networking opportunities related to the integration of
bioinformatics into life sciences education, a white paper summarizing the
current state of this integration, and, as appropriate, a full RCN-UBE proposal
that defines management and coordination plans for sustaining and expanding the
initial network.

The field of bioinformatics, which uses techniques from computer science to
store, manage, and analyze large biological data sets, has arisen to meet these
challenges and is now an important interdisciplinary field that is central to
studying many aspects of biology. The intellectual merit of this project rests
on the need to integrate bioinformatics concepts into undergraduate life
sciences education and to provide faculty with the resources and knowledge to
effectively accomplish this.

The network will have a broad impact on undergraduate education in the life
sciences by enabling educators nationwide to effectively apply bioinformatics
knowledge and skills to their teaching and research. To ensure diversity in the
developing network, Steering Committee members are recruiting from a variety of
organizations with active bioinformatics education initiatives, including small
private liberal arts colleges, large public research universities, and minority
serving institutions.

This project is funded jointly by the Directorate for Biological Sciences and
the Directorate of Education and Human Resources, Division of Undergraduate
Education in support of efforts to address the challenges posed in Vision and
Change in Undergraduate Education: A Call to Action
http://visionandchange.org/finalreport/.