* 1346278
* STTR Phase I:  Self-powered wireless leak detection sensor for pipeline monitoring
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Andrew Nguyen, Veraphotonics
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2014
* USD 207,172.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer Research (STTR) Phase I project will
support the development of the hydraulic pressure harvesting mechanism combined
with four-channel acoustic emission (AE) based leak and damage detection
hardware along with power management electronics to enable self-powered wireless
health monitoring in pipeline systems. By combining our theoretical simulation
and experimental testing, hydraulic pressure energy harvester systems will be
designed and optimized for characteristics of typical oil pipeline systems.
Wireless AE-based leak detection and energy harvester systems will be integrated
with impedance matching and optimal power management to achieve the maximum
efficiency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project includes significant cost saving for both the civil engineering and
aviation industries by providing a cost-effective solution for damage detection
and evaluation. Through our commercialization efforts, advances in the wireless
sensing technology will permit researchers to utilize our technology to better
understand degradation mechanism leading to material failure in large and
complex structures. The low-cost, high sensitivity sensor technology will
improve public safety as a result of cost-effective structural and material
condition evaluation and diagnostics.