* 1346122
* SBIR Phase I:  Compact Torus-Shaped Organic Ranking Cycle for Distributed Solar Thermal Power Generation
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,06/30/2014
* Bryce Shaffer, Air Squared Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 06/30/2014
* USD 149,820.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project addresses the current
need to develop a small scale organic rankine cycle (ORC). While ORCs have been
used extensively in industry for waste heat recovery for larger systems (10kW
and above), there has been little advancement in the private sector for smaller
ORCs used for distributed solar power, biomass or diesel waste heat recovery for
smaller portable/compact applications. While smaller systems are known to work
through various demonstrations at research institutions, it has yet been proven
whether they can be manufactured and sold at a competitive cost to replace
current distributed power systems for remote applications. The proposed design
packages all components in a way to optimize system efficiency, reduce
complexity and increase manufacturability. The research effort will consist of
assessing the feasibility of designing a working compact ORC that can be
competitive in the areas of life cycle cost, reliability, efficiency and
performance. This will be accomplished through design, fabrication and testing
of a portion of the system. This project will seek to develop a smaller and
novel organic ranking cycle system for commercial use that is practical and
highly competitive.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project can be narrowed down to
two main markets. The first includes use for distributed solar power generation.
ORCs offer a cheaper alternative to solar photovoltaic (PV) for distributed
solar power generation in that thermal energy can be easily stored on site
without the use of large expensive batteries as in solar PV. With reduction in
cost in both generation and storage, ORC solar power generation can potentially
be available to markets where the costly PV is not an option. This includes
markets in underdeveloped countries where solar energy is plentiful, yet the
infrastructure to support grid energy storage doesn?t exist; as well as remote
markets where an electrical grid doesn?t exist and energy storage is required.
An additional market includes distributed biomass power generation for small
independent farms, currently expensive anaerobic digesters or large steam driven
biomass plants are used for biomass energy production from farm waste. The low
power density of farm waste makes it impractical to transport long distances to
these facilities. With the use of a affordable compact ORC, energy from biomass
can be generated on-site at an affordable cost.