* 1346261
* 2013 IEEE Conference on Decision and Control. To be Held in Florence, Italy,  December,10-13, 2013.
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2014
* Warren Dixon, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 07/31/2014
* USD 15,000.00

This proposal requests support for student travel to the 52nd IEEE Conference on
Decision and Control (CDC), which will be held in Florence, Italy, December
10-13, 2013. The IEEE CDC is the annual flagship conference of the IEEE Control
Systems Society and one of the premier international conferences in the field of
systems and control, featuring both theory and applications. The funds will
provide partial support for up to thirty students from US colleges and
universities to attend the conference and present their research results.

Intellectual Merit: Systems and control theory is ubiquitous in modern, complex,
technological systems, from automotive to aerospace systems, biomedical systems,
industrial automation systems, robotics, and a host of other systems. It is
increasingly evident that current research on many technological frontiers is
heavily influenced by foundational ideas from control and system theory. The
recent 51st IEEE CDC received over 2300 submissions and accepted 1262 for
presentation, many of which are co-authored by students together with their
faculty advisers. The intellectual merit of the proposed use of funds is that
graduate students will see first-hand how the foundations of control and systems
are evolving and shaping the frontiers of research in many applications domains.

Broader Impacts: With over 1000 anticipated research presentations, including
plenary lectures, workshops and exhibits the CDC provides attendees with
exposure to the state-of-the-art in emerging areas of control research and
technology. The broader impact of this travel support is that it will help train
the next generation of system and control researchers and practitioners. The
future security and well-being of the United States relies on maintaining pools
of trained scientists and engineers in critical areas such as control
technology, systems engineering and automation. The students to be supported
under the proposed project represent the future technological leaders of the
IEEE Control Systems Society, which is the world's leading professional
organization in the discipline.