* 1346687
* U.S.-Romania Collaboration: Rock Glaciers Dynamics and Permafrost Degradation using High-Resolution Optical and Multi-Polarization SAR Imagery
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/2014,01/31/2015
* Marius Necsoiu, Southwest Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Roxanne Nikolaus
* 01/31/2015
* USD 51,292.00

Rock glaciers are the most important form of high mountain permafrost, making
the investigation of rock glacier dynamics a key factor in understanding the
evolution and movement of permafrost-related formations under changing climate
conditions. Monitoring terrain change is necessary to understand rock glacier
mass-transport processes, to detect their response to environmental variability,
and to assess associated natural hazards.

This project will support a new international research collaboration between
Southwest Research Institute® (SwRI®) and West University of Timisoara (WUT),
Romania, to quantify rock glacier dynamics using a state-of-art method based on
complementary analysis of high resolution optical and radar satellite imagery.
The project will set up a "benchmark" study where we will test the applicability
of these methods in measuring movements of several rock glaciers located in
Retezat National Park, Southern Carpathian Mountains, Romania. It promotes
interdisciplinary research, bringing together principles and specific methods of
geomorphology, climatology, mountain ecology, remote sensing, and
geoinformatics.

Results from this proposed work will create a baseline for future studies on
rock glacier movements in Central and Eastern European alpine regions where
information on glacier rock dynamics is scarce or completely missing. In
parallel with this work, we will initiate similar research activities in the
United States (e.g., Front Range, Colorado or La Sal Mountains, Utah). Future
research will advance our broader understanding of climate trends and permafrost
evolution in mountainous areas and the potential for remote sensing techniques
to detect and monitor a variety of rock glacier movements.