* 1346542
* US-Cameroon Planing Research Visit on Combined Binary Code Translation and Synthesis for Heterogeneous Multiprocessor Systems, January 2014
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2014
* Christophe Bobda, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 09/30/2014
* USD 28,538.00

1346542&lt;br/&gt;Bobda&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will provide support for
PI Dr. Christophe Bobda, from the University of Arkansas&lt;br/&gt;to organize a
10 day planning research visit in December 2013-January 2014 to the University
of Yaounde in Yaounde and the University of Dschang in Dschang, both in
Cameroon. He will be accompanied by two students from the University of
Arkansas. The main objective of this proposed trip is to meet with Dr. Rene
Ndoundam of the University of Yaounde and associate faculty at the University of
Dschang to develop a master plan for international research. They will (1)
develop plans for future collaboration in the fields of compilers, architecture
synthesis and run-time architecture optimization, (2) put in place a research,
training and exchange framework for the remote collaboration, (3) set the basis
for the development of international grant proposals to sustain this effort, and
(4) organize seminars and FPGA labs with Cameroonian students and faculty to
teach them technical aspects in computer architecture and multicore design on
FPGA devices.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This project will help leverage the
performance of new architecture on legacy code, thus saving time and money for
redesign. With the reduced amount of elements&lt;br/&gt;to configure, the
proposed coarse-grained architecture will allow for a fast run-time
synthesis&lt;br/&gt;of selected code blocks onto the configurable processor. The
proposed coarse-grained architecture uses a combination of direct interconnect
and network on chip elements to increase the flexibility at device level, while
maintaining high performance within a component boundary. The proposed run-time
spectral-based synthesis approach uses the singular values of the Laplacian of
the incident instruction-matrix to compute the placement of instructions in a 2D
field in such a way that the total interconnect cost among instructions is
minimized. Finally, the proposed generic and configurable streaming component
will allow for a transparent management of data exchange and synchronization
among code blocks executing on the reconfigurable processor and those running on
the remaining processors.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: One of the major outcomes
of this project is the run-time translation of legacy binary code for
heterogeneous multiprocessor systems. This will allow for automatic migration of
existing programs onto new architectures, thus improving their performance while
avoiding complete redesign and recompilation. The planning visit will lay the
groundwork for a broader international collaboration network in which new
partners could be easily integrated. The research components produced by this
collaborative effort would benefit undergraduate and graduate students in the
United States and in Cameroon. The two students from the University of Arkansas
will gain international experience by presenting their work at the seminars
organized at the University of Yaounde and the University of Dschang. Beyond the
planning visit, the PI will actively recruit several undergraduate researchers,
especially women and minorities, from the U of A to work on compilers,
architecture design and applications. Under-represented groups in science and
engineering research will be recruited through the U of A Engineering Career
Awareness Program (ECAP), Arkansas Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority
Participation (ARK-LSAMP), and the George Washington Carver Project.