* 1346901
* Core Support of the Water Science and Technology Board
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2014
* Jeffrey Jacobs, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 08/31/2014
* USD 30,000.00

1346901&lt;br/&gt;Jacobs &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Water Science and Technology
Board is the focal point for studies related to water resources and hydrologic
sciences accomplished under the aegis of the National Academy of Sciences and
the National Academy of Engineering. The Board's objective is to improve the
scientific and technological basis for resolving important national questions
and issues associated with the efficient management and use of ground and
surface water resources. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In carrying out its
responsibilities and in serving the national interest, the Board responds to
requests for evaluations and advice through its ad hoc studies concerning
specific and generic issues in water resources, influences action by initiating
studies of issues that merit consideration by public agencies and others,
identifies issues and topics of research related to water resources, and
cooperates with other units of the National Research Council (NRC) and groups
with mutual interests outside of the NRC. &lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of
the Board is important in advancing knowledge and understanding covering the
traditional scientific and engineering aspects of water resources and the
economic, institutional, legal, educational, and social aspects, as well. The
Board consists of members from all of the disciplines involved in water
resources activities and responds to specific requests from government, state
and local agencies, and others. The Board projects future needs for and
capabilities of multi-disciplinary water-related research and education in the
sciences, engineering, and technology. These projects are separately funded and
carried out by ad hoc committees under the Board's oversight. At meetings of the
Board, liaison representatives provide comments and suggestions to aid the board
in developing its program and reports on its activities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Board promotes broader impacts for its activities by
advancing discovery and understanding while promoting teaching, training and
learning in projecting future needs for and capabilities of multi-disciplinary
water-related research and education in the sciences, engineering, and
technology. Board members and staff participate in conferences, workshops, and
other activities to disseminate the scientific and technological understanding
of its reports. The Board's findings benefit society by assuring that the
activities in water resources receive attention appropriate to the role water
plays in furthering national interest.