* 1346436
* STTR Phase I:  Software-Based Building Airflow Analysis Tool for Enabling HVAC  Energy Use Savings in Commercial Buildings
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,02/28/2015
* Alan Morse, Aeolus Building Efficiency Inc
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 02/28/2015
* USD 224,914.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project will establish
proof of concept for a unique, software-based Building Airflow Analysis Tool for
measuring and optimizing airflow rates in commercial buildings. Using the
existing Building Automation System (BAS), room temperature responses to
controlled perturbations of airflow rates are used with a physics-based room
thermal model and system identification (SI) routine to determine air changes
per hour for each room. The proposed research focuses on developing algorithms
that will work in BAS architectures and establish proof-of-concept in several
large scale building tests, not only to validate the SI procedure, but also to
establish actual energy savings and value proposition. The concept behind our
technology is a unique integration of two diverse areas, bringing the dynamic
nature of SI from control theory to the typically static or quasi-static aspects
of HVAC system diagnostics and measurements. This research enables development
of a smart building controls approach that will make building HVAC energy use
more efficient. The successful proof-of-concept and large-scale validation of
the basic idea, that are the goals of this research, will position the
technology for commercialization. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project addresses a widespread problem that
wastes billions of dollars and creates millions of metric tons of green house
gases every year: heating, ventilation and air conditioning (HVAC) systems that
move and condition too much air. This occurs since many large office buildings
were designed when energy was cheap and their designs use minimum airflow rates
above necessary levels for maintaining occupant ventilation. The technology
developed through this STTR project will enable a unique software tool that can
minimize airflow levels, while still meeting the ventilation and thermal comfort
objectives. The new technology enables a new high margin business model by
virtue of its low cost and scalability, all made possible because it is
software-based and implemented through the existing Building Automation System.
Commercialization of this technology will further catalyze energy efficiency
investments in commercial buildings, a market that demands short payback periods
and low risk investments. With commercial buildings representing an enormous
built infrastructure with very slow turnover, development of this technology
will enable a significant opportunity to improve domestic sustainability since
commercial buildings account for 18% of the annual GHG emissions and 36% of the
national electric demand.