* 1346942
* EAGER: Decision-Theoretic and Scalable Algorithms for Computing Finite State Equilibrium
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2016
* Prashant Doshi, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Weng-keen Wong
* 07/31/2016
* USD 150,153.00

This project is exploring algorithms for computing multiagent strategies that
are in exact and approximate equilibrium. The context involves economic games
that are played repeatedly by agents each of whom privately observes noisy
signals about other players' actions. A complete characterization of equilibria
for such games, missing until recently, introduces the concept of a finite state
equilibrium in which each player's strategy is represented as a finite state
automaton. Players' strategies are verified to be in equilibrium by solving a
partially observable Markov decision process. The research is building on this
surprising and deep application of decision theory toward equilibrium analysis
in a pragmatic class of games, which provides a bold and innovative bridge
between decision and game theories. It is designing novel algorithms that
utilize approximate and error-bounded solutions of partially observable Markov
decision processes for computing approximate finite state equilibrium in games
with increasing dimensions.

This research is contributing insights for broader classes of games such as
stochastic games with noisy signals. The interdisciplinary outcomes of this
research are being integrated into courses and conference tutorials on
multiagent decision making for dissemination. New international research
collaborations with eminent multiagent researchers in Japan are being
established.

This research is bringing together the disciplines of decision and game theories
with mutual benefit. Key outcomes include scalable algorithms for solving highly
complex games thereby contributing to the understanding of sophisticated
interactions under uncertainty. Applications include analyzing auctions without
release of public information, covert price wars between firms, and managing
resource congestion.