* 1346821
* SBIR Phase I: A robotics-based gaming system for Science, Technology, Engineering and Math education
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,06/30/2014
* Adriana Moscatelli, Play Works Studio
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 06/30/2014
* USD 150,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project proposes to design a robotics-based gaming system for
Science, Technology, Engineering and Math (STEM) education that is attractive to
girls. The hypothesis is that physical game-based learning from play patterns
that revolve around a robot's storyline, with interactions and negotiation in
the physical world, can attract and retain girls' interest in STEM. The system
contains four technical innovations: (1) interlocking, story-telling game tiles,
(2) mobile robot pets with a novel tile-tracking system, (3) interactive games
that engage girls in the virtual and the physical world, and (4) downloadable
game content from the Cloud. The system supports a diverse set of play patterns,
such as virtual programming, physical programming, story mode, dynamic maze
construction, and mat programming. The link between the game tiles, the robot
Pets, and the Pet Planet Cloud support a nearly limitless diversity of
activities and challenges. The mobile device and cloud game server provide an
interface for collecting data such as level completion, success rates, and time
on task, which provides an opportunity to evaluate interest and learning. We
will use this infrastructure to identify the play patterns that are more
successful with girls, and in the long term to evaluate the success of the game
at developing STEM skills.

The broader/commercial impact stems from the nearly limitless expandability of
our modular design. The goal is to reach millions of girls and boys who will be
having too much fun playing with robot pets and game tiles to notice that they
are learning logical reasoning, procedural thinking, spatial reasoning and
probabilistic reasoning. While the project is initially focusing on girls, the
system extends to boys and can also be used to encourage the participation of
underrepresented minorities in STEM. The project plans to make donations to
schools and non-profit organizations to reach underserved students. The firms
data collection and evaluation will help us understand how to modify game
content to encourage STEM education for underserved communities. The projects
ultimate goal is to increase the general public's engagement with science and
technology, which is possible with technical games and toys that can be
accessible at a relatively low cost. The project team consists of a partnership
between academia, non-profit organizations, schools and industry; as a mutually
beneficial collaboration.