* 1346452
* STTR Phase I:  Using Big Data to Support Supply Chain Analytics and Optimization
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Vijay Hanagandi, Optimal Solutions, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 12/31/2014
* USD 225,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project proposes to demonstrate the feasibility of delivering
a radically game-changing Big Data - based Supply Chain Analytics Platform. A
complex supply chain, in consumer goods manufacturing and distribution, for
example, involves data analysis and decision support in many areas. Today's
tools and techniques used in supply chain analytics are too restrictive as they
rely on the company's internal factors and are unable to effectively incorporate
the increasing volume of readily available, external data. The quality of
analytics directly impacts the product quality, cost of fulfillment, customer
satisfaction, and ultimately the company's financial health. It is proposed to
introduce Big Data concepts including distributed text mining, machine learning,
and scalable analytics to support supply chain analytics. The proposed
innovation will integrate increasingly available structured and unstructured
external data to enhance supply chain decisions. This will enable companies to
be more customer-focused, make better decisions, and become more profitable. The
key results from this research will include algorithms and methods to pre-
process inherently unstructured Big Data into quantitative and qualitative
descriptors suitable to be inputs for creating new indicators for decision
making.

The benefits of better supply chain analytics are clear and significant
including better products, better customer service, reduced waste and costs, and
increased quality The broader/commercial impact of the proposed innovation is in
the area of enhancing product quality and reducing costs for consumer goods
companies, increasing the safety of products, and rapid new products
introduction into the market based on customer feedback, etc. The proposed
research will also significantly lower the technology adoption barriers - both
technology-wise and cost-wise barriers to embracing Big Data - while delivering
next generation analytics capabilities for businesses and will "democratize" the
use of Big Data for companies of all sizes. This is expected to make U.S.
companies more competitive resulting in job creation in the U.S. and reducing
the outflow of jobs overseas. The potential impact of the proposed research on
the business community is significant, and validated in various surveys and
studies recently published documenting the benefits of applying Big Data to
business.