* 1346570
* RCN-UBE: Faculty Development Network for Undergraduate Biology (FDN-UB)
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2014,09/30/2020
* Charlene D'Avanzo, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Sophie George
* 09/30/2020
* USD 498,753.00

This RCN-UBE network project seeks to advance the professional development of
undergraduate biology faculty to improve teaching and learning of biology
consistent with changes in undergraduate biology education that are called for
in the Vision and Change report. Progress in faculty development has been
hampered by limited interaction among faculty members, science education
researchers, and higher education experts from across different institutional
types, geographic locations, and demographic categories. This network will
create, build, and support a community of practitioners who will analyze the
state of the field of professional development, identify gaps in the practice of
professional development, then engage professional societies and other
organizations to engage in a series of coordinated and collaborative efforts to
improve of faculty development. The goal is that improved opportunities for
faculty development should enhance biology teaching and learning in all
institutional contexts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Faculty Development Network for
Undergraduate Biology will foster exchanges and partnerships between the major
constituencies essential for effective biology faculty development through use
of idea-generating network cluster meetings, all-network synthesis meetings,
smaller working group meetings, and online collaboration tools. A Standards of
Practice Working Group is synthesizing best practices, and compiling information
and resources for professional development in biology education and for broader
professional development communities. A Research Working Group is identifying
gaps and disconnects in our understanding and/or practice of biology
professional development as a starting point for developing future cross-
institutional research projects to address questions related to best practices
and ways to motivate and sustain change. Through the activities of the
Sustaining Change Working Group, the network is partnering with centers,
institutes, and national organizations to identify strategies for providing the
local, institution-based follow-up needed to sustain changes initiated at
national conferences and workshops. The network as a whole is interfacing with
biology professional societies to develop society-based teams with common goals
and materials for professional development in biology teaching and
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded jointly by the Directorate
for Biological Sciences and the Directorate of Education and Human Resources,
Division of Undergraduate Education in support of efforts to address the
challenges posed in Vision and Change in Undergraduate Education: A Call to
Action http://visionandchange.org/finalreport/