* 1346372
* Gordon Research Conference on Environmental Sciences: Water to be held in Holderness, NH on June 22-27, 2014
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2015
* Allison MacKay, Gordon Research Conferences
* Continuing Grant
* William Cooper
* 09/30/2015
* USD 32,000.00

CBET-1346372&lt;br/&gt;Paul Tratnyek&lt;br/&gt;Gordon
Research&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project supports the Gordon Research
Conference on Environmental Sciences:&lt;br/&gt;Water to be held June 22-27,
2014. This year, the unifying theme will be Environmental Sciences in a Human-
Impacted World. The conference will bring together participants in an informal
setting, for a program of plenary talks by established and emerging scientists
to discuss frontier aquatic sciences research that explores how human
alterations of the environment influence critical processes from the molecular
to the landscape scale. The scope will span multiple disciplines (chemistry,
biology, geology, engineering, health science), media (soil, groundwater,
surface water, atmospheric water, drinking water, wastewater), and scales
(molecular, nano, cellular, ecosystem, global). Session topics will examine
contaminant fates, redox transitions, aquatic organic matter, consumptive water
use, treatment and release, advanced analytical and computational tools, human
and ecosystem health, and science communication. These formal sessions will be
complemented by poster sessions that integrate scientists at all career stages,
including graduate and post-doctoral researchers, in scientific discussions.
Together, the organizational format of this conference will advance the overall
goal of facilitating more effective communication and integration of ideas
between scientific disciplines and will contribute to the identification of new
approaches for solving important problems affecting water
quality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The provision of clean water for all uses requires
integrated solutions drawn from multiple disciplines in a broader framework of
environmental policy. The conference advances discovery while promoting
teaching, training, and learning by offering a platform for graduate student and
postdoctoral researchers to present their research and participate fully in the
conference activities. The conference format provides and unusual and ideal
means for the dissemination of research results, through close interaction of
participants from industry, government laboratories, and academia. Finally, the
conference promotes broad participation from a diverse background, both through
the speaker selection and through special GRC funding mechanisms that target
underrepresented groups.