* 1346332
* STTR Phase I:  SYNTHETIC JET BASED ROBUST MAV FLIGHT CONTROLLER
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2014
* William MacKunis, High Technology Materials, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2014
* USD 205,075.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer Research (STTR) Phase I project
initiates development of a conceptually new ?seamless? micro air vehicle (MAV)
design based on distributed array of synthetic-jet micro-actuators (SJMAs)
operating in a closed-loop flight control system to achieve unprecedented
aircraft maneuvering and gust tolerance capabilities. A radical minimalism in
the robust flight controller design is proposed to make it suitable for MAVs
with limited onboard computational capability. The design is particularly
advantageous for high levels of parametric uncertainty and nonlinearity present
both in the unsteady flight-path environment and the embedded actuator?s
response. The research objectives of the Phase I research include: (i) Design of
the robust SJMA-based flight controller which is easily and inexpensively
implementable, requiring no observers, function approximators, or adaptive
update laws needed for alternative methods, (ii) Development of low-fidelity MAV
flight simulator to be used as a testbed for design and optimization of the
robust flight controller concept, (iii) Technology demonstration using high-
fidelity simulations, and (iv) Assessment of technical and commercial merits and
commercialization feasibility. The proof-of-concept benchmark studies will
demonstrate robust flutter control of elastically-mounted airfoil entering
limit-cycle oscillations (LCO) due to impinging upstream flow disturbances
including deterministic gust and stochastic turbulence with prescribed
characteristics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential
of this project include: (i) Developing enabling robust flight control
technology to meet requirements specified for the market sector of airborne
combat and civil autonomous systems to conduct intelligence, reconnaissance and
surveillance missions with enhanced maneuverability and flight stability
capabilities for operations in highly unsteady flight-path environments; (ii)
Provide scientific and technological understanding of SJMA control authority
required as part of the closed-loop flight control system through conducting
low- and high-fidelity benchmark studies; (iii) Creating potential for the
technology demonstration to grow into the first start-up company incubated by
ERAU, thus opening new employment opportunities and directly meeting objectives
to spearhead the development of the advanced aerospace technologies and foster
the creation of the university Research Park providing synergy between industry
and academia in the Daytona Beach HUB-zone area; (iv) Enhancing the aerospace
engineering design curriculum with focus on novel air vehicle concepts; (v)
Contributing to the research team environment in the predominantly teaching
university by involving faculty and students in research projects and
collaboration between engineering departments on cross-disciplinary research
subjects; (vi) Providing important rational to initiated Ph.D. program in ERAU
College of Engineering; (vii) Involving female, minority and handicapped
participants in the research project.