* 1346789
* US-Ignite: EAGER: GENI-Enabled In-Home, Personalized Health Monitoring and Coaching
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2015
* Prasad Calyam, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* John Brassil
* 09/30/2015
* USD 300,000.00

Prior work has shown that the unobtrusive, continuous monitoring of individuals
with in-home sensors provides useful embedded health assessment, i.e., the
continuous assessment of health changes based on each person's individual
activity patterns and baseline health conditions, and can improve health
outcomes. Especially for older adults, identifying and assessing problems early
provides a window of opportunity for interventions to alleviate problems before
they become catastrophic and require hospital or nursing home
care.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project augments monitoring of individuals with
a new interactive exercise coaching interface that will connect a remote
physical therapist to senior clients in the home. GENI-enabled networking will
be incorporated to support real-time interaction via high-definition video. The
proposed project will meet the following objectives:&lt;br/&gt;* Develop an
integrated, interactive interface for displaying in-home gait history and
coaching remote users on proper exercise form.&lt;br/&gt;* Extend the integrated
system to support GENI-slice overlay network channels.&lt;br/&gt;* Deploy the
integrated monitoring and coaching system in senior independent living
homes&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will impact technology, healthcare,
policy, quality of life for seniors, and peace of mind for their families. The
technology impacts include significant contributions to GENI-enabled networking
and interactive interfaces for seniors. Results will further embedded health
assessment and offer new ways to detect health problems before they become
catastrophic. The project results will be disseminated both through traditional
academic publications and by outreach to the general public via the US Ignite
conferences and the university?s Engineering Week Open House in which hundreds
of K-12 students tour the college. Additionally, the project will recruit
undergraduate students, especially women and under-represented groups.