* 1346586
* Travel Grants for US Scientists to Attend Metabolic Pathway Analysis 2013 Conference at Corpus Christi College, Oxford, England on September 16-20, 2013
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2014
* Ross Carlson, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Friedrich Srienc
* 07/31/2014
* USD 13,200.00

1346586 &lt;br/&gt;Carlson, Ross P.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the
participation of US investigators and graduate students in the Metabolic Pathway
Analysis meeting to be held in Oxford, UK from Sep. 16-20, 2013. The meeting has
a primary focus on the structural (topological) analysis of metabolic networks,
and in particular techniques allied to linear algebra, linear programming and
computer modelling. This focus may be applied at many levels of abstraction,
from individual reaction mechanisms, through pathways, organelles, whole
organisms and, most recently, mixed populations. Covered topics will include
Metabolic pathway analysis, Metabolic flux analysis, Elementary mode analysis,
Metabolic modelling, Metabolic engineering, Genome scale modelling. One day will
be devoted to Thermodynamics in Metabolism. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF support
will help ensure the success of the meeting by partially defraying conference
costs for select US academic scientists and engineers with an emphasis on
underrepresented groups and graduate students. In the absence of NSF support,
many US academic scientists and graduate students would not be able to attend
and to benefit from interactions with the international community of metabolic
analysis/engineering researchers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award from the
Biotechnology, Biochemical, and Bioengineering Program of the CBET Division is
co-sponsored by the Synthetic and Systems Biology Program of the Molecular and
Cell Biology Division.