* 1346947
* EAGER:   A Comparison of Lacustrine Carbonate d18O and Organic Matter dD from Drought Sensitive Lakes in the Western United States
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2015
* Mark Abbott, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 07/31/2015
* USD 65,085.00

Instrumental climate records indicate that drought patterns in western North
America are sensitive to Pacific Ocean variability and to interactions between
the El Ni√±o Southern Oscillation, and the North American monsoon. A deeper
understanding of the past behavior of these modes is needed to improve
predictions of future drought and pluvial cycles. This proposed research would:
1) provide proof of concept for the use of delta-Deuterium records in lake
systems where single phase carbonates are not available for delta-18 Oxygen
analyses and 2) add to a growing a network of quantitative paleoclimate data
sets that would add a critical spatial and temporal perspective to our
understanding of aridity patterns in western North America and associated
synoptic climate teleconnections.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will
develop lake sediment organic matter del-D records from two closed-basin lakes
at centennial scale from two drought-sensitive lakes in the western US for the
last 2,000 years. The first, Castor Lake, is a well-studied system in Washington
State that has been instrumented for a decade with lake level sensors, water
temperature loggers, sediment traps, a weather station, and annual ground, lake
and stream sampling for water chemistry and stable isotopes. A decadal scale
record of oxygen isotopes has been published from Castor Lake, and offers an
opportunity for comparison with Algal del-D. The second lake, Graham Lake, is
also a drought-sensitive system located in New Mexico, a region of great
interest for drought studies. The team has visited this system, verified that it
meets the criteria for their proposed work and plans to recover a series of
overlapping cores for this study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts are
that if this new del-D technique is successful in these lakes without single
phase carbonates, the resulting network of paleodrought datasets from the
western US would provide important new information on the timing, duration and
magnitude of wet/dry cycles and combined with ongoing research, identify spatial
patterns of aridity in North America during late Holocene.