* 1347330
* Collaborative Research:  The role of oxygen fugacity in calc-alkaline differentiation and the creation of continental crust at the Aleutian arc
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2023
* Katherine Kelley, University of Rhode Island
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 07/31/2023
* USD 329,441.00

This proposal seeks to examine the role of oxygen variations in the origin of
the calc-alkaline magmas that erupt at subduction-related volcanoes (arc
volcanoes). In particular, the PIs seek to determine how oxygen varies during
differentiation and degassing, and see how it varies along strike of the
Aleutian arc as a function of material derived from the subducted slab. The work
will also include an experimental study of the relationship and interplay
between H2O and fO2 during magma formation, a critical question with
implications for the formation of continental crust. The PIs note that the
Aleutian arc features local and regional variations in numerous geochemical
features, but lacks the complexities introduced when magmas move through
continental crust. The proposed work includes novel (micro XANES analysis of the
ferrous/ferric ratio in glasses (a proxy for oxygen content), especially glass
inclusions in mineral. Water, CO2 and major and trace elements (including Cl and
S) will also be analyzed. The PIs also propose an experimental program in which
fO2 is varied at constant water content. The experimental glasses will be
analyzed using the same techniques as described for the natural glasses. Broader
impacts include a new interactive exhibit at the Smithsonian that will include
an on-line component. Material from the exhibits will be incorporated into
undergraduate curricula. There will be undergraduate mentoring through REU
and/or senior thesis, as well as mentoring of grad students and a post-doc.