* 1347026
* Student Travel Support to The International Conference on Cloud and Autonomic Computing
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2015
* Salim Hariri, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Katz
* 07/31/2015
* USD 7,500.00

This project will provide financial support to allow a number of graduate
students, especially those from underrepresented groups, the opportunity to
learn about the latest research results and tools in the Cloud and Autonomic
Computing (CAC) field. In addition, it will give the supported students the
opportunity to network and interact with active researchers and other students
doing research in this important and emerging research area. Networking and
interactions among the conference attendees are facilitated through the CAC
conference's structure. For example, the conference provides breakfast, lunches,
one reception during the poster/demonstration session, and a dinner banquet. By
providing all these activities, the supported students will have invaluable
experiences and plenty of opportunities to interact with and learn from CAC
researchers and other graduate students about their research activities and
approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent advances in computing, networking,
software and mobile technologies have lead to the development of cyberspace
services that are pervasive and ubiquitous, such as cloud services, that will
touch all aspects of our life and economy. Cloud services will revolutionize the
way we do business, maintain our health, conduct education, and how we secure,
protect, and entertain ourselves. However, along with these advances, there are
grand challenges in how to ensure that our cyberspace resources and services are
manageable and secure. The main focus of the CAC conference is to be the premier
international forum to present the latest research, applications, and
technologies to make cloud and autonomic computing systems and services self-
manageable with little involvement of human or system administrators.&lt;br/&gt;