* 1347087
* Origin and Vertical Extent of Damage Zones Around Continental Strike-slip Faults
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2014,12/31/2017
* Scott Johnson, University of Maine
* Continuing Grant
* David Fountain
* 12/31/2017
* USD 282,951.00

The objectives of this project are to: (1) scale-up a preliminary
micromechanical model for grain-scale coseismic damage spanning the seismogenic
zone that integrates analytical (electron backscatter diffraction and
cathodoluminescence) and computational (asymptotic expansion homogenization)
approaches and fully account for the grain-scale elastic interactions among the
different minerals in the sample; (2) apply this integrated framework to
quantify the effects of damage and other fault-zone microstructure on seismic
anisotropy; (3) determine the spatial and temporal pattern of damage and related
seismogenic structure around an ancient strike-slip fault (the Norumbega fault
in Maine) exhumed from a depth of approximately 10-15 km; (4) develop a
conceptual model linking this pattern to the damage structure of active faults
observed at the surface; and (5) disseminate open-source software for damage
analysis and calculation of bulk elastic stiffnesses and seismic properties of
damaged rocks. This software will take input either from electron backscatter
diffraction data files of natural microstructures, or synthetic (computer
generated) microstructures that can be used in sensitivity analyses among other
applications.

Strike-slip faults like the San Andreas Fault in California represent major
threats to life and property owing to the repeated generation of large
earthquakes. During each earthquake, the rocks surrounding the ruptured segment
of the fault are fragmented by cracking of individual mineral grains. Over many
earthquake cycles, these rocks become so damaged that they strongly affect the
elastic properties of the rocks, and therefore the speed and preferred
propagation direction of seismic waves. Although these so-called damage zones
are of great importance for seismic hazards, a robust mechanical model for how
they form is lacking, and there is almost no information on the vertical extent
of this damage within active fault zones. Furthermore, there is currently no
computational framework available for calculating how progressive damage
evolution might affect seismic wave propagation. The combination of modeling and
field-based results from this work will allow improved characterization of
seismically active areas, including conceptual and wave speed models that can be
used to better predict ground shaking directions and intensities. The open-
source codes developed in this project will be made available through existing
public portals, and will have many community applications including the
relationships between microcrack orientation and state of stress, interpretation
of seismological data, and analysis of brittle damage and fragmentation of
ceramics and advanced composite materials. Recognition of the importance of
microfracturing for macroscopic behavior and the ability to treat it
quantitatively is growing in both Earth sciences and materials engineering. The
results of this project will provide a framework for future efforts in both
fields, and for collaborations between them. The project will contribute to the
development of a diverse, globally competitive STEM workforce through training
of graduate and undergraduate students and in participation of women in STEM.