* 1347196
* CAREER: Understanding Flammability of Charring Polymers
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2019
* Stanislav Stoliarov, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 03/31/2019
* USD 412,418.00

Abstract &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal describes a five-year project
focused on developing a quantitative understanding of burning for charring and
intumescing polymeric systems. These systems represent one of the most promising
and environmentally benign solutions to the hazards associated with polymer
flammability. The mechanism of their flame resistance has not been well
understood, hampering material development efforts. The PI proposes to design a
set of controlled radiative pyrolysis experiments combined with a high-
resolution X-ray tomography, thermogravimetric analysis and differential
scanning calorimetry. This combination of experimental techniques is expected to
yield accurate data on the kinetics and thermodynamics of the thermal
degradation, char morphology evolution, and heat flow inside this class of
materials. The experimental results will be interpreted using a numerical model
concurrently developed. This model is capable of simulating transient
conductive, radiative and convective heat transfer, mass transport, and multiple
chemical reactions in a three-dimensional, non-homogeneous object of non-static
dimensions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will produce an in-depth
understanding of char growth dynamics in a wide range of polymeric systems
including a new generation of biodegradable materials. This understanding is
expected to transform the field of flame resistant material design and enable
qualitative improvements in public safety. The research results will be rapidly
disseminated among scientists and practicing engineers and utilized to
strengthen an array of partnerships that the PI has established with industry
and professional organizations. These results will also form a foundation of the
PI?s educational initiatives. The PI will develop an interactive material
flammability demonstration for secondary school students. This demonstration
will be used to foster the student?s interest in science while promoting fire
safety. The PI will combat a low graduation rate among racial minority college
undergraduates by engaging them in the fire safety research. The PI will also
develop the first of its kind graduate course on material flammability.