* 1347722
* Scaling cultures of collaboration: Evidence-based reform in portal STEM courses
* EHR,DUE
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2018
* Jose Mestre, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 12/31/2018
* USD 2,000,000.00

This project is using transformational learning theory and an Immunity-to-Change
model as justification for forming Communities of Practice (CoPs) to change the
teaching culture in gateway STEM courses at the University of Illinois. The
Immunity to Change model focuses on the discomfort caused by the many teaching
reforms that take the instructor out of the role of routinely providing
expertise to the students as the dominant form of interaction with them. When
the same instructors are working in or representing their research, it is
important to present themselves in ways that demonstrate their expertise. This
dissonance is a barrier to changing the teaching practices of research-active
faculty in many instances because the teaching practices require them to take on
the role of facilitator rather than expert.

Hence, this project is based on the core idea that teaching in gateway courses
should be jointly owned and created by the faculty, rather than being the sole
province of individual, independent instructors. This process is being initiated
through the formation of Communities of Practice (CoPs) around each
undergraduate STEM discipline in ten departments, which are located in two
colleges - Liberal Arts and Sciences and the College of Engineering. Through the
CoP process, the teaching culture is changing, as faculty are adapting
evidenced-based reforms and changing their instruction in gateway courses. These
gateway courses in ten departments in two colleges enroll over 17,000 students
annually, and several of the gateway courses are required for nearly all STEM
majors on campus. The Community of Practice approach is operating both within
each department and also at the aggregate level across all ten departments. Each
CoP is collaboratively exploring a domain of knowledge to support the
development of improved practice by connecting faculty who need to adapt their
teaching to evidence-based pedagogies with faculty whose beliefs already support
those pedagogies.

CoPs are providing an organizational structure that promotes long-term situated
learning that is exposing and challenging instructors' tacit beliefs that impede
change. CoPs also depend on high levels of collaboration for success and
effectively spread tacit knowledge, which decreases the learning curve for
novices, reduces creation of redundant resources or reenactments of failures,
and promotes creativity. The emphasis on CoPs will further engender common
ownership of the reforms, countering the current individualistic teaching
culture, thereby institutionalizing the reforms so that they are used in the
gateway courses as new faculty are assigned to teach them.

CoPs are engaging in a development cycle of innovate to evaluate, facilitated by
a large evaluation team and an instructional support team. The evaluation team
is providing both formative and summative feedback to CoPs using both
qualitative (e.g., student attitudes) and quantitative (e.g., performance
outcomes) measures that are in turn being used to improve teaching and learning.
In addition, the evaluation team is also studying the functioning of the CoPs,
including the extent to which teams are operating as CoPs, and providing
detailed descriptions of features of effective and less effective CoPs. The
instructional support team is providing just-in-time training to the CoPs by
attending their weekly meetings and organizing monthly gatherings for all CoPs.
The remaining PIs are working to maintain the top-down administrative support
from deans and department heads to sustain the bottom-up reform efforts of the
CoPs.