* 1347179
* CAREER:    Multiscale Investigations of Tropical Andean Precipitation
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2020
* Lester Perry, Appalachian State University
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 04/30/2020
* USD 494,296.00

This five-year proposed project will promote collaborative interdisciplinary
research, education, and outreach activities designed to advance scientific
understanding of the multiscale atmospheric processes responsible for
precipitation delivery in the tropical Andes Mountains. Initial research led by
the PI focused in the Cordillera Vilcanota of Peru has identified that most
precipitation occurs at night, is likely stratiform rather than convective in
structure, and is associated with Amazonian moisture transport arriving from the
northwest. These findings upend conventional understanding on regional
precipitation in the scientific literature; however, it is unclear whether these
patterns also hold for other regions in the tropical Andes. For this CAREER
proposal, project activities aim to address the following research
questions:&lt;br/&gt;1) How do the temporal patterns, moisture source regions,
and ENSO relationships with precipitation occurrence vary in the tropical Andes?
2) What is the vertical structure (e.g., echo top heights, moist layer depths,
melting layer heights) of tropical Andean precipitation and how does it evolve
temporally? The tropical Andes Mountains will serve as the study site, with in-
situ observations focusing on the glacierized regions above 4,000 m in the
Cordillera Vilcanota (Peru) and Cordillera Real (Bolivia) and adjacent populated
valleys. &lt;br/&gt;The educational activities of the proposed project will be
based in both the tropical Andes and the southern Appalachian Mountains and
include the following: 1) Involvement of undergraduate and graduate students in
all phases of the proposed research, including extensive field experiences, 2)
Development of collaborative partnerships with the Universidad Nacional de San
Antonio de Abad de Cusco&lt;br/&gt;(Peru) and the Universidad Mayor de San
Andres (Bolivia), 3) Education and outreach programs with exposure to 250,000
annual visitors at Grandfather Mountain, North Carolina, and 4) K-12 education
activities in a rural mountain school district in conjunction with the 2012
North Carolina Teacher of the Year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit
:&lt;br/&gt;Precipitation variability in tropical high mountains is a
fundamental, yet poorly understood, factor influencing local climatic expression
and a variety of environmental processes, including glacier behavior and water
resources. Precipitation phase (e.g., rain vs. snow), timing (e.g., afternoon
vs. overnight), frequency, and amount influence surface albedo and soil
moisture, whereas cloud cover associated with precipitation events reduces solar
irradiance. Considerable uncertainty remains in the multiscale atmospheric
processes influencing precipitation patterns and their associated regional
variability in the tropical Andes -- particularly related
to&lt;br/&gt;precipitation phase, timing, and vertical structure. The proposed
research is transformative in that it aims to investigate the multiple
spatiotemporal atmospheric processes associated with precipitation delivery in
the tropical Andes, which is of considerable importance to climate variability
and change, glacier behavior, hydrology, agriculture, ecosystems, and
paleoclimatic reconstructions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts
:&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research, education, and outreach activities will build
on the mission of Appalachian State University, which is to resourcefully blend
teaching and scholarship. In particular, the proposed activities will promote
collaborative interdisciplinary research, education, and outreach with a variety
of partner organizations, both abroad and in the U.S.,
thereby&lt;br/&gt;fostering global learning. The proposed project will engage
underrepresented groups from the tropical Andes Mountains and rural southern
Appalachian Mountains in citizen science and educational activities through
local schools and partner organizations. The PI will actively involve
undergraduate and graduate students in all phases of the proposed project,
providing them with valuable&lt;br/&gt;international research, outreach, and
field experience, thereby furthering their professional development. The
proposed instrumentation and citizen science observations will also
significantly expand the observational networks in a severely data-limited
mountain region, providing an important long-term contribution to the
atmospheric science community. Broader scientific&lt;br/&gt;benefits from the
proposed activities include improved precipitation forecasts, increased
scientific understanding of precipitation-climate-glacier interactions in the
context of ongoing climate variability and change, and improved ice core-based
reconstructions of past climates in tropical mountain environments.