* 1347711
* Change at the Core: A Collaborative Model for Undergraduate STEM Education Reform
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/2013,01/31/2019
* Catherine Clark, Western Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 01/31/2019
* USD 1,999,581.00

Change at the Core (C-Core) is a multi-disciplinary, inter-institutional project
that is transforming undergraduate STEM education at Western Washington
University (WWU), Whatcom Community College (WCC), and Skagit Valley College
(SVC). C-Core is improving student engagement, learning, and success in STEM by
creating a critical mass of STEM faculty at each institution and in each STEM
department who understand and regularly use evidence-based teaching and learning
practices. Participants include faculty members, department chairs, deans, and
teaching assistants, who are becoming agents of change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
achieve project goals, participants and project staff are creating a shared
vision and model for transforming undergraduate STEM education. This model
includes Summer Institutes on evidence-based practices, followed by professional
learning communities (PLCs) to support implementation over the academic year.
Institutes and PLCs are also focusing on implementation of strategies to promote
underrepresented minority (URM) students' success in STEM. Assessment for
Learning (AL) is C-Core's overarching framework, supported by student-centered
strategies such as peer-learning, flipped classrooms, and authentic research
experiences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;C-Core is generating new knowledge about
organizational change at both two- and four-year institutions including
alignment of institutional and departmental policies and practices to support
student-centered learning, use of PLCs and change agents to create a critical
mass of faculty using evidence-based practices, promotion of positive and
lasting changes in faculty practices and beliefs, and improvement of URM student
success and interest in STEM courses, majors, and careers. Rigorous evaluation
and dissemination plans are enabling C-Core to become an adaptive model for
institutional reform involving two- and four-year
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To increase participation, retention and
success of URM students in STEM, C-Core is partnering with high school-to-
college bridge programs to recruit more URM students into STEM majors and
leverage research opportunities, tutoring, and student clubs to promote academic
success. Additionally, faculty are being trained to address issues of isolation,
culture, and identity as ways to support URM student success in STEM. To
disseminate the C-Core model regionally and nationally, WWU, WCC, and SVC are
working directly with other institutions, collaborating with disciplinary-based
organizations and networks such as Project Kaleidoscope (PKAL), the Science
Education Resource Center (SERC), and Partnership for Undergraduate Life
Sciences Education (PULSE), conducting workshops at professional society
meetings, and developing a Change at the Core Webinar series.