* 1347083
* Collaborative Research: An Experimental Economics Investigation of Groundwater Resource Dynamics
* SBE,SES
* 05/22/2013,10/31/2014
* Jordan Suter, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 10/31/2014
* USD 58,233.00

Groundwater resources are increasingly relied upon to provide vital sources of
clean drinking water and irrigation for food production throughout the world.
Groundwater extraction impacts the dynamics of complex hydrogeologic systems in
ways which may degrade the quality and quantity of water available for human and
ecological systems in the future. The proposed research seeks to examine the
feedback between human and natural systems in the context of groundwater
resources through the combined use of experimental economic techniques and
hydrogeologic modeling. The research improves understanding of human decision
making and the role of policy and psychological context in a dynamic common
groundwater resource that is characterized by realistic hydrogeologic features.

A better understanding of how physical feedbacks, information, and system
complexity affect individual decision-making allows both economists and
hydrogeologists to develop models that better integrate groundwater dynamics and
human behavior previously considered to be exogenously determined in models from
the respective fields. The work helps to inform the public and policy makers on
how to better tailor management policies to improve the efficiency and
sustainability of groundwater resources. This research moves beyond previous
work in this area by integrating models that are motivated by real-world
groundwater management situations. While the research is general scope, it has
implications for a variety of situations, including where aquifers are at risk
of depletion, such as in California's Central Valley; situations where excessive
pumping of an aquifer can lead to contamination of the entire resource, as in
the case of arsenic poisoning in parts of Bangladesh; and in instances where
pumping leads to sea water intrusion, which influences users differently
depending on location, such as in coastal regions of the United States. These
hydrogeologic settings produce situations in which human decision makers face
differential external costs associated with groundwater pumping and also the
potential for catastrophic failure of the resource. The experiments also
contribute to a better understanding of the role of institutions such as voting,
regulatory penalties and communication within a complex common-property
resource.