* 1347496
* Option 1: Small-Business ERC Collaborative Opportunity for the Virtual Coach for Home-Based Therapy
* ENG,EEC
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2016
* Gene Tacy, Myomo
* Fixed Amount Award
* Deborah Jackson
* 03/31/2016
* USD 199,953.00

Stroke occurs in 2.9% of the US adult population and there are nearly 800,000
new or recurring&lt;br/&gt;cases annually. Neuromuscular impairment is a common
consequence, though one from which recovery&lt;br/&gt;is possible with
appropriate therapy. Though most healthcare plans cover post-stroke
therapy,&lt;br/&gt;insurance reimbursement caps typically limit it to a few
weeks, despite a growing body of&lt;br/&gt;evidence that therapeutic gains are
possible months and even years after a stroke. Adding&lt;br/&gt;the fact that
patients generally prefer out-of-clinic care, there is a compelling case
for&lt;br/&gt;delivery of physical therapy in the home setting. The new product
that will result from this&lt;br/&gt;project will increase dosing of meaningful
exercises that promote recovery and minimize co-morbidities&lt;br/&gt;such as
pain, swelling, spasticity and (shoulder) subluxation.&lt;br/&gt;This project?s
outputs respond to other trends in the US healthcare system, including
the&lt;br/&gt;dwindling supply of qualified care providers, the movement toward
evidence based medicine&lt;br/&gt;and the economic requirement for increased
self-care. The ultimate goal of our Virtual Coach&lt;br/&gt;technology is to
leverage scarce human-based care with computer based solutions at
substantially&lt;br/&gt;lower cost. The self-adjusting goal-setting capability
developed in the proposed research&lt;br/&gt;will enable professional therapists
to extend their reach to patients.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One significant
challenge in computer-based coaching is devising algorithms that affect
human&lt;br/&gt;behavior in an intended way. It is difficult to predict how
people will react to commands,&lt;br/&gt;instructions, prompts and rewards. Some
respond well to a nurturing "atta boy!" while others&lt;br/&gt;respond better to
a drill sergeant?s "that?s not good enough!" Moreover, not only is
there&lt;br/&gt;variability among people, but also within a particular
individual from day-to-day. To be a&lt;br/&gt;viable, pervasive solution,
Virtual Coaches will need to be responsive to the psychology&lt;br/&gt;of the
people they serve. Pursuit of our objectives, especially the exploratory
research objective,&lt;br/&gt;addresses this challenge in the context of
motivating people to adhere to an exercise regimen.&lt;br/&gt;A second challenge
is designing exercise software factoring in the heterogeneous
presentation&lt;br/&gt;of individuals with neuromuscular impairments. Such
patients have varying levels of motor&lt;br/&gt;control, cognitive ability and
co-morbidities associated with their impairments. Off the&lt;br/&gt;shelf
exercise packages do not account for their limitations. Our translational
research objective&lt;br/&gt;is to overcome this challenge by leveraging
research conducted on impaired patients and an&lt;br/&gt;already developed
software architecture for coaching them through movements that promote
long&lt;br/&gt;term recovery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;