* 1347476
* Collaborative Research: The Role of Priming in Microbial Utilization of Terrestrially-Derived Dissolved Organic Carbon: A Proof of Concept
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2013,08/31/2014
* Thomas Bianchi, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 08/31/2014
* USD 31,851.00

The motivation for this work is the observation of higher than previously
thought consumption of terrestrial dissolved organic carbon (TDOC) in inland and
coastal waters. One possible mechanism contributing to enhancing consumption of
TDOC from soil and plant litter is the "priming effect," which has been
demonstrated for soil but not in aquatic systems. The priming effect in soils
consists in an increase in the rate of soil mineralization by the addition of
labile organic matter. The proponents want to investigate if the priming effect
is a general phenomenon of aquatic systems, which would influence the CO2
emissions of both aquatic and terrestrial ecosystems, and affect their nutrient
cycles. Their working hypothesis is that microbial consumption of TDOC will be
enhanced by the availability of priming substrates derived from available
dissolved organic carbon (ADOC), resulting in detectable effects using chemical
assays and microcosm experiments. Thus, this study will examine microbial
utilization of TDOC in Mississippi waters collected at Baton Rouge where
dissolved labile substrates from ADOC mix with TDOC.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Determining whether the priming effect affects the process
of carbon cycling in aquatic systems and thereby atmospheric C concentrations
and the delivery of C to the oceans is of outmost importance for the global
carbon budget and making predictions. The PIs want to insert the findings into
the US Carbon Cycle Plan. Undergraduate students will be involved in the
research.