* 1347510
* Collaborative Research: Investigating Institutional Success at Overcoming Challenges in Algebra-based Studio Physics
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2018
* Brian Thoms, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Connie Della-Piana
* 12/31/2018
* USD 180,962.00

This mixed methods research project investigates the puzzling problem of
variations in student learning gains that are observed at different institutions
of higher education when implementing the same research-based instructional
method in highly interactive classrooms. The study investigates model
implementations of algebra-based studio physics to identify and analyze the
critical features of this instructional method. The study is guided by the
following questions. Research Question1: How is algebra-based studio physics
implemented at a variety of institutions and for what types of students?
Research Question 2: Why are departments implementing algebra-based studio
physics in those ways? Research Question 3: What factors are associated with
student outcomes that indicate student learning gains? Algebra-based studio
physics comprise the physics experience for many students who enroll in
introductory physics courses. However, this approach to teaching physics remains
understudied relative to calculus-based studio physics. Therefore, the research
takes advantage of a unique opportunity to examine student learning gains. The
study examines how different types of students respond to interactive teaching
strategies in model implementations of this instructional method to teach
physics and how institutional types influence teaching and learning. Three
initial institutions serve as the basis for Phase 1 of this multi-phase study.
One of the institutions has reported high student learning gains in the algebra-
based studio physics courses. The other two institutions have observed low
student learning gains. Phase 1 is designed to establish baseline measures for
the research. During Phase 2 the research team is examining a total of twelve
additional institutions that utilize algebra-based studio physics. The twelve
institutions represent a range of those in the U.S. implementing this approach.
Institutions that are included in Phase 2 provide settings in which the research
team tests emergent hypotheses and the robustness of findings from Phase 1.
Specifically, the project is investigating (a) characteristics of model
implementations of algebra-based studio physics by faculty at different
institutions and (b) the characteristics of students engaged in these types of
courses, to investigate and explain the observed variations in student learning
gains. Research methods include classroom observations, interviews, surveys, and
student outcomes assessments.