* 1347719
* Wider Implementation of STEM Educational Reforms (WISER) Practices Planning Grant: Setting the Stage for Institutional Commitment to Evidence-Based Teaching and Learning
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Farooq Khan, University of West Georgia
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 08/31/2016
* USD 250,000.00

This Widening Implementation &amp; Demonstration of Evidence-Based Reforms
(WIDER) planning grant provides faculty at the University of West Georgia's
College of Science and Mathematics (COSM) with increased support in the use of
evidence-based teaching and learning practices. A Core Learning Team (CLT)
comprised of at least ten faculty members from six departments (Biology,
Chemistry, Computer Science, Geosciences, Mathematics, and Physics)is
participating in professional development activities designed to increase their
ability to develop and implement effective evidence-based teaching
practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Aligning with best practices in facilitating
institutional change, this program (Wider Implementation of STEM Educational
Reforms, WISER) Practices] is focusing on changing the knowledge and attitudes
of STEM faculty and university administrators with the goal of
institutionalizing practices that will increase student success. Additionally, a
rigorous evaluation of the program is providing both quantitative and
qualitative data that will advance knowledge and contribute to the growing
literature on evidence-based teaching and learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: As COSM faculty increasingly value and engage in best practices in STEM
learning, and as the University of West Georgia shows a commitment to rewarding
these faculty, the institution expects to see significant increases in student
learning, STEM majors, and retention in STEM courses. As a result, the
University will be better able to meet the demands for graduates in STEM fields
who can contribute to the economic growth of the state of Georgia and beyond.