* 1347321
* Proposal for Organizing the 18th GENI Engineering Conference (GEC 18) Networking Event
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2014
* Kiren Nayak, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Lyles
* 07/31/2014
* USD 49,613.00

This project supports hosting the 18th GENI Engineering Conference, including
organizing and hosting a demo session, to be held October 27-29, 2013, on the
campus of the Polytechnic University of New York. The Global Environment for
Network Innovations (GENI) is a virtual instrument that is rapidly emerging in
prototype form across the United States. GENI aims to transform experimental
research in networking and distributed systems, as well as emerging research
into very large socio-technical systems, by providing a suite of infrastructure
for 'at scale' experiments in future internets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;About 250
to 300 leading researchers and Ph.D. students from diverse U.S. institutions
will gather in New York to showcase their ideas and results. In the demo
session, each demo will be provided with a wired connection to the GENI
infrastructure. The NYU Poly information technology department will support both
the conference and demo session with high speed and high bandwidth connectivity
for researchers to demonstrate their experiments, both wired and wireless. The
demo venue will also provide connectivity to Internet2, National Lambda Rail,
and/or regionals, thus enabling researchers and practitioners to access all the
GENI resources nationwide for supporting their demo needs. Each GEC demo project
will be issued with temporary campus-wide wireless credentials that will grant
access to the campus wireless infrastructure and commodity Internet for the
duration of the demo evening.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The GEC meeting and demo
sessions provide graduate students with an opportunity to demonstrate and
explain their work to the GENI community prior to formal publication. It is a
key part of helping new graduate students understand what is being done with
GENI and who amongst their peers at other institutions might be valuable
resources. It also supports outreach to new community members, including the
emerging US Ignite community. GENI is already being used as an instrument for
research. This project supports further development and use of the research
instrument.