* 1347992
* Large Scale Molten Fuel Coolant Interaction Experiments: Explosion Initiation and Propagation
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Alison Graettinger, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 08/31/2018
* USD 293,501.00

1347992&lt;br/&gt;Sonder&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant supports development of
an experimental capability to control influencing parameters and study the
behavior of phreatomagmatic events. Specifically, the PIs will develop a
significantly and, as of yet unexplored, up-scaled device for controlling and
observing the behavior of triggered explosive phreatomagmatic volcanism by: 1)
assembling and developing a tiltable furnace for melting natural igneous rock;
2) developing a 25-50 L insulated crucible into which the melt would be poured
and through the base of which water can be injected at various isolated points
throughout the melt to create a phreatomagmatic ?premix? in which a quasi-stable
water vapor phase separates the liquid water from the melt; 3) developing a
trigger system (e.g., an air gun directed into the crucible containing the
premix or a hammer device) to induce breakdown of separating water vapor phase
such that direct interaction of hot magma and liquid water causes rapid cooling
and leads to explosive volcanism; and 4) instrumenting the crucible with
observation methodologies to study the mechanical and dynamical behavior of the
system (e.g., high-speed force transducers mounted on the bottom of the crucible
to measure the vertical forces of explosion, thermocouples within the crucible
to measure melt temperatures, high speed cameras to observe ejecta). The
development of the device will involve consultation with scientists at Wurzburg
University in Germany and engage a Ph.D. student in instrument system
engineering and experimentation. Initial experiments will varying the pre-mix
parameters (injected water geometry and volumes and preloading of water down the
crucible supply ramp ? dynamic premix), testing differing triggering mechanisms
and subsequent study of ejecta (e.g., grain size analysis, spatial distribution,
textural and mineralogical study of ash minerals). Melt composition will be
maintained as a constant for experiments. The explosive experiments will be
carried out at an extant outdoor facility (the GeoHazards Field Station leased
by SUNY-Buffalo that is already permitted for explosives.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed scale of the device represents the potential
for a two order of magnitude increase in the volume of magma premix that has
hitherto been experimentally controlled to study phreatomagmatism and presents
an interesting mid-scale parameter space to study of phreatomagmatic behavior
and the conditions that favor hazardous ash clouds and pyroclastic density
current formation. This scale of experiment is far from the scale of natural
systems, but should offer new insights into questions surrounding the nature of
phreatomagmatism including: 1) what is the influence of many water domains
entrapped in the melt on explosion intensity when they are homogeneously and
inhomogeneously distributed? and 2) is there a minimum trigger energy necessary
to start the explosion, or can a premix effectively explode by itself?
Experimental results will feed into models that attempt to scale laboratory
observations to natural system behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;***