* 1347545
* Numerical Assessment of the Practical and Intrinsic Predictability of Warm-Season Convection Initiation Using Mesoscale Predictability Experiment (MPEX) Data
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2018
* Paul Roebber, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 05/31/2018
* USD 456,206.00

The formation of deep, moist convection, or convection initiation, is highly
sensitive to the atmospheric state in which it occurs. Consequently, accurately
predicting the timing and location of convection initiation events poses a
formidable challenge for storm-scale numerical simulations. The ultimate goal of
this research is to improve the ability to predict convection initiation and,
subsequently, mitigate the loss of property and life that often accompany
intense convective events. To that end, this study examines the practical and
intrinsic predictability of convection initiation by assessing the impact of
targeted synoptic- to meso-alpha-scale observations obtained in the pre-
convective environment by the Mesoscale Predictability Experiment (MPEX) upon
convection-permitting real-data numerical simulations of selected convection
initiation events. Investigating how predictability evolves in response to a
more intensively-sampled representation of the pre-convective environment will
increase fundamental understanding regarding the synoptic- to meso-alpha-scale
controls upon convection initiation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
Utilizing two ensembles of Ensemble Kalman filter-initialized, convection-
permitting real-data numerical simulations, one incorporating MPEX observations
and one not, this research tests the hypothesis that a more intensively-sampled
representation of the pre-convective atmospheric state is sufficient to improve
the practical predictability of pristine convection initiation timing and
location over the range of events sampled by MPEX. Probabilistic, temporally-
binned spatial verification methods will be utilized to test this hypothesis.
Utilizing "perfect model" and "perfect observations" approaches applied to the
study of the initial convection initiation event from three MPEX intensive
observation periods, each characterized by a different prevailing synoptic-scale
flow pattern, the influences of initial condition uncertainty and variability in
the numerical representation of sub-grid-scale planetary boundary layer
processes upon the intrinsic predictability of convection initiation are
examined. In so doing, this research will expand understanding through the
provision of critically-needed insight into the limits imposed by current
observational constraints upon the predictability of convection initiation, an
inherently multi-scale, non-linear physical process. It will further illuminate
the controls upon the predictability of convection initiation exerted by the
synoptic- and meso-alpha-scales and identify the presence of larger-scale
attractors that influence its intrinsic
predictability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Deep, moist convection
routinely poses significant impacts to both property and life. The ability to
mitigate these impacts through the development of more accurate, longer-lead
forecasts of deep, moist convection hinges upon our ability to better predict
its initiation. Basic insight into convection initiation provided by the
research will lead to advances in our ability to predict the timing, location,
and occurrence of deep, moist convection. Such advances offer the promise of
reducing the substantial losses of property and life due to deep, moist
convection and associated phenomena incurred annually. The cross-cutting
research themes of predictability, probability, and uncertainty will be
communicated to non-specialists through the development of an undergraduate,
non-majors Honors seminar titled "Understanding and Communicating Probability
and Uncertainty in the Atmospheric Sciences." Graduate students involved with
the research will be mentored as to the inherent societal significance of their
research, afforded opportunities to communicate research findings to diverse,
non-specialist audiences, and encouraged to acquire training in integrating the
physical and social sciences.