* 1347243
* Opening Doors: A Wider Examination of STEM Teaching and Learning, Culture and Support at Otterbein University
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Anna Young, Otterbein College
* Standard Grant
* olga pierrakos
* 08/31/2016
* USD 241,254.00

This WIDER planning project is examining teaching, learning, and co-curricular
evidence-based practices (EBPs) among underclass STEM majors and faculty at
Otterbein University. Through an interdisciplinary initiative led by STEM
practitioners and educational experts, the project is seeking to understand
factors that influence the use and effectiveness of evidence-based practices for
STEM students. These factors include faculty members' knowledge and use of EBPs,
barriers to implementation of EBPs, and impact of EBPs on student learning and
retention, as well as the role of student confidence and culture on learning and
persistence. The team is using a rigorous, mixed-method design that employs a
combination of validated assessment methods, classroom observations, focus
groups, and data mining, focusing on gateway courses for majors in Biology,
Biochemistry &amp; Molecular Biology, Chemistry, Mathematics, Physics, and Zoo
&amp; Conservation Science. The mixed-method design is informed by multiple
change theories, including Senge's model of learning organizations, and the
results are being used to develop strategies for change at both the individual
level (i.e., developing reflective teachers and disseminating curriculum and
pedagogy) and the organizational level (i.e., enacting policy and developing a
shared vision). The goal is to drive strategic, comprehensive reforms to the
STEM programs at Otterbein and also to disseminate findings to other primarily
undergraduate institutions in order to improve student learning and retention in
STEM fields.