* 1347605
* MOOC-Supported Learning Communities for Future STEM Faculty: Multiple Paths to Advance Evidence-based Teaching Across the Nation
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2018
* Bennett Goldberg, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 09/30/2018
* USD 855,563.00

This project is leveraging the core ideas and ten years of experience of the
Center for the Integration of Research, Teaching, and Learning (CIRTL) to
address the preparation of future STEM faculty to use evidence-based teaching.
Although the nation has invested in understanding undergraduate learning and
developing evidence-based teaching and learning practices, research shows that
most current STEM faculty do not incorporate these practices into their own
teaching. This project is developing the use of Massively Open Online Courses
(MOOCs) and associated on-line learning modes to engage large numbers of STEM
future faculty and to prepare them to implement and advance evidence-based,
high-impact teaching practices. The CIRTL Network, now composed of 23 research
universities that produce 22% of the nation's STEM PhDs, is well-positioned for
this work, which is addressing four process objectives: (1) development of two
MOOCs that prepare future STEM faculty to implement and advance evidence-based,
high-impact teaching practices; (2) development and implementation within the
CIRTL Network of three modes of implementation of these MOOCs: (a) Open
Individual Participation; (b) MOOC-Supported Learning Communities; and (c)
Blended-Learning Courses; (3) evaluation of future faculty participation and
their learning of evidence-based, high-impact teaching practices across the
three implementation modes; and (4) offering the MOOCs to the nation on
available platforms, and disseminating supporting materials for varied
implementation modes throughout the CIRTL Network and the
nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this work is based on the
design of the proposed MOOCs, which are aligned with key findings of cognitive
science and discipline-based education research about student learning, such as
student engagement and inquiry, collaborative learning, and the value of
diversity. The MOOCs are building upon the CIRTL teaching-as-research process
which involves learning what is known (including ongoing knowledge-access
skills), developing a plan for teaching a scientific concept, acquiring ongoing
knowledge-access skills), developing a plan for teaching a scientific concept,
acquiring data on student learning, and reflective iteration. MOOC topics
include: learner-centered teaching and learning practices drawn from
(discipline-based) education research; information-access skills allowing future
faculty to stay abreast of advancing knowledge; skills for promoting active and
collaborative learning activities, such as problem-based teaching and learning,
peer instruction and use of learning communities; formative and summative
classroom assessment strategies; and techniques for creating inclusive learning
and learning-through-diversity. Additionally, the MOOC-Supported Learning
Communities and Blended-Learning Courses offer new approaches to integrate an
online learning environment with supportive local learning communities in order
to deepen student learning. A variety of sources of data will be collected to
understand the composition of student participants, student learning, student
satisfaction, and student use and adaptation of learning materials. Data will be
collected using a variety of pre- and post-course assessments, as well as
platform-provided metrics.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts
of this work rest on the large number of future faculty who will be prepared to
use evidence-based teaching strategies through the CIRTL MOOCs. It is estimated
that 1100 students will complete the CIRTL MOOCs each year. Based on a recent
needs assessment within the CIRTL Network, it is estimated that there will be
200 participants per year in MOOC-Supported Learning Communities (MSLCs) from
the CIRTL Network alone (with very high completion rates). Lastly, the content
of the proposed MOOCs is available to anyone across the nation to reuse, revise,
or redistribute into Blended-Learning courses or other learning experiences. By
introducing widespread learning about evidence-based teaching practices through
MOOCs, MSLCs, and Blended-Learning Courses, many more STEM future faculty across
the nation will be prepared as excellent teachers.