* 1347116
* Host-mediated regulation of dual obligate intracellular symbionts
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2014,02/28/2019
* Nancy Moran, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 02/28/2019
* USD 580,000.00

Intimate associations between bacteria and animals have evolved frequently and
form the basis for many specialized animal lifestyles. Insects that feed only on
sap of vascular plants depend on bacterial partners that live within specialized
cells of their insect hosts and that provide nutrients to the insects. These
relationships have persisted for hundreds of millions of years, yet little is
known about what mechanisms allow both insects and bacteria to rely on each
other. This project addresses the question of how these insects tolerate and
foster their resident bacterial populations. The project will incorporate
experiments on laboratory populations of leafhoppers, which have some of the
most specialized symbiotic associations. Typically leafhoppers harbor two
different symbiont types that provide complementary sets of nutrients required
by the hosts. Investigators will use new genomic and molecular technologies to
determine the mechanisms that leafhopper species use to maintain their symbiotic
bacteria. To understand the specific host mechanisms that differentiate among
bacterial types, investigators will make use of comparisons between related
leafhopper species that have different bacteria as symbionts.&lt;br/&gt;This
project will give in-depth research experiences to numerous undergraduates at
the University of Texas. It will also be the basis for the long-term research
program of a postdoctoral researcher who plans future work on insect-bacterial
relationships. In addition, leafhoppers are primary vectors of many viral and
bacterial diseases of plants, including many major agricultural crops in the
United States. For this reason, leafhoppers are some of the most severe insect
pests of agricultural systems. Thus, investigators will perform all experiments
on two notorious North American pest species. These results will provide new
insight into how these pest species interact with microorganisms, including both
symbionts and disease organisms.