* 1347658
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Resource Production and Environmental Degradation in Jordan
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Kyle Knabb, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2014
* USD 15,167.00

The human impact on marginal environments is a deep-time challenge that has
especially affected societies in the Middle East during the past 3,500 years. In
particular, the impact of ancient pollution on food systems and human health is
poorly understood. To address this, Kyle Knabb will analyze ancient soil samples
collected from agricultural terraces during the 2011 season of fieldwork of the
UC San Diego Edom Lowlands Regional Archaeology Project in southern Jordan,
under PI Prof. Thomas Levy. The Faynan valley is located in a hyper-arid desert
zone approximately 50 km southeast of the Dead Sea, at an elevation of roughly
200 meters above sea level. The Faynan valley is also the largest natural
resource zone rich in copper ore, and home to one of the most prominent Iron Age
and Roman (1200 BCE - 400 CE) settlements, where agricultural crops and copper
was produced at a massive scale. Because this site was continuously occupied
over this 1600 year period, it provides an ideal case study to examine the human
impact on the environment. Mr. Knabb's research will use cutting-edge laboratory
techniques, such as luminescence dating, mass spectrometry, and isotope
analysis, to measure the timing and the extent of environmental pollution that
resulted from hundreds of years of industrial copper smelting. The geo-science
laboratory work is supervised by Prof. Yigal Erel of the Hebrew University
Institute of Earth Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Some of the most significant
political and economic developments in the history of human societies took place
in arid, marginal environments. Such development often permanently altered the
character of these fragile landscapes. Environmental degradation, especially
heavy metal pollution, is a poignant example of the deleterious effects that
large-scale production can have on an environment. This project will contribute
to anthropological and archaeological knowledge about the relationship between
industrial-scale resource production and environmental degradation. In
particular, it will lead to a better understanding of the spread of
environmental pollution and the potential impacts of ancient pollution on the
environment and to humans. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project also seeks to make
a broader impact beyond the archaeological research. An essential element of
this project is interdisciplinary collaboration with domestic and international
institutions. This will include travel to Israel for Mr. Knabb's graduate
student training and laboratory work, enhancing interaction between archaeology
and geo-science disciplines and international partnerships between the UC San
Diego Department of Anthropology and the Hebrew University Institute of Earth
Sciences. Collaboration will also lead to joint publication in cross-
disciplinary journals. Furthermore, this research supports multi-disciplinary
approaches to discovering our human past through geophysical, geochemical,
archaeological, and geographical methods. The research will be an important step
towards a better understanding of the history of environmental pollution in the
Middle East. In doing so, this project will increase knowledge about the
potential health and environmental consequences that ancient and modern mining
can have.