* 1347675
* Designing Teaching: Scaling up the SIMPLE Design Framework for Interactive Teaching Development
* EHR,DUE
* 12/01/2013,09/30/2019
* Cody Edwards, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 09/30/2019
* USD 572,190.00

This WIDER Institutional Implementation project investigates and implements a
teaching development process, the SIMPLE Design Framework, for creating design-
based small groups to support faculty as they implement interactive teaching
strategies. The project includes faculty from George Mason University's College
of Science, Volgenau School of Engineering, and College of Education and Human
Development in an interdisciplinary partnership that encourages discussion of
disciplinary differences in teaching. The hypothesis is that by participating in
support networks to attempt small changes, faculty will be able to make larger
changes over time. The project uses strategies suggested by Rogers' (2003)
Diffusion of Innovations as the theory of change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the
SIMPLE model, faculty at different levels of experience in interactive teaching
practices engage in discipline-based small groups that meet regularly and
provide mentoring around common needs and interests. This provides faculty with
limited teaching innovation experience to participate in the Teaching Design
Groups and supports more experienced faculty in the scholarship of teaching in
the Teaching Inquiry Groups. A key component to teaching development is the
design memo, which is used to document and share interactive teaching
experiences and serves as a starting point for the group discussions. The
project also is collecting qualitative data to document how the teaching design
or inquiry groups work together, the strategies instructors use, and the impact
on teaching in STEM departments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of
this project include the creation of a transferable framework for institutions
of higher education to use to facilitate the use of research-based and evidence-
based teaching practices focused on student interaction. The principles of the
framework give guidance as to group organization but allow flexibility across
contexts, institutions and departments. The implementation of interactive
teaching practices has been demonstrated to improve student learning
particularly by groups of students who have historically lacked representation
in STEM disciplines. The sharing of the design memos and teaching resources
through the SIMPLE Design wiki will allow data collected to be shared with a
broad audience.