* 1347915
* Ni Systematics in Olivine as Fingerprints of Magmatic Processes in Hawaiian Basalts
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2014,07/31/2016
* Michael Garcia, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 07/31/2016
* USD 167,194.00

The mineral olivine is of fundamental importance in understanding upper mantle
and crustal processes. The nickel (Ni) content of olivine is of great interest
because it is a sensitive indicator of temperature, pressure, oxygen fugacity
and bulk composition. The factors that influence equilibrium partitioning of Ni
in olivine have been explored through numerous experimental studies for a wide
range of experimental conditions and compositions. However, the behavior in Ni
and other divalent ions in olivine remains poorly known because of the complex
processes in magmatic systems. Ocean island basalts, such as those from Hawaii,
show large variations in olivine Ni content. There are many competing hypotheses
to explain the wide range of observed variation. To evaluate these hypotheses,
lavas from the ongoing eruption of Kilauea Volcano will be used. These lavas
also contain a wide range in Ni and have well characterized magmatic histories.
Analyzes of major and trace elements in Ni-bearing phases in rocks with known
magmatic histories will be made to assess the relative importance of each
magmatic process in controlling Ni in olivine.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The early
crystallization history of mantle-derived magmas is dominated by olivine.
Usually, it is the only mineral to crystallize for &gt;100 oC below the liquidus
at low to moderate pressures in primitive Hawaiian basalts. The composition of
olivine has been used extensively to evaluate various magmatic processes
including crystallization history, magma mixing accumulation and contamination
processes. The Ni content of olivine has been of keen interest because of its
strong compatibility in mantle-derived lavas and has been considered of
fundamental importance in interpreting core formation, the nature and evolution
of the mantle, melt formation in the mantle, and crystal fractionation and
accumulation in basaltic magmas. Thus, the Ni content in olivine provides
valuable perspectives on Earth processes. Plume-related lavas like those from
Hawaii show high abundances but wide variations in Ni content at the same MgO.
Controversy surrounds the origin of this variation. Well characterized samples
will be used to assess what magmatic processes are responsible for controlling
Ni abundance in olivine from Hawaiian basalts. Tholeiitic basalts from the
ongoing eruption of Kilauea Volcano and alkalic lavas from the rejuvenation
stage of volcanism for Ka`ula Island are the focus of this project. Magmatic
processes for the Kilauea eruption are well known including magma mixing,
crystal accumulation and temporally varying parental magma composition. For the
rejuvenation stage lavas, their depth of origin will be investigated using Ni in
olivine. Current depth estimates are highly variable. No previous high precision
analyzes have been done on olivine in rejuvenated lavas. This study will have
implication for our understanding of the source lithology and formation
conditions for mantle-derived basalts.