* 1347899
* Dynamic Statistical Models to Improve Long-term Volcanic Hazard Assessments
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Rocco Malservisi, University of South Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 06/30/2018
* USD 229,116.00

Long-term volcanic hazard assessments aim to forecast the timing and nature of
future, potentially dangerous, volcanic activity. Such assessments need to
account for the dynamic nature of volcanic systems, such as migration of
eruptive vents, variations of eruption frequency, and magma focusing in various
tectonic settings. This project brings together a multidisciplinary team to
improve our understanding of how volcanic systems evolve in space and time due
to complex magmatic processes within the Earth's mantle and crust that cannot be
directly observed. In this project, researchers will concentrate on the
distributed volcanic system around Lassen Peak, California, as a test for
statistical models of spatial intensity (vents per unit area), volume intensity
(erupted volume per unit area), volume-flux (erupted volume per unit of time and
area) and recurrence rate models (number of eruptive events per unit of time).
They plan to enhance these models by integrating data that provide clues to
subsurface magmatic processes, such as geophysical, geochemical and tectonic
data. They will make new age determinations of past volcanic eruptions and
assess geochemical trends in the Lassen volcanic system. Together, these data
and models should provide more accurate tools for assessing the potential
impacts of future volcanic activity. Researchers then plan to generalize this
model to consider diverse volcanic systems in the western United States and
their potential hazards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, existing data on
vent location and erupted volumes will be used to develop nonparametric kernel
density statistical models of the spatial intensity and volume intensity at
Lassen and for five other well-studied volcanic systems in the western U.S.A.
These statistical models cast the discrete processes of dike injection, sill
development, and eruption as continuous density functions. Uncertainties in
these statistical models (e.g., uncertainty due to vent burial; uncertainty in
geochronology) will be tested by gathering additional data in the Caribou
volcanic field, east of Lassen. There, new radiometric age determinations and
additional volume data will be collected to test statistical models of field
growth using stochastic recurrence rate and lava flow inundation models that we
have previously developed. Using radiometric age determinations of vents and
erupted units, recurrence rate of volcanism and associated uncertainty will be
calculated using a Monte Carlo approach. Stochastic solutions to differential
equations governing magma production and transport will be implemented to model
subsurface processes of magma ascent. Using this continuous formulation,
additional complexities that influence magma migration such as complex sources,
magma generation, magma rheology, tectonic stresses, and/or
anisotropic/heterogeneous behavior of the porous medium, can be simply
implemented by varying the choice of source and conductivity parameters. In this
way physical processes that may give rise to heterogeneous flux in numerical
models can be tested and be related to observed vent distributions and volume
flux at the surface, creating stronger links between statistical models of
volcanism and observed geophysical, tectonic, and geochemical data.