* 1347209
* Future of Geoscience Undergraduate Education in January of 2014 at the University of Texas at Austin
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2013,02/29/2016
* Sharon Mosher, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Lina Patino
* 02/29/2016
* USD 235,023.00

This conference will bring together a broad spectrum of the geoscience education
community to undertake an in-depth review of undergraduate geoscience education.
The objective will be to begin the process that would develop a vision and road
map for the community on undergraduate geosciences education for the 21st
century. In a 2.5 day workshop, participants will bring to the surface key
issues that the community needs to work on in order to set a vision that is
audacious, well-informed, and implementable. Over the last 17 years since the
last community wide effort, significant advances in the geosciences, in
technology, and in STEM education have occurred. Questions that need to be
addressed include: How can we best prepare our undergraduate students for
graduate school and/or future careers in the geosciences? What should an
undergraduate geoscience curriculum cover? What are best practices for student
learning and use of technology in the geosciences? What can we do to broaden the
participation of underrepresented minorities and increase the number of
qualified K-12 geoscience teachers?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This summit will
catalyze new approaches, techniques, and uses of technology to enhance student
learning by bringing together participants with very different expertise and
backgrounds. The ultimate outcome of the activities initiated by the summit
conversations will be students from diverse backgrounds better prepared to
address fundamental geoscience questions using modern technology, tools and
techniques. Geoscientists play a critically important role in addressing
societal issues such as energy, water, natural hazards (e.g. earthquakes,
volcanos, tsunamis, hurricanes, and floods), mineral resources, climate,
environment, and sustainability. It is expected that the post-summit activities
will have a profound impact on the education of future geoscientists, increasing
the quality and breadth of their education and preparation for future careers.
An increase in their understanding of natural processes will help find solutions
to society's problems.