* 1347578
* Collaborative Research: A Community of Enhanced Assessment Facilitates Reformed Teaching
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Michelle Smith, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 08/31/2017
* USD 54,486.00

his project is creating the foundation for a national network of local
disciplinary Faculty Learning Communities (FLCs) that use constructed response
assessments in support of reformed teaching practices. It is building on prior
work of the Automated Analysis of Constructed Response (AACR) research group to
create a disciplinary community of biology faculty from the five collaborating
institutions who are interested in new methods of assessment and willing to use
open-response assessments and automated analysis to inform their teaching.

The project is grounded in transformational learning theory and Senge's theory
of organizational change and is facilitating wider adoption of these practices
by creating hubs of practice: multiple faculty adopters contained in a single
department/program. Each hub is supported by a lead faculty member,
institutional administrator support, and a cross-institutional community of
assessment users in several hubs. The project is building sustainability in the
following ways: (1) creating local FLCs for professional development (PD) to
support the use of these assessments and develop learner-centered materials in
response to assessment reports; (2) connecting the local FLCs in a cross-
institutional virtual community of instructors who use AACR questions, share
materials, and where support emerges from the community itself; and (3) laying
the foundation for expanding the FLC network in the future in which we will
fully automate the analysis of AACR assessments, providing a roadmap for
structuring support of transformed teaching and learning in Biology.

The project has three research objectives focused on faculty adoption and use of
the assessments and institutional structures effect on faculty within the FLCs.
They are investigating faculty members' attitudes about the AACR assessments and
reports and their perception of the systemic structures that facilitate and
impede sustained use. They are also determining the extent to which
participation in the AACR FLCs impacts faculty's ideas about teaching and
learning and what impacts sustained adoption of AACR tools.

The intellectual merit of this project lies in the improving STEM education
through the use of valid and reliable instruments for providing insight into
student thinking. Constructed response concept assessments have the potential to
assess "big ideas" in STEM in a richer, more multi-faceted manner than multiple
choice instruments. This project is providing insight into the factors that
facilitate or impede faculty adoption and use of reformed teaching materials and
practices. It is also providing the foundation for the future expansion of a
national network of local FLCs and disciplinary-based virtual communities of
practice that will have access to completely real-time, automated analysis of
AACR assessment items, faculty developed teaching resources and support.
Creation of a cross-institutional network of biology educators using the same
assessments allows the discussion of significant issues in undergraduate science
education.

The broader impacts of the project lie in the improvement of STEM educator
development at the undergraduate level to increase recruitment and retention in
STEM and provide enhanced infrastructure for research in teaching and learning
and the education of undergraduates in STEM courses. It is laying the foundation
for a national collaboration of science educators interested in using conceptual
assessment tools. The inclusion and mentoring of postdoctoral research fellows
and undergraduate research assistants in STEM education research work is further
enhancing the infrastructure for research in teaching and learning. Finally, the
project website is enabling a community of practice by allowing resource sharing
and discussion.