* 1347576
* WIDER Planning Grant: Evaluation of WSU Use of Evidence-Based Methods in STEM Instruction
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2013,01/31/2016
* Robert Bruner, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 01/31/2016
* USD 249,995.00

Wayne State University (WSU) is an urban research-intensive university whose
student body reflects the diversity of the metro Detroit area. The primary goal
of this project is to support the broad implementation of Evidence-Based
Teaching Methods (EBTMs) across the STEM disciplines on campus, and by doing so,
to support student persistence within STEM majors, improve the 6-year graduation
rate of STEM undergraduates, and enable graduates to be more effective in the
21st century workplace. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Phase 1 of the project involves a
critical self-assessment of current teaching practices on campus including STEM
faculty attitudes toward and knowledge of EBTMs. Comparisons of self-reported
usage of EBTMs to classroom video observations scored using objective measures
of classroom activity take place during this phase. In phase 2, the development
and implementation of a series of professional development activities aim at
broadening the awareness of EBTMs and assisting faculty with their adoption.
Additional survey work will assess the impact of the interventions on attitudes
and observational work on classroom pedagogy usage. Phase 3 involves the
development of an institutional plan for the broad implementation across the 26
foundational courses identified in 4 primary disciplines (Biology, Chemistry,
Math and Physics) with an enrollment of approximately 7000 students per
semester. Concurrently during the 3-phase plan, metrics for longitudinal
tracking of students through the STEM curricula will be developed to: a)
understand better how students interface with the degree programs; b) identify
critical points within our majors where specific interventions can be developed
to improve student outcomes; and c) determine if appropriate developmental
curricula are in place and whether the appropriate guidance is provided to
students in a timely fashion to maximize student success.