* 1347525
* EAGER: Holistic Security for Cloud Computing: Architecture for Modular System and Network Design
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2013,02/29/2016
* John Byers, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 02/29/2016
* USD 299,992.00

Perhaps the greatest single impediment to the broad adoption of public clouds is
concerns about security. Reasoning about all the security aspects of complex
modern information systems is enormously difficult. Security is especially
problematic in the cloud, where a customer must place their trust in opaque
complicated services that they do not understand or control and that are shared
with many other customers. Yet, in today's public clouds, the assumption is that
providers of cloud services can be fully trusted to provide systems secure
against any threat. An architecture that exposes the security properties of the
underlying services will enable a community of researchers to innovate in the
implementation of secure cloud services. It will also provide customers
visibility and control of the security in the services they use. Confidence in
the security of the cloud will enable transformational societal benefits as the
massive public cloud infrastructure becomes more broadly
adopted.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project defines a modular security
architecture for cloud services where providers of different services each
expose the security properties of their service, and the consumer can construct
a compositional service that matches their application requirements and then
reason about the security of the compositional service. The investigators extend
existing cloud infrastructures to support this architecture, and explore secure
modular networking and operating system technologies in the context of this
architecture.