* 1347982
* ARI-MA: Functionalization of Polymers with Fluorescent and Neutron Sensitive Groups for Efficient Neutron and Gamma Detection
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2015
* Uwe Greife, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 09/30/2015
* USD 282,000.00

13479782 (Greife). Efficient large scale detectors for gammas and neutrons are
needed to provide radiological security at international borders and at other
sensitive sites. To date large (sqft dimensions) gamma detectors can be liquid
or solid organic scintillators while neutron detection is achieved by a
combination of moderating plastic material and 3-He filled proportional
counters. As 3-He has become scarce and expensive due to its widespread use in
radiological security scanners, alternative detector materials need to be
developed with similar or superior performance. The aim is also to reduce the
price of the individual detectors to allow a wider distribution and as such aid
in improving the global nuclear detection architecture. The project brings
together an interdisciplinary team of researchers with backgrounds in
chemistry/polymer science and nuclear physics to do basic research on the
synthesis of scintillating polymers directed at significant improvement in light
output, incorporation of neutron sensitive isotopes as well as reduction in
production cost. This project will synthesize new organic-based materials for
use as dopants and/or matrices with greatly enhanced energy transfer
efficiencies over what is commercially available. This goal will be achieved by:
1. Develop highly fluorescent groups that will be chemically incorporated into
the polymer matrix, thus preventing aggregation of the fluorescent groups during
processing and/or application that is known to reduce efficiency; 2. Develop
highly fluorescent boron (10-B) containing materials that can act as both
neutron and alpha/gamma detection groups, and 3. Develop "bulky" 3-D highly
fluorescent groups that can be physically mixed into the polymer matrix, but
will not migrate or aggregate due to its bulky 3-D structure. This project is
aimed at scintillator development for nuclear security applications and as such
if successful will have broader impact on the society it serves in improving the
possibilities for widespread deployment of sensitive radiation scanners. The
interdisciplinary research on the intersection between organic/polymer chemistry
and nuclear physics provides an ideal training ground for for all the graduate
and undergraduate students involved. A hands-on curriculum for outreach
activities on fluorescence and its applications will be developed and taught in
local schools.