* 1347516
* WIDER:Planning: GRASP: GW Reform and Advancement of STEM-education Practices
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Stephen Ehrmann, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 08/31/2017
* USD 229,886.00

This WIDER planning project is addressing the challenges of student learning,
diversity, and retention in STEM by promoting evidenced-based pedagogies with
proven organizational change frameworks. The project is being implemented by a
team of faculty with a depth and breadth of accumulated expertise in
transforming faculty educational practices. The team is working work with
colleagues in ten STEM departments to develop a framework in which to pilot the
use of four effective pedagogies, as a prelude to a larger implementation phase.
The four pedagogies are: (1) Peer-instruction; (2) SCALE-UP; (3) Blended
learning and flipped classrooms; and (4) Online customized tutoring in
mathematics to accompany mathematics and statistics coursework. To achieve the
transformation, the project will focus on core faculty beliefs about student
learning as a means for identifying opportunities for transformation. The
project will also rely both on proven transformative processes at GW, such as
faculty learning communities, as well as organizational change approaches
recommended in the education community, such as the Concerns Based Adoption
Model (CBAM). The project will forge the collaborations among faculty needed to
adopt future developments in STEM pedagogy, and to form an agent of
transformative change on campus. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will also
seek to understand the core issues in recruiting and retaining students from
non-dominant and underrepresented groups, as well as impact student learning in
non-major STEM courses through the use of evidence-based pedagogies. The change
processes and materials developed in this project can serve as a model at other
universities.