* 1347454
* SECO Program Solicitation NSF 13-551: Microwave Nearfield Radar Imaging (NRI) Using Digital Breast Tomosynthesis (DBT) for Non-Invasive Breast Cancer Detection.
* ENG,EEC
* 04/15/2014,02/10/2015
* Hok Seto, HXI, LLC
* Fixed Amount Award
* Deborah Jackson
* 02/10/2015
* USD 0.00

Early, accurate detection of breast cancer has long been a top medical priority.
Recent clinical&lt;br/&gt;success using Digital Breast Tomosynthesis (DBT)
developed by our Massachusetts General Hospital&lt;br/&gt;(MGH) research
partners shows reduced false alarms relative to conventional
mammography.&lt;br/&gt;However, despite DBT?s enhanced detection capability, the
1% radiological contrast between&lt;br/&gt;cancerous tissue and commonly-
occurring fibroglandular tissue limits the unequivocal
characterization&lt;br/&gt;of diseased tissue. Alternatively, due to the
relatively high contrast (10%) between cancer&lt;br/&gt;and fibro-glandular
tissue, microwave imaging has a strong potential to distinguish
diseased&lt;br/&gt;from healthy tissue. However, the often highly heterogeneous
nature of breast tissue, where&lt;br/&gt;fibroglandular tissue is randomly
interspersed in the adipose background, results in
disorganized&lt;br/&gt;microwave images resulting in degraded image
reconstruction.&lt;br/&gt;In collaboration with our research partners at
Northeastern University?s Gordon Center for&lt;br/&gt;Subsurface Sensing and
Imaging Systems (Gordon-CenSSIS) ERC, HXI proposes to fuse the
DBT&lt;br/&gt;X-ray imagery with microwave Nearfield Radar Imagery (NRI), and by
building upon the image&lt;br/&gt;extraction techniques developed by ERC
platform technology, to significantly improve the cancerous&lt;br/&gt;tissue
detection rate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed activities will help the
scientific/medical community to advance the knowledge&lt;br/&gt;and
understanding of the effectiveness of microwave NRI method in detecting breast
cancer.&lt;br/&gt;Our approach is based on the use of high resolution X-ray-
based DBT imaging to obtain the&lt;br/&gt;spatial organization of heterogeneous
breast tissues and on coupling it as prior information&lt;br/&gt;to NRI for 3-D
reconstruction. This completely new transformative concept has not been
previously&lt;br/&gt;investigated, and it has the potential to overcome the
limitations of a single-modality breast&lt;br/&gt;cancer imaging
technology.&lt;br/&gt;This project brings together expertise from multiple
disciplines:&lt;br/&gt;1) HXI, world experts in radar design, will build the NRI
sensor and antenna array;&lt;br/&gt;2) CenSSIS will provide its platform
technology algorithms to perform the sensing, imaging&lt;br/&gt;and feature
extraction of biological tissues and conduct phantom experiments;
and&lt;br/&gt;3) Consultants from the MGH will provide medical
expertise.&lt;br/&gt;Our approach, using new but validated imaging systems,
allows for rapid transition to industrial&lt;br/&gt;product development. The
project furthers the ERC?s strategic plan through the application&lt;br/&gt;of
translational research for commercialization, with appropriate licensing of
CenSSIS? IP&lt;br/&gt;to HXI. Additionally, the NRI/DBT system has the potential
to expand HXI?s portfolio of marketable&lt;br/&gt;microwave and RF
products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this project are
multifaceted, including improving breast cancer detection&lt;br/&gt;rates,
minimizing the cost of treatment by reducing the number of false-positive
screenings&lt;br/&gt;and preventing patients from going through the anxiety that
callback examinations create.&lt;br/&gt;Today, mammography allows 10-15% of
cancers to go undetected and present themselves within&lt;br/&gt;one year. In
the United States approximately 45 million mammograms are performed
annually&lt;br/&gt;with false positive rates of 8-10%. This equates to more than
4 million callback examinations&lt;br/&gt;per year. With the global market
growing at a CAGR of 15.4% developing better imaging systems&lt;br/&gt;is a high
priority, in terms of women?s health, emotional toll, and medical costs.