* 1347349
* Enhancing the Technology and Design Entrepreneurship and Innovation Ecosystem at Rochester Institute of Technology
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2014,04/30/2020
* Scot Atkins, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Shearman
* 04/30/2020
* USD 330,000.00

This I-Corps Site at Rochester Institute of Technology (RIT) will increase the
quality and quantity of commercializable student projects, leveraging its core
strengths in diversity and experiential learning to advance innovation,
entrepreneurship, and commercialization outcomes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;RIT has
a track record for innovation. The Simone Center for Innovation and
Entrepreneurship's Student Incubator advanced approximately 100
multidisciplinary teams during 2012. These teams are supported by the Simone
Center's faculty Innovation Council with representatives from all of RIT's
colleges. Funding from the NSF I-Corp program will expand the number of teams
that will receive funding for prototyping/proof of concepts supplies, coach
expense, and exploratory customer market activities. The Simones Center's
approach to entrepreneurship is experiential and multidisciplinary. RIT is
situated to pioneer an I-Corps Site because of its history with experiential
learning (coop, industry relationships, history of practitioners in the
classroom etc.) and its program diversity. The Simone Center programs integrate
technology, design, and business perspectives in a holistic manner. Teams
simultaneously enter a program with formalized training and curriculum and
weekly coaching by an experienced cohort of industry-based entrepreneurs and
product developers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal provides broader impacts
to society and Rochester region in several ways:&lt;br/&gt;-The Creation of
Entrepreneurial Assets: RIT will increase the number of graduates with an
emphasis on STEM and design with business creation/tech commercialization
knowledge, experience, and teams building skills to innovate throughout their
careers.&lt;br/&gt;-New Ventures: The Student Incubator has and will continue to
create a variety of companies that have growth and provided economic development
to the struggling Rochester Region. &lt;br/&gt;-Pipeline Development: RIT will
provide a pre-seed/early stage pipeline for potential new ventures.
&lt;br/&gt;-Successful Undergraduate Innovation Processes: This program promotes
and advances the development of balanced student teams, experienced coaching,
and access to university support services (prototyping labs, faculties, and
other expertise). &lt;br/&gt;-Integration with a Preexisting Business Incubator:
The Simone Center's programs and events target early stage business development.
The Simone Center's Student Incubator Program transitions its investment ready
projects/businesses to the pre-existing RIT Incubator allows each unit to focus
on the a specific stage of new venture creation. This is also a potential
process for learning and dissemination.&lt;br/&gt;This is a project at an
institution that serves a very large population of deaf students (the largest
population in the nation). It has processes in place that will accommodate those
and the other RIT students to explore entrepreneurship and innovation - 90% of
all RIT students engage in a co-op experience. The Site design is student-
centric, having the joint impact of launching innovative products and immersing
students in an entrepreneurship curriculum. RIT has a track record of successes
- in particular, they have a history of launching "game-centric" and visual
media products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Site has the potential to
have a large regional impact in a part of the country that has been economically
depressed. There is a large team of volunteers willing to mentor students as
well as an Advisory Board to guide the programs.