* 1347226
* Minnesota I-Corps Site (MIN-Corps): Catalyzing Innovation Through Collaboration
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2014,05/31/2019
* John Stavig, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Pamela McCauley
* 05/31/2019
* USD 300,000.00

This project supports an I-Corps Site at the University of Minnesota (UMN). The
Site will provide infrastructure, resources, networking opportunities, training
and modest funding to I-Corps entrepreneurial teams. With this grant, UMN
leverages and extends its assets in science and engineering, research,
entrepreneurship education, and technology commercialization to create the
Minnesota Innovation Corps (MIN-Corps). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MIN-Corps will:
&lt;br/&gt;1. Expand UMN's outreach to its STEM researchers - faculty,
postdoctoral, graduate students, and undergraduates - to engage more of them in
the process of translating discoveries and technological developments into
commercializable products. &lt;br/&gt;2. Train entrepreneurial talent through
STARTUP, a course that incorporates the Lean LaunchPad concepts and tools.
&lt;br/&gt;3. Provide modest, early-stage funding ($1,000 to $3,000) to
approximately 30 entrepreneurial teams per year who are engaged in the course
and show potential, bridging the funding gap between early stage development and
translation into the market. &lt;br/&gt;4. Support ongoing customer development
and commercialization efforts by connecting teams with UMN and community
resources. &lt;br/&gt;5. Leverage research expertise to contribute to and
support collaborative program evaluation and research across the national
I-Corps network. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By engaging teams from UMN's STEM
research base, MIN-Corps will create new ventures based on sustainable business
models and customer-focused product design. MIN-Corps will prepare teams to seek
follow-on funding through public grants and private investment. MIN-Corps will
engage with stakeholders to make broader impacts in the community including:
&lt;br/&gt;Talent Development. MIN-Corps will expand awareness of resources
supporting innovation and entrepreneurship among students and faculty in STEM
fields, particularly among women and under-represented groups. The training
experience offered to high-potential entrepreneurial team members through the
STARTUP course will increase their readiness for innovation roles in industry
and infuse a more entrepreneurial mindset in UMN's culture. &lt;br/&gt;Network
Development. MIN-Corps will expand UMN's current engagement with seasoned
entrepreneurs, angel investors, and venture capitalists from the local
innovation ecosystem as mentors throughout the educational and commercialization
process. The program will also help harness the energy of individuals and
organizations currently supporting entrepreneurship and innovation across
Minnesota, including 19 Fortune 500 companies that make their home in the
state.&lt;br/&gt;Economic Development. MIN-Corps will increase the translation
rate of STEM-based innovation to new commercial ventures positioned for
subsequent funding from NSF I-Corps, SBIR, NCIIA E-Teams, accelerators,
incubators, competitions, angel investors and venture capitalists. The program
will spur economic prosperity by expanding access to Lean Launchpad training and
increasing the number of start-ups, entrepreneurs, and high-tech jobs in the
state.