* 1347890
* Collaborative Research: PGE and Pb Systematics in Altered Abyssal Peridotites: Integrating Experiments with Natural Samples
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2016
* Michael Bizimis, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 03/31/2016
* USD 153,444.00

The proposed work will test the hypothesis that changes in sulfide and metal
alloy mineralogy during peridotite alteration will mobilize and fractionate the
PGE, Re and Pb relative to their primary magmatic concentrations. Hydrothermal
experiments will constrain the solubility of PGE, Re, Pb in mantle Ni-Fe-Ru-Re
bearing sulfides and metal alloys as function of temperature and redox
conditions, and evaluate PGE alloy exsolution and PGE-Re fractionation under low
sulfur fugacity. The natural sample part of the study will constrain the
distribution and fractionation of PGE, Re, Pb in sulfides, alloys and bulk rocks
from well characterized abyssal peridotites, as function of redox, alteration,
sulfide mineralization and primary composition (fertile versus depleted).
Through integration of the experimental and natural sample data this work will
constrain the fate of PGE, Re, Pb upon recycling of altered oceanic lithosphere
and whether altered peridotites can develop, over time, highly heterogeneous
187Os/188Os and 186Os/188Os ratios between refractory (metal alloys) or mobile
(sulfide) reservoirs. This project is a collaborative effort between 2 US
institutions, and will promote transfer of technology and expertise on novel
analytical techniques to a newly established geochemical facility at USC.
Researchers will share a suite of state-of-the art instrumentation including
FIB-SEM, FE-EMPA, FE-SEM, LA-ICPMS and synchrotron radiation micro-X-Ray
fluorescence. All the data collected will be submitted to the PetDB and IEDA,
and will be available to the public through a CIW-hosted data repository. A
graduate student from USC will participate towards completion of his PhD
studies.

Altered mantle rocks exposed at the seafloor (called "serpentinized abyssal
peridotites") contain Ni-bearing metal phases associated with secondary
plantinum-group element (PGE) sulfur-bearing minerals (sulfides) and PGE metal
nuggets. PGEs have unique physical and chemical properties that are critical to
many technological applications. Thus, they are often regarded as strategic
metals in a wide range of industries including aerospace and fuel cell
technology. The proposed research will significantly advance the currently
limited understanding of the effects of high-temperature seawater alteration on
the distribution of plantinum-group element sulfides hosted in abyssal
peridotites. Moreover, abyssal peridotites provide an important record for
understanding the composition and evolution of Earth?s mantle now and in the
past. The proposed work is a collaborative experimental and natural sample
investigation. Experimental data will define the thermodynamic properties of PGE
minerals at conditions relevant to modern deep-sea volcanoes and assess critical
details of PGE solubility mechanisms in Fe-Ni-Ru-Re sulfides/alloys at elevated
temperature/-pressure conditions. The combined experimental results and natural
sample data will lead to a fundamental new understanding on the effects of
seawater alteration on the siderophile and chalcophile composition of altered
peridotite and its effect on the Os and Pb isotope heterogeneity in the Earth?s
mantle.