* 1347717
* Nonlinear Dynamics and Stochastic Methods: From Neuroscience to Other Biological Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 03/01/2014,02/28/2015
* Rodica Curtu, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 02/28/2015
* USD 20,000.00

The conference "Nonlinear Dynamics and Stochastic Methods: From Neuroscience to
Other Biological Applications" will be held at the University of Pittsburgh on
March 10-12, 2014. Recent years have witnessed an explosion of biological data
that require novel quantitative approaches for their interpretation and
analysis. In parallel, concentrated efforts were made by both the government and
the national universities to educate a new generation of researchers with
interdisciplinary expertise in mathematics, statistics and biology. However, the
demand for such specialized skills is still to be met as few mathematical and
biological scientists are trained in both topics. The meeting will bring
together a mix of senior and junior scientists to report on theoretical methods
that proved successful in mathematical neuroscience, and to encourage their
dissemination and application to modeling in computational medicine and other
biological fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the past two decades, among all
biological fields, neuroscience is arguably the most influenced by quantitative
methods. Computational models were used to propose anatomical- and functional-
related hypotheses and, conversely, novel experimental findings have led to the
development of new mathematical theories. While most of these theoretical
advancements were driven by the investigation of the nervous system, they are
general enough to be successfully translated to modeling problems in other areas
of biology and medicine. The meeting will integrate education and research by
introducing young investigators to a useful and effective mathematical toolbox
for quantitative biology, while presenting at the same time the most recent
advancements in the field.