* 1347830
* PERSIST:  Promoting Educational Reform through Strategic Investments in Systemic Transformation
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2018
* Douglas Bullock, Boise State University
* Continuing Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 08/31/2018
* USD 2,163,660.00

Boise State University's Promoting Educational Reform through Strategic
Investments in Systemic Transformation (PERSIST) project is 1) fundamentally
changing how foundational STEM courses are taught; 2) applying a change model
(Dormant's CACAO Model) to propagate the use of evidence-based instructional
practices (EBIP) among STEM faculty, departments, and curricula at Boise State;
and 3) assessing the impact of increased use of EBIP on student learning and
retention. The project is empowering a six-member Faculty Associates for STEM
Transformation (FAST) Team, supported by the campus Center for Teaching and
Learning, that is reaching across college and departmental boundaries to provide
leadership for implementation of best practice pedagogies in foundational STEM
courses (e.g., General Chemistry, Calculus and Pre-calculus, General Physics,
lower division Engineering courses, and upper division Geoscience courses).
Mathematics, crucial to STEM student success and retention, is an integrated
focus in many of the projects. The assessment and evaluation activities are
measuring institutional change, supporting pedagogical reform, and driving
continuous improvement. The ultimate impact of the project will be increases in
STEM majors and bachelor's degrees, including a specific focus on women and
other underrepresented groups in STEM, persistence in STEM from first to second
year, and a university culture that sustains long-term efforts of continuous
improvement in STEM pedagogy. Boise State's PERSIST is providing a testing
ground for how to drive institutional change in teaching practices. Ongoing
efforts to share the approach and results of PERSIST are informing
transformation of STEM teaching and learning locally, regionally, and
nationally.