* 1347383
* Polsky Prototyping Fund
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2018
* Steven Kaplan, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 04/30/2018
* USD 326,777.00

This I-Corps Site, at the University of Chicago's Polsky Center for
Entrepreneurship and Innovation, involves five campus-wide programs: the New
Venture Challenge, College New Venture Challenge, Global New Venture Challenge,
Social New Venture Challenge, and a Mobile App Challenge (offered in partnership
with UChicagoTech and Information Technology Services). And, as part of a
campus-wide innovation initiative, the Center will be working closely with
Argonne National Laboratory, the University of Chicago Computation Institute,
Medical Center, and Institute for Molecular Engineering to ideate and start
companies based on novel technologies and use-based innovation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funding from this I-Corps Site will support prototyping or
proof-of-concept at an early, critical stage of company development, providing
funding in line with Polsky's lean start-up methodology that stresses innovative
thinking, rapid iteration, market-testing, and flexibility in redesign or
repositioning. In particular, the Sites grant enables teaching and employing of
this methodology with faculty and students in the Computation Institute and
Molecular Engineering, in the Medical Center, and throughout the Physical
Sciences. With a growing roster of companies being launched out of Argonne, the
Computation Institute, the Medical Center, and Molecular Engineering, the
Center's entrepreneurial culture will be made more visible and accessible, and
instill an entrepreneurial mindset among faculty and
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Polsky Center has a strong track record of
transitioning technology into the marketplace leading to the creation of
multiple companies. The Site award will expand the number of ideas that can be
tested quickly and inexpensively (in dollars and opportunity cost) for those
that show the greatest promise. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Site will contribute
to the growth of the Chicago innovation network where academia, corporations,
government, the investor and the philanthropic communities collaborate to
contribute to economies based on networks and network effects. The Chicago Site
will be a critical component of working with the city to address the urban
challenges of education, healthcare, and opportunity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
University of Chicago is the largest employer on Chicago's South Side. Through
their entrepreneurial activities, the institution seeks to change the economic
potential for residents on Chicago's South Side and to create new industry and
wealth for this underserved part of the city.