* 1347164
* I-Corps Site at Carnegie Mellon University: A Model Promoting University Innovation, Entrepreneurship, and Regional Growth
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2014,08/31/2020
* Robert Dammon, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Shearman
* 08/31/2020
* USD 299,110.00

The goal of the Carnegie Mellon University (CMU) I-Corps Site, led by the
campus-wide Carnegie Mellon Center for Innovation and Entrepreneurship (CIE), is
to implement a systematic and replicable agile startup methodology, focused on
customer discovery and product adaptation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CMU I-Corps
Site leverages Carnegie Mellon's strengths and past successes in fusing
technology with entrepreneurship. Their Site utilizes CMU's network of internal
and external contacts to train entrepreneurial faculty and student teams working
in STEM fields. CMU's curricular model is based on the i6 Agile Innovation
System and is consistent with the I-Corps Curriculum. It includes four elements:
workshops, mentoring, funding for projects and customer discovery, and incubator
space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of the CMU Site are to: &lt;br/&gt;1)
capitalize on CMU's culture of innovation by expanding programs to nurture
entrepreneurial ventures and transition university research to the market;
&lt;br/&gt;2) train individuals to understand basic motivations, processes,
practices, and challenges of innovation and entrepreneurship;&lt;br/&gt;3) hone
individuals' entrepreneurial practices and skills; &lt;br/&gt;4) collaborate
with industry, entrepreneurs, and the business community in the region and
nation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CMU program will recruit teams from: existing
entrepreneurial activities, course projects, college liaisons, and an open call.
Underrepresented groups will be especially encouraged to apply. Teams will be
encouraged to avail themselves of enrichment opportunities such as funding
avenues, venture competitions, and business events. Each team will have an
Entrepreneurial Lead, an Academic Lead, and a Mentor. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
assessment plan focuses on ascertaining the most effective components of an
agile university entrepreneurship training program. Teams' milestones and
customer contacts will be tracked. Formative assessment using tools such as
pre-, mid-, and post-program surveys will inform the CMU program
evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Of particular merit is this proposed Site's
agile and adaptable customer-based training program, components of which have
been shown to be successful in programs such as the i6 Agile Innovation System
and the I-Corps Curriculum/Lean Launch Pad. Combining these components -- and
then distilling through assessment and evaluation which of them are especially
effective at spurring creativity, resourcefulness, independence, and
connectivity -- will further entrepreneurial knowledge and education. The
program will also teach entrepreneurial students and faculty how to create their
own ecosystem by engaging in customer discovery and network building.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CMU I-Corps Site plans to move university research out
of the lab more efficiently and effectively. Expediting the movement of academic
innovation to the commercial sector allows new, often government-funded,
university discoveries and inventions to reach the public sector earlier
spawning new endeavors and economic growth. All sectors of society and areas of
inquiry -- healthcare, energy, sustainability, global communication, for
example, can see benefits. In addition, making earlier decisions about viability
of commercial outcomes is beneficial as it can more effectively utilize critical
resources --time, energy, talent, and funds. In addition, a successful Site will
likely impact the Pittsburgh, Steel Valley, and Allegheny Valley communities.