* 1347364
* EAGER: Holistic Security for Cloud Computing: Computing on Encrypted Data
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2013,02/29/2016
* Shafrira Goldwasser, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 02/29/2016
* USD 300,000.00

The main impediment to a wide adoption of outsourcing storage and computing
services is the need to keep the client's data private. Clients may directly own
the data, or it can belong to third parties such as customers of the client in
which case there may be a contractual or legal obligation to keep this data
private. The data may be outsourced to external services due to it enormity or
due to the complexity of the computations to be performed on the data. This
project investigates how to design secure and private database services so they
can be integrated within a larger design of secure systems. The broad impact of
this work is new methods to ensure the private manipulations of large data sets
in an efficient and easy to integrate manner, which is of vital importance to
enable utilization of cloud services. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
investigators study mechanisms that allow one to privately outsource large
amounts of data to the cloud and privately execute various computations over
this data. The data may change over time which will require the design of
efficient methods to update the data while maintaining its privacy which do not
increase dramatically with the size of the database. The project focuses on the
composability of the security guarantees provided, so as to ensure that the
overall privacy and security guarantees of a service can be deduced from the
properties of its components.