* 1347119
* CAREER: Learning from Observational Data with Knowledge
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2020
* Samantha Kleinberg, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 04/30/2020
* USD 529,099.00

Large observational datasets from social networks, climatology, finance, and
other areas have made it possible for researchers to test complex hypotheses
that previous studies would have been under-powered to tackle. This is
especially true in biology and health, with the proliferation of new methods for
gathering long-term population data, such as from electronic medical records,
and real-world health data from body-worn sensors. However, the number of
complex hypotheses that can be tested in datasets with hundreds or thousands of
variables far surpasses what humans can propose and reason about. Exhaustively
testing all possible relationships is not computationally feasible, and after
this testing a researcher must still examine a non-trivial number of seemingly
significant findings to determine which still need to be validated
experimentally. This project aims specifically to infer causal relationships, as
these provide insight into not only how a system behaves, but also why it
behaves as it does, enabling the development of successful interventions.
Results from this work will be incorporated into education at three levels (high
school, undergraduate, and graduate) through university courses and summer
programs for high school students. In addition to communicating the core
concepts of causal inference, the summer programs will also introduce potential
computer scientists to key areas of computer science research. Applications of
the methods developed to data from stroke and diabetes may lead to new knowledge
about the physiologic processes underlying recovery in stroke, and the complex
interaction of factors affecting glucose in people with
diabetes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will lead to more robust and efficient
inference of causal relationships from large-scale datasets, through a feedback
loop between experiments and prior knowledge. Current approaches require users
to specify the set of variables and hypotheses to be tested, but these limit
findings to the set a user chose to explore. Instead this work will develop
methods that can use prior knowledge in the form of causal relationships as well
as prior experimental results to constrain what will be tested and generate new
hypotheses. Causes provide information about their effect that are not contained
in other variables, so this work will develop measures of how explanatory a
cause is and how much information it yields, and use changes in this measure to
guide generation of complex relationships in the constrained hypothesis space.
The proposed approach differs from stochastic heuristics in that the new method
will be deterministic, and will evaluate relationships individually, thus
addressing the computational challenge and reducing the impact of incorrect
inference. Second, the work will lead to algorithms that can automatically
evaluate how findings relate to prior knowledge, whether they are, for example,
consistent, novel, or contradictory. This will allow researchers to focus more
in depth on findings likely to be significant or interesting, rather than those
that simply confirm prior knowledge. It also provides a feedback loop between
knowledge and inference.