* 1347782
* Copper and Gold in Sulfur-rich Magmatic-hydrothermal Systems
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2019
* Mark Frank, Northern Illinois University
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 06/30/2019
* USD 271,262.00

Magmatic-hydrothermal ore deposits are important sources of copper and gold,
however, there are many outstanding questions on how these deposits form. The
results of this research can provide direct economic benefits by improving
existing metal exploration models associated with magmatic-hydrothermal ore
deposits. Funds from this project will be used to support and train both
graduate and undergraduate students in economic geology, experimental geology,
thermodynamics, and data interpretation. The graduate students will also mentor
the junior members involved in this project. Each student will be expected to
present their portion of the project at a national scientific meeting.
Furthermore, recognizing the importance of science education and the
dissemination of knowledge, the PI has and will continue to participate in
numerous mentoring activities and outreach programs focused on the importance of
geology and mineral resources in society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
study will conduct experiments to determine the concentrations of copper and
gold in various fluids and minerals as a function of temperature and pressure to
address these questions. The data obtained will increase our understanding on
the transportation of metals in hydrothermal fluids and the process of
precipitation responsible for the formation of select ore deposits. Experiments
will be conducted from 500-700 degrees Celsius and pressures from 50-100 MPa.
This temperature and pressure range that bridges the magmatic to hydrothermal
transition where many deposits are thought to form but where few consistent data
are currently available. This pressure-temperature region has added importance
because it represents portions of natural systems where a supercritical fluid
may cool and undergo phase separation into a vapor + brine pair. The sulfur and
oxygen fugacity will be buffered by sulfide and oxide minerals commonly found in
ore deposits. The importance of sulfur in hydrothermal fluids on ore metal
concentrations and speciation will be evaluated. This study will also examine
the extent to which gold is incorporated into sulfide minerals during their
formation and how it is impacted by changes in sulfur, temperature, and
pressure. An internally consistent thermodynamic model will be generated by
using the data obtained in this study.