* 1347221
* Collaborative Research:  GeoChronR - Open-source Tools for the Analysis, Visualization and Integration of Time-Uncertain Geoscientific Data
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Nicholas McKay, Northern Arizona University
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 06/30/2018
* USD 369,348.00

This collaborative grant from the Division of Earth Sciences Geoinformatics
program will support the development of software tools which will enable Earth
scientists to better quantify and analyze how uncertainties in ages influence
records of past climate, ecosystems and landscapes. These tools will allow
scientists to better integrate these records, and to integrate larger datasets
into predictive models. Thus, the tools will facilitate a more thorough
understanding of past climate changes, and more rigorous tests of hypotheses
regarding Earth?s history. Two workshops will be held to ensure that the
community of scientists who may benefit from these tools are provided with
training and opportunities to provide feedback to the software development
process. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the researchers will develop a
package of integrated software tools and make these tools broadly available
using the open-source and community supported platform ?R?. The tools will
enable paleogeoscientists to use state-of-the-art Bayesian and Monte-Carlo-based
approaches to quantifying age uncertainties in paleorecords, and allow more
rigorous integration of data sets and models with more thorough accounting for
age uncertainties. The tools will allow the broad community of paleogeoscience
researchers to visualize and archive their data in intuitive and consistent
ways. The researchers will apply the tools to a proof-of-concept data recovery
effort aimed at archiving primary geochronological information for marine and
terrestrial records of Holocene paleoclimate, thereby providing a synthesis and
more permanently archive of results from the NSF Earth System History (ESH)
Holocene initiative.