* 1347728
* Collaborative Research: Community Implementation: WIDER:Data Explorer and Assessment Resources for Faculty
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Robert Hilborn, American Association of Physics Teachers
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 08/31/2017
* USD 392,493.00

A collaborative PI team from Kansas State University and the American
Association of Physics Teachers is creating a national model for improving STEM
higher education through a community-based web resource to help physics faculty
transform their teaching by incorporating teaching methods and assessments based
on research into classroom learning. Recognizing that higher education struggles
to find ways to evaluate and improve instruction, the project is using a
"bottom-up" approach in which discipline-based teachers/researchers develop,
share, and aggregate assessment data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research-based
assessment instruments have had a major impact on physics education reform. They
provide universal and convincing measures of student understanding that
instructors can use to assess and improve their teaching. These instruments can
transform teaching practice by informing instructors about their teaching
efficacy so that they can improve it. At the same time, their widespread use can
transform researchers' understanding of the impact of educational transformation
by providing large quantities of data that compare teaching practices across a
broad range of institutions and student populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
results of preliminary studies suggest that physics faculty members are eager to
use their cognitive resources as scientists to explore big data and compare
their students' assessment results to those of other students like their own.
However, the preliminary studies also suggest that many instructors who use
these instruments do not know how to interpret the results or how to use them to
improve their teaching. Further, because local results are known only to
individual instructors, researchers do not have access to this pool of data. For
these reasons, the project is turning the private practice of administering
assessment instruments into a community practice of interpreting assessment
results in the context of a large community of educators using similar practices
in similar settings, comparing results, and using them to transform teaching
practices both for individual faculty members and for departments as a whole.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI team is expanding a prototype database developed as
part of a previous NSF grant (WIDER DUE-1256352) into a community forum and data
explorer that allow instructors and researchers to easily upload, discuss, and
compare their data in an intuitive, interactive, and informative way. The data
explorer features an intuitive user interface inviting exploration and
discovery, interactive one-click analysis tools, a scalable database, and robust
data security. This system will be incorporated into the PER User's Guide, an
NSF-funded (NSDL DUE-0840853, TUES DUE-1245490) project that provides online
resources for physics faculty about research-based teaching methods and
assessments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project resides
in the easily accessible user interface that is designed to enable faculty
members to engage with their students' assessment data and the national dataset.
Instructors can generate reports for themselves to interpret their own results
in order to improve their teaching, to explain what they are doing to
colleagues, and to include in teaching portfolios and promotion and tenure
reports that demonstrate their teaching efficacy. When fully operational, the
database is expected to include results from hundreds of colleges and
universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Broader Impacts of the project lie in the
access to an unprecedented amount of assessment data that opens the doors for
physics education researchers and faculty to answer questions about students'
learning that were previously inaccessible.