* 1347684
* Copper Mountain Conferences on Iterative Methods
* MPS,DMS
* 02/01/2014,01/31/2015
* Thomas Manteuffel, Front Range Scientific Computations, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Amnon J Meir
* 01/31/2015
* USD 34,998.00

Copper Mountain Conference on Iterative Methods, Copper Mountain, Colorado,
April 6 -- April 11, 2014. The purpose of this proposal is to support the
participation of 20 students and 10 women, post docs, minorities, and disabled
in the 2014 Copper Mountain Conference on Iterative Methods. Begun in 1983 and
alternating between Multigrid Methods (odd-numbered years) and Iterative Methods
(even-numbered years), with substantial and growing overlap in both programs,
this series is an important forum for exchange of ideas in these two closely
related fields. The meeting will continue to promote the established tradition
of a very high level of student participation and to increase efforts to promote
participation by members of groups underrepresented in the mathematical
sciences. The proposal is to support travel and local expenses for these groups,
to foster an egalitarian structure with no invited speakers and all talks of
equal length, to continue to organize tutorials and themed evening workshops,
and to encourage broad representation of participants from academia, national
labs, and industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Iterative methods and multilevel
algorithms are of critical importance for the development of efficient
simulations in all domains of science and technology. The conference series is
concerned with all aspects of these methods, including traditional techniques of
convergence analysis, implementation and development of mathematical software,
and use of such ideas in new settings, including advanced computer architectures
and new applications. Building on previous success, the plan is to take a
proactive role in recruiting students and female and minority participants. This
support will have significant impact on science and technology because, for many
simulations performed in these important fields, iterative solvers dominate
overall calculation time and constrain capabilities. As simulations continue to
grow in complexity, the need for more effective solvers becomes increasingly
acute. This conference will facilitate the development of efficient iterative
solvers and their dissemination to users in industry and national labs.
Moreover, the continued high level of participation of students and other young
scientists will create and nurture a community of researchers and practitioners
who are welcomed to the field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Conference web
page:&lt;br/&gt;http://grandmaster.colorado.edu/~copper/2014/