* 1347433
* Thermal Structure of a Long-lived Ultrahigh-pressure Terrane, North Qaidam, Northwest China
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2019
* Chris Mattinson, Central Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 03/31/2019
* USD 235,294.00

The growth, evolution, and destruction of continental crust during continental
collision are fundamental processes that form great mountain belts such as the
Himalaya, alter regional and global climate, and impact the transfer of mass
between the Earth's surface and deep interior. Deeply buried rocks that have
returned to the Earth's surface record these processes in their textures,
chemistry, and isotopic composition, so analyzing such samples allows
reconstruction of the continental collision processes, analogous to using a
flight data recorder to reconstruct the events leading to a plane crash. Rocks
buried to >100 km are termed ultrahigh-pressure (UHP) rocks, and are
particularly useful for testing models of continental collision. Study of UHP
rocks also aids understanding of the physical conditions relevant to the fluid-
releasing mineral reactions that are linked to the deep earthquakes and melting
that occur beneath volcanic chains such as the Cascade Range of the Pacific
Northwest and the Aleutian Islands of Alaska.

This project focuses on the processes responsible for the deep (>100 km) burial
and exhumation of continental crust, as recorded in rocks of the North Qaidam
UHP terrane, western China, where UHP rocks and a long-lived (>30 Myr)
collisional history are well documented. Ultrahigh-pressure metamorphism is now
recognized as an integral component of continental collision for at least the
past 600 Myr, but a growing data set indicates that some of the largest terranes
remained at UHP conditions for an unexpectedly long time, challenging the
commonly invoked interpretation that the complete burial + exhumation cycle must
be brief (<5-10 Myr). Models developed to explain long UHP durations predict
distinct spatial and temporal trends in temperature and pressure, but current
data lack the necessary spatial distribution and temperature resolution to test
the applicability of these models. This project will determine the thermal
structure (spatial and time evolution of temperature, as well as pressure) of
the southeastern segment of the North Qaidam UHP terrane by combining (1)
recently developed trace element thermometers, forward thermodynamic modeling,
and conventional approaches to improve the accuracy and precision of temperature
estimates, and (2) systematic U-Pb geochronology, tied to pressure and
temperature constraints using trace elements and inclusions, to place these
results in a time context. The planned research will involve education and
training of graduate and undergraduate students in fundamental analytical
techniques as well as international collaborative research. Results of the
project will provide the fundamental constraints necessary to evaluate processes
leading to long UHP duration, to test existing model predictions as well as
develop new models, and to make meaningful comparisons with other well-
documented UHP terranes. These results should significantly advance our
knowledge of general UHP formation/exhumation processes in ancient and modern
collisional mountain belts.