* 1347954
* Significance of Newly Discovered Subduction Complex, Including Partially Serpentinized Mantle Peridotite, Southwest Arizona
* GEO,EAR
* 01/15/2014,12/31/2018
* Carl Jacobson, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 12/31/2018
* USD 66,268.00

The Late Cretaceous to early Paleogene Pelona, Orocopia, and Rand Schists of
southern California and southwest Arizona represent an extensive subduction
complex underplated beneath the continental crust of southwest North America
during low-angle northeastward subduction, coeval with the Laramide orogeny.
Several important aspects of the low-angle subduction process are poorly
understood, mainly because only a small fraction of the subducted schist is
exposed at the surface. The field of schists available for study was
significantly widened in 2012, when we discovered an additional exposure of
Orocopia Schist unusually far inland--at Cemetery Ridge, 90 kilometers west of
the outskirts of greater Phoenix.

Determination of uranium-lead detrital-zircon ages and argon-argon metamorphic
ages for the schist at Cemetery Ridge will reveal whether the Pelona, Orocopia,
and Rand Schists decreases in age to the southeast, parallel to the former
subduction margin; or to the northeast, perpendicular to the former margin.
Resolution of this question will allow a choice between two widely discussed
tectonic models: progressive inboard subduction erosion or migration of an
aseismic ridge parallel to the subduction trench. Furthermore, field and Argon-
Argon study of exhumation faults at Cemetery Ridge will contribute to
understanding of processes whereby deeply subducted rocks are returned to the
upper crust and surface.

Unexpectedly, the Orocopia Schist at Cemetery Ridge includes numerous blocks and
fragments of oceanic or continental-margin mantle peridotite, chiefly
serpentinized dunite and partially serpentinized harzburgite to olivine
orthopyroxenite. Much of the peridotite is converted to actinolite-rich
metasomatic rocks, but some contains abundant orthopyroxene and a little relict
olivine. The well-preserved ultramafic rocks and minerals at Cemetery Ridge are
unique in the Pelona, Orocopia, and Rand Schists, and their presence so far
inland is remarkable. We will use field, petrographic, geochemical, and electron
microprobe techniques to determine the origin of the peridotite, and how it was
incorporated into and transported with the Orocopia Schist. In particular, we
want to know whether it more closely resembles abyssal or mantle-wedge
(suprasubduction) peridotite. Study of metasomatized peridotite at Cemetery
Ridge will reveal details of chemical interactions between crustally derived
(meta)sedimentary rocks and mantle peridotite within a low-angle subduction
complex.

This project has two major goals. First, we will determine the ages of rocks in
and processes that formed the subduction complex at Cemetery Ridge; these ages
are fundamental to understanding its origin. Second, we will study the character
and origin of the remarkable peridotites at Cemetery Ridge, in order to
determine how these oceanic rocks were transported so far inland. Our project
will contribute to knowledge of mechanisms of low-angle subduction in southwest
North America. In particular, low-angle subduction is intimately related to
formation of the Rocky Mountains, which dominate the natural and human geography
of much of the American West. More generally, study of the subduction complex
exposed on-land in southern California and southwest Arizona will complement
evidence from marine geology and geophysics and further understanding of
subduction on a global scale. In addition to the scientific goals of the
research, this project is contributing to the training of undergraduate students
from Iowa State University in all aspects of the research, including field and
laboratory work, as well as presenting the results of the research at
professional society meetings. Results of the research will also be incorporated
into a workshop for middle and high school students on the tectonics of western
North America that will be taught at the University of Iowa's geology field
station in Wyoming. The project involves collaboration with UCSC and Stanford
for geochemical and isotopic analyses.