* 1347219
* RUI/Collaborative Research:   Evaluating the Influence of Crustal Deformation on Episodic Magmatism: Southern Coast Mountains Batholith, British Columbia
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2018
* Robinson Cecil, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 03/31/2018
* USD 95,620.00

This project will evaluate processes responsible for the non-steady-state growth
of continental crust in Cordilleran-type magmatic arcs. These batholiths develop
as a result of subduction of oceanic lithosphere at convergent margins, but the
processes that control the tempo of magma production are unclear; even in arcs
where subduction is continuous, magmatism is strongly episodic (e.g. Sierra
Nevada batholith, Peninsular Ranges batholith, Central Andes). Short periods
(10-15 million years) of intense magmatism or 'flare-ups' may generate as much
as 90% of total batholithic volumes, with little magmatism occurring during
intervening lulls. Geochemical and isotopic signatures indicate that magmas
produced during flare-ups incorporate more upper plate material than magmas
formed during lulls. This pattern raises the question of whether continental
growth by magmatic addition is controlled primarily by the behavior of the
subducting oceanic plate or by the tectonics of the continental lithosphere at
the plate margin. We are investigating this question through an integrated
geologic, geochronological and geochemical study of the southern Coast Mountains
Batholith in British Columbia. This project directly addresses a basic question
in earth science: how do continents grow? In addition to the research goals of
this project, this endeavor is enhancing the scientific education and training
of students at four academic institutions recognized for the diversity of their
student populations. Engagement of students in fieldwork, laboratory analysis,
data interpretation and presentation of results are providing them with insights
into all aspects of the science process and career options, and increase
retention in STEM fields. Samples and datasets generated as a result of this
project are being used to design problem sets and interpretive exercises for
classes taught by the investigators. Data generated during this the course of
this project is being added to NSF-funded databases, such as NAVDAT, for access
by the larger community.