* 1347777
* Young Researcher Participation in Northern Research Forum 2013:   Climate Change in Northern Territories
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2014
* Noor Jehan Johnson, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 07/31/2014
* USD 5,670.00

This is a small workshop award to support the participation of two early career
female scholars in the Northern Research Forum, which will be held in Akureyri,
Iceland in the Fall 2013. The Northern Research Forum (NRF) holds an Open
Assembly every two years. Each assembly focuses on a different theme of
relevance to northerners and northern research. This year?s Assembly theme is
Climate Change in Northern Territories: Sharing Experiences and Exploring New
Methods, Assessing Socio-Economic Impacts. One of the main objectives of the NRF
is to promote the next generation of Arctic researchers by involving emerging
scholars in leadership and by selecting a cohort of early career researchers to
present their research projects and findings at the Open Assemblies. The aim is
to engage early career researchers in dialogue with senior scientists and other
professionals and experts as well as representatives of various stakeholder
groups and the public. This proposal will support the involvement of two early
career scholars from the United States: Dr. Noor Jehan Johnson, a postdoctoral
researcher at Brown University, and Amy Wiita, a doctoral candidate at the
University of Alaska-Fairbanks. They will join more than 20 other Young
Researchers from other Arctic nations, offering an opportunity for exchange of
ideas and network building.