* 1347323
* Collaborative Research:   Geoinformatics: Development of Structural Geology and Tectonics Data System with Field and Lab Interface
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Julie Newman, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 07/31/2019
* USD 190,362.00

The main research task addressed in this project is to construct a Data System
for Structural Geology and Tectonics (SG&T). SG&T data are complex for a variety
of reasons, including the wide range of temporal and spatial scales (many orders
of magnitude each), the complex three-dimensional geometry of some geological
structures, inherent spatial nature of the data, and the difficulty of making
temporal inferences from spatial observations. To successfully implement the
step of developing a SG&T data system, the principal investigators must
simultaneously solve three problems: 1) How to digitize SG&T data; 2) How to
design a software system that is applicable; and 3) How to construct a very
flexible user interface.

To address the first problem, the principal investigators introduce the "Spot"
concept, which allows tracking of hierarchical and spatial relations between
structures at all scales, and will link map scale, mesoscale, and laboratory
scale data. A Spot, in this sense, is analogous to the beam size of analytical
equipment used for in situ analysis of rocks; it is the size over which a
measurement or quantity is applicable. A Spot can be a single measurement, an
aggregation of individual measurements, or even establish relationships between
numerous other Spots. They will implement both a Spot and a more traditional
Mapping mode for data input. To implement these approaches into a software
system, they will utilize a Graph database - as opposed to a Relational database
- to better preserve the myriad of potentially complex relationships. A Graph
design is ideally suited for the complex relations inherent in a SG&T data
system. Finally, they will construct a user interface that is intuitive, open
source, and spans as many operating systems and devices as possible. For these
reasons, they will develop a web-application that can run in both a connected
(on the internet) and disconnected mode.