* 1347143
* Support for US Astronomers to Participate in the XXIXth General Assembly of the International Astronomical Union
* MPS,AST
* 06/01/2014,11/30/2015
* Kevin Marvel, American Astronomical Society
* Standard Grant
* James Neff
* 11/30/2015
* USD 190,000.00

Astronomy is a fully international endeavor; we all share the same sky. To
participate in the international scientific community, American researchers must
meet and collaborate with researchers from around the world. Every three years,
the International Astronomical Union has a General Assembly accompanied by
topical symposia, joint discussions, working groups, and business meetings. The
next such meeting, in August 2015, will be held in Hawaii and hosted by the US
(the last US-hosted meeting was in 1988). In order to ensure a vigorous
participation by the US astronomical community, this award will fund small
travel grants to approximately 200 US astronomers. Preference will be given to
early-career astronomers, astronomers from less-endowed institutions, and
astronomers playing an active role in the governance of the IAU and the conduct
of the associated symposia. Scientists supported by this program will come from
a wide range of educational institutions, museums, planetariums, etc. The
experiences they gain from this meeting will be shared with a broad segment of
the US population, exposing them to the global nature of astronomy and the
importance of international collaboration to the advancement of science and
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The small travel grant program will be
administered by the American Astronomical Society (AAS), the principal
professional organization for US astronomers. They have very successfully and
economically administered similar programs in the past, and the proposed
procedures ensure that these funds will provide the maximum benefit to the
astronomical community at minimal cost. The AAS will solicit proposals, select
awardees, issue funds to be used for airfare only, collect receipts and meeting
reports from the grantees, and prepare a final assessment and report on the
entire program.