* 1347848
* EAR-PF: First evidence for low temperature oxygen isotope exchange and fractionation between crystalline iron oxides and water: Role of biogeochemical iron cycling
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Andrew Frierdich, Frierdich               Andrew
* Fellowship Award
* Lina Patino
* 05/31/2015
* USD 132,667.00

Dr. Andrew J. Frierdich has been awarded an NSF Earth Sciences Postdoctoral
Fellowship to carry out a research and education plan at the University of Iowa
and the University of Wisconsin-Madison. He will investigate oxygen isotope
exchange and fractionation between iron oxides and water. Iron oxides are
ubiquitous minerals whose intimacy with local meteoric precipitation makes their
oxygen isotope composition a potential proxy for paleoclimate. However, the use
of oxygen isotope signatures in iron oxides is stymied by the inability to
accurately determine mineral-water oxygen isotope equilibrium fractionation
factors and a limited understanding of the temporal processes that alter their
isotopic composition. Dr. Frierdich will address these challenges by
investigating oxygen isotope exchange and fractionation between iron oxide
minerals and water that is initiated by aqueous Fe(II), a product of microbial
Fe(III) reduction, which has recently been shown to catalyze such reactions at
low temperature. The main premise of the experiments is to utilize a novel
"double three-isotope approach" (57Fe-56Fe-54Fe and 18O-17O-16O) whereby
mineral-water isotopic exchange is assessed by measuring enriched 57Fe and 17O
tracers, and natural mass-dependent isotope fractionation for iron and oxygen is
determined by monitoring the 56Fe/54Fe and 18O/16O ratios, respectively. These
measurements will contribute to the fundamental understanding of iron and oxygen
bonding, reactivity, and isotopic fractionations in iron oxides, an important
mineral group in environmental science and geology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal will generate an innovative research and education outreach experience
by establishing mentoring opportunities for undergraduate student researchers in
geology and engineering, provide broadening participation activities to increase
diversity in the geosciences, and create scientific knowledge that impacts
numerous disciplines. The interdisciplinary and multi-institutional work plan
provides a unique opportunity to perform collaborative research. This fellowship
will also allow Dr. Frierdich to develop his mentoring skills and community
outreach experiences. The inquiry-based broadening participation activities will
guide undergraduate researchers, engage grade school students and parents at
Iowa City local schools, and educate local Girl Scout troops about the
importance of geosciences to societal problems. The proposed research will also
offer societal benefits by identifying the fundamental processes controlling
iron oxide reactivity which affects water quality, nutrient availability, and
contaminant fate.