* 1347077
* RAPID: Short term effects of initial flood disturbance on restoration projects
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2015
* Michael Lemke, University of Illinois at Springfield
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 08/31/2015
* USD 148,210.00

Seasonal floods maintain the biological productivity and diversity of
floodplain-river ecosystems, but the effect of infrequent, great floods on these
ecosystems are less well known. Knowing the effect of this type of flood is
critical where river ecosystems have been developed and where floodplains are
now being restored because there are likely trade-offs between using restored
floodplains to maintain native species and natural functions and using them to
reduce threats to lives and property. The record flood of April 2013 on the
Illinois River flooded two floodplain restoration projects undertaken by The
Nature Conservancy; neither project had received river water prior to 2013.
There were two contrasting flood regimes: 1) at the Merwin site, the levee
breached resulting in a sudden and sustained influx of river water. This flood
pattern typifies what happens during intentional breaching to reduce a flood
crest; 2) at Emiquon, the levee held but river water flowed into the site
inoculating the area with nutrients and organisms. The pattern at Emiquon
typifies a seasonal flood or a flood managed to optimize species recovery and
natural functions. At both sites, rapid responses will be measured in nutrient
and sediment concentrations, sediment denitrification, and change in algal
biomass, bacterial communities and zooplankton production. Longer-term responses
of vegetation, fish, and water birds will be determined by comparing post flood
2013 data to existing long-term data sets. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results from
this project, including both short and long-term data sets and analyses, will
assist floodplain managers and policymakers. This project will support the
dissertation research of three graduate students and provide research
experiences for three undergraduate students in river ecology. Lessons learned
will be shared with the public and government and private organizations through
publications and field-based lectures/workshops for students and visiting groups
through established programs at three river field stations.