* 1347082
* 2013 Tissue Engineering & Regenerative Medicine International Society (TERMIS) Conference, November 10-13, 2013, Hyatt Regency, Atlanta, GA
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2014
* Robert Guldberg, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Friedrich Srienc
* 08/31/2014
* USD 34,356.00

1347082 Guldberg, Robert E.

This conference award will support the annual meeting of the Tissue Engineering
and Regenerative Medicine International Society, Americas Chapter (TERMIS-AM)
aims to: (1) provide a forum for leading scientists, engineers, clinicians, and
industry and government representatives in the field of tissue engineering and
regenerative medicine to discover, discuss and interact, and (2) facilitate
networking, professional development, and mentoring of students and young
investigators to encourage them to embrace and advance the field of tissue
engineering and regenerative medicine. The Conference and Exposition, scheduled
for November 10-13, 2013 in Atlanta, Georgia, will address the scientific and
engineering basis for tissue engineering-based repair, regeneration, and
treatment of tissues and organs with focus areas of Cellular Engineering,
Synthetic Biology, Cellular Reprogramming, and Rejuvenating Tissue/Organ
Function, among others. The conference will advance knowledge within the broad,
cross disciplinary community of those engaged in tissue engineering and
regenerative medicine through the presentation of knew and transformative
research.

The multidisciplinary focus of the conference and diversity of attendees has the
ability to impact many sectors of engineering, science, and medicine. The global
nature of TERMIS will provide for international perspectives and will lead to
new international collaborations. This conference has the ability to impact
several levels of attendees, with particular focus on women, students and young
investigators through the activities and events planned. Additionally, inclusion
of underrepresented high school students will be a part of this conference
event. This conference will inspire and help train the young future leaders of
tissue engineering and regenerative medicine.