* 1347731
* RUI: The Evolution of the Galapagos Hotspot
* GEO,OCE
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2019
* Karen Harpp, Colgate University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah K. Smith
* 06/30/2019
* USD 283,641.00

Many of the world's volcanic island chains, such as Hawaii or the Galápagos, are
the surface manifestation of mantle plumes, one of the most important but least
well understood tectonic phenomena on Earth. The dominant theory is that mantle
plumes originate in the deep mantle, transporting material from the core-mantle
boundary to the surface, a distance of nearly 3000 km. As such, variations in
the chemical composition of lavas erupted at ocean island volcanoes may provide
the only way to sample material from such great depths and, in the process, to
determine the composition and structure of these otherwise inaccessible parts of
the planet. The primary goal of this project is to carry out a field and
geochemical study of the 3 oldest Galápagos Islands to investigate persistent
questions related to ocean islands: 1) what is the nature of the material
supplying the Galápagos plume, which in turn will provide information about the
composition of the deep Earth; 2) how does the plume's composition vary with
time; and 3) how do Galápagos volcanoes evolve as they are carried away from the
plume's center? The latter question, which addresses the life cycle of ocean
island volcanoes, is particularly relevant to ongoing conservation and
preservation efforts at oceanic archipelagos
worldwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These questions will be addressed in two stages.
First, field studies will be carried out on the 3 oldest, most poorly
characterized islands, Santa Cruz, San Cristobal, and Española, which together
record almost 3 million years of the plume's history. Radiogenic isotopes, major
and trace element, and Ar-Ar analyses will be applied to understand the chemical
evolution. The second phase is a focused effort to define the compositions of
Galápagos mantle reservoirs by applying high-resolution lead isotopic analyses
to a selection of lavas from across the archipelago. Taken together, these
efforts will permit evaluation of competing hypotheses for the complex
geochemical variation observed in the Galápagos and insight into the origins and
nature of mantle plumes. One of the most important goals of this project is the
engagement of undergraduates as integral members of the research team. They will
also participate in a seminar on mantle dynamics, which will be used to develop
a digital repository of presentations by experts in the field that will be
archived and made available online. Ecuadorian students will participate in
fieldwork and spend a summer at Colgate, where they will also be trained in
analytical geochemistry techniques. Finally, students will participate in an
established outreach program at Colgate, working with K-12 students from across
upstate NY performing hands-on science activities and developing a state-of-the-
art presentation on volcanic evolution at the Colgate Visualization Lab.