* 1347247
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH, LTREB RENEWAL: Using long-term data, experiments and modeling to assess demographic effects of fire and complex interactions in Florida scrub
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2014,09/30/2019
* Pedro Quintana-Ascencio, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 09/30/2019
* USD 124,279.00

Long-term data provide a valuable context to understand how landscapes and
species adjust to variation in climate, changing land use, and a variety of
disturbances. This project extends a twenty-six year study of 14 plant species
by combining experiments with models to understand the effects of local and
regional variation on plant population dynamics. Field experiments will vary
water and ash addition and removal, competition, and seed additions. Survival,
growth, fecundity, and recruitment will be measured in both undisturbed
populations and experimental treatments, and these small-scale responses will
then be linked with larger-scale changes in climate and fire regimes. Long-term
data and experimental results will inform models that predict how different fire
and climate conditions affect key plant species. In general, this research takes
advantage of long-term demographic data on multiple co-occurring plant species
to reveal how plants respond across different spatial scales to environmental
change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research incorporates education efforts at
multiple levels. It will support high school research assistants each summer and
will fund post-baccalaureate interns, continuing a unique, highly productive,
in-depth research experience. Graduate students will be trained through their
participation in the research. The project will provide a wealth of statistical,
ecological, and conservation information, contributing directly to conservation
of Florida scrub, an imperiled ecosystem that is home to dozens of endangered
species. Specialized workshops and continual interaction with local land
managers and policy makers through collaborations and presentations will
increase the practical value of the research findings. Specifically, the project
will inform land managers using fire and other tools to conserve critically
threatened plants. Public displays and art projects will directly convey
information to the general public.