* 1347523
* Small Business - ERC Collaborative Opportunity to develop an instrument for trace detection of O2 using a high-finesse prism optical cavity and the Faraday Effect
* ENG,EEC
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2016
* Gerard Wysocki, Tiger Optics, LLC
* Fixed Amount Award
* Deborah Jackson
* 03/31/2016
* USD 200,000.00

Intellectual Merit :&lt;br/&gt;In this project a new fully optical CE-FRS
detection scheme is proposed to mitigate needs&lt;br/&gt;for any chemical
treatments of the sample gas that is usually required with currently
available&lt;br/&gt;instrumentation for trace oxygen sensing. The project will
leverage unique capabilities of&lt;br/&gt;development and commercialization of
cavity enhanced technologies by Tiger Optics and the&lt;br/&gt;new sensing
technology based on FRS developed and demonstrated by MIRTHE. Initially a proof-
of-concept&lt;br/&gt;prototype system will be investigated based on a
conventional two mirror high-Finesse cavity&lt;br/&gt;equipped with a custom FRS
optics for signal extraction. Most importantly the proposed
research&lt;br/&gt;will also explore the possibility of implementing CE-FRS
using the Tiger Optics proprietary&lt;br/&gt;high-Finesse optical prism cavity
technology. This unique technology would allow CE-FRS to&lt;br/&gt;be
implemented in combination with standard cw-CRDS in the same commercial
instrument, permitting&lt;br/&gt;sensitive broadband detection of paramagnetic
and diamagnetic molecules simultaneously. The&lt;br/&gt;proposed technology will
eliminate routine maintenance issues, chemical conversion
uncertainty&lt;br/&gt;and other disadvantages typical for electrochemical
systems or indirect sensing technologies.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed direct laser-
based detection provides significant advantage in industrial
applications&lt;br/&gt;where 24-7 continuous monitoring is required and in
environmental applications where analyzers&lt;br/&gt;are often situated in
remote locations with basic infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts
:&lt;br/&gt;Development of a CE-FRS method will open up possibilities for
sensitive monitoring of many&lt;br/&gt;other paramagnetic species. This method
will be suitable for real-time monitoring of trace&lt;br/&gt;concentrations of
radicals involved in combustion and atmospheric chemistry, i.e. NO,
NO2,&lt;br/&gt;OH, HO2, and CH. In many cases, while the presence of these
radicals is known, the reaction&lt;br/&gt;rates and abundances are not well
known due to the lack of in situ monitoring capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;A direct
laser-based method can provide a new tool for monitoring trace-radicals in a
wide&lt;br/&gt;range of applications such as environmental monitoring,
industrial process control or combustion&lt;br/&gt;diagnostics. Therefore
scientific and engineering advancements in this field integrated
with&lt;br/&gt;a comprehensive educational program addressing specific career
development goals at each academic&lt;br/&gt;level from high school students to
post-doctoral researchers, will provide an excellent training&lt;br/&gt;for the
new generation