* 1347778
* TCU STEM Student Success Collaborative
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2013,09/30/2019
* Carrie Billy, American Indian Higher Education Consortium
* Continuing Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 09/30/2019
* USD 749,977.00

The American Indian Higher Education Consortium (AIHEC) is establishing a multi-
campus team of STEM faculty and academic administrators focused on incorporating
culturally- and community-relevant problem-based learning (PBL) into the STEM
programs of at least six Tribal Colleges and Universities (TCUs). The multi-
campus project team is building on the transformative work of Navajo Technical
College, a TCU that has been highly successful in increasing the number of
American Indian students completing STEM degrees, in large part by promoting and
encouraging PBL activities campus-wide.

Participating TCU faculty are incorporating PBL in at least one STEM course or
program and exploring strategies for developing campus-wide PBL opportunities.
The collaborating partners are working with AIHEC and expert consultants in PBL
to develop and implement a culturally responsive PBL implementation and
assessment strategy, building on the Indigenous Evaluation Framework developed
by AIHEC for the evaluation of American Indian education programs.

The project is building upon a collaborative multi-campus best practices
dissemination model developed by AIHEC through a Walmart Foundation-funded
project that identified and disseminated empirically-based methodologies for
increasing the retention and graduation rates of students at Minority Serving
Institutions (MSIs). This model is being used to disseminate evidence-based best
practices in problem-based learning at the undergraduate level. The best
practices are based in large part on a TCU-specific and culturally responsive
adaptation of the PBL instructional model developed and implemented successfully
by Navajo Technical College.

The project is expanding the existing TCU community of practice focused on
American Indian student retention and completion, helping to sustain an ongoing
effort by AIHEC and the TCUs to identify and share best practices in promoting
student success at TCUs. By significantly expanding the community of
practitioners working with culturally-responsive implementations of problem-
based learning and other student-centered learning models, the project is
contributing to the knowledge base of culturally responsive implementations of
PBL appropriate for American Indian and Native Alaskan STEM education programs.

The project is sharing project outcomes and its dissemination model with the
larger MSI community through AIHEC's close partnerships with the Hispanic
Association of Colleges and Universities (HACU), the National Association for
Equal opportunity in Higher Education (NAFEO), and the Asian Pacific Islander
American Association of Colleges and Universities (APIAACU).