* 1347130
* EAGER: Fabrication of self-powered scaffolds for enhanced bone repair
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Mei Wei, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 08/31/2018
* USD 236,673.00

PI: Mei Wei&lt;br/&gt;Proposal ID: 1347130&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More than 1.3
million bone-repair procedures are conducted every year in the USA, which
constitutes a large proportion of the medical bills of the society. Despite of
the huge demand in bone grafting materials, many currently available grafting
materials still exhibit poor efficiency in bone regeneration. Thus, there is a
pressing need for the development of new grafting materials aimed at faster and
better bone regeneration. In this study, we propose to fabricate self-powered
scaffolds with good biodegradability, excellent osteoconductivitiy and
osteoinductivitiy, and capable of inducing in-situ DC electric stimulation. The
specific aims of the study are:&lt;br/&gt;(1) Fabrication of biodegradable
scaffolds capable of generating in-situ DC electric field with controlled
electric current direction; and (2) Evaluations of the in vitro cell-nanobattery
incorporated-scaffolds interactions, and determine the optimum nanobattery
loading for stimulating cell activities without resulting in toxic
effects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The proposed research is
highly innovative across fields of tissue engineering, nanotechnology,
electrochemistry, developmental biology, and orthopedics, which explores a
completely new approach for better and faster bone repair and regeneration. Its
intellectual merits can be summarized into the following two aspects: (1) The
fabrication of self-powered scaffolds for in situ generation of DC electric
field to stimulate osteoprogenitor activities; (2) Alignment of nanobatteries in
the apatite/collagen scaffold via dielectrophoresis; (3) The employment of a 4-D
imaging platform for real-time observation of the interactions between
nanobattery and GFP-labeled cells to elucidate mechanisms of electric
stimulation on osteoblastic cells. It is for the first time that self-powered
electrical stimulation is used in conjunction with tissue engineering scaffold
to produce early and high-quality new bone
formation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The proposed application
explores a completely new approach to apply in situ DC electric stimulation to
bone tissue engineering. The successful implementation of the proposed study
will address directly the existing problems of bone tissue engineering
scaffolds, such as poor osteoconductivity, lack of osteoinductivity, and slow
bone healing. Its approach may also provide an effective solution to non-union
and delayed union of bone repair in conditioned patients, such as aging,
diabetics, osteoporosis patients. Thus, the proposed research will be
significant and transformative to the tissue engineering field as it will result
in a new generation of tissue engineering scaffold which is not only
osteoconductive, but also osteoinductive with the capability of stimulating new
bone formation in define areas. The strategies established here can also be used
to stimulate other cells for tissue repair and regeneration other than bone,
such as blood vessel, never, cartilage, etc. It is expected that the novel
approach will greatly shorten the rehabilitation time of patients and thereby
substantially lower medical costs associated with hospitalization, health care,
etc for the society. Thus, the social and economic impact of the proposed
project is invaluable. Also, this project will result in the training of two
graduate students and a number of undergraduate students in areas of tissue
engineering and electrochemistry, while exposing them to a multidisciplinary
research environment. Efforts will be made to recruit females and minority
students by integrating our research activities with existing recruiting efforts
at the Departmental as well as Institutional levels. A plan is made to
participate in activities organized by various professional societies dedicated
to underrepresented minorities. In addition, K- 12 outreach will also be carried
out to target high school students, especially females and underrepresented
minorities, excited about regenerative engineering. The results obtained from
the project will be disseminated broadly via publishing in scientific journals,
presenting in conferences and publicizing to general public web site.