* 1347056
* Analytical Method Development: Comparison of Elemental and Isotopic Fractionation During Femtosecond and Nanosecond Laser Ablation
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2016
* Clark Johnson, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 07/31/2016
* USD 141,021.00

In-situ analyses of isotopic and chemical composition are critical for
documenting spatial heterogeneities within geological samples, and are now
commonly accomplished by laser ablation methods. Improvements in laser
technology are of current interest to the geochemical community and the
potential advantages of relatively new technology has shown some growing pains
but holds great promise. This award allows the researchers to evaluate the
approaches needed for high-precision stable isotope analysis of major elements
using new laser ablation technology by comparing two key laser ablation systems.
The research will focus on iron isotopes to rigorously test issues of mass bias,
the results of which can be extended to other isotope systems. Iron is also a
major element that occurs in most rock-forming minerals, and so it will be of
widespread interest to the geochemical community. The results will provide a
basis for inter-laboratory comparisons of different methods of in situ analysis.
The award will provide training and expertise for a postdoctoral fellow on the
physics involved in laser ablation.

This award funds the development of techniques for the high-precision stable
isotope analysis of major elements using laser ablation (LA) and to compare
femtosecond (fs)- vs. nanosecond (ns)-LA technologies to understand potential
processes of isotopic fractionation during the ablation and ionization
processes. The accuracy of fs- and ns-LA for isotopic analysis of iron isotopes
will be evaluated due to known isotope heterogeneities at relevant scales. The
results will be applicable to other stable isotope systems such as magnesium,
silicon, and calcium, and should be extendable to radiogenic isotope systems in
terms of mass bias issues associated with fs-LA and ns-LA. The specific research
goals are targeted to evaluate the degree to which fs-LA is free of matrix
effects and to determine what specific aspects of fs-LA appear to generate
matrix free analysis as compared to ns-LA and standard solution nebulization
methods. The study will be devoted to measuring the particle size distribution,
chemical and isotopic composition, and morphological characteristics (e.g.,
agglomerates and spheroids) of aerosols generated by both fs- and ns-LA.
Moreover, matrix effects will be characterized by using mineral group isotope
standards (e.g., minerals such as siderite, ankerite, ferroan dolomite) and
addition of elements into the LA aerosol stream by ?teeing? in the aerosol
produced from a desolvating nebulizer.