* 1347399
* Mathematical Analysis in Condensed Matter and Atomic Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 02/01/2013,07/31/2015
* Rupert Frank, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 07/31/2015
* USD 84,225.00

This project is for research on problems, motivated by physical applications,
where traditional mathematical methods fail and where novel and original
techniques need to be developed, which will be relevant beyond the context of
these concrete cases.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Lieb-Thirring inequalities play an
important role in numerous problems from mathematics and physics. One goal is to
improve their constants by exploiting a conformal symmetry. Another goal is to
extend these inequalities to complex valued potentials arising in applications
and to derive analogous bounds in the case in which instead of the vacuum there
is a background density of particles, as occurs in real solids.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Frohlich polaron serves both as a model for an
electron in an ionic crystal and as a simple model for a dressed particle in
quantum field theory. The PI's recent results about the binding of several
polarons will be extended. There is a challenging conjecture about the effective
polaron mass to be addressed. Uniqueness of ground states is important for the
understanding of finite time blow up of dispersive, non-linear equations. The PI
recently provided the first robust uniqueness proof for fractional Laplace
equations. It is intended to extend this technique towards a conjecture about
the boson star equation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A goal is to rigorously derive
Ginzburg-Landau theory of superconductivity from BCS theory, which effectively
amounts to semi-classics under minimal regularity conditions. Further problems,
where the standard semi-classical calculus is not applicable, are to be pursued
with an eye towards physical intuition. An attempt will be made to find the
sharp form of two functional inequalities, namely a bound on the entropy defined
via Bloch coherent spin states and the Strichartz inequality about the decay of
solutions of the Schrodinger equation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:
Problems from physics have often fostered progress in mathematics, while new
tools of mathematics allow physics to enhance our qualitative and quantitative
understanding of complex phenomena occuring in nature. The proposed project on
the interface of these fields will strenghten the interdisciplinary bonds
between the communities of mathematicians and physicists and promote the
relevance of modern methods of mathematical analysis to problems of atomic and
condensed matter physics.