* 1347090
* EAGER: A Novel Form of Intraneuronal Membrane Transport
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Virgil Muresan, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey-RBHS-New Jersey Med
* Standard Grant
* Evan Balaban
* 08/31/2017
* USD 225,000.00

Similar to the human body as a whole, cells, the building blocks of organisms,
have a nonhomogeneous composition, where the different components--nucleic
acids, proteins, and lipids--segregate to different parts of the cell to perform
different functions. In neurons, such vital functions include the formation of
stable connections, called synapses, which constitute the basis of cognition,
including memory formation. To maintain proper function of the synapse, a large
number of proteins and ribonucleic acids are transported from their site of
synthesis in the cell body to the remote synapse. This project proposes to
reinvestigate the mechanism of this transport, aiming to test the idea that many
of the components needed at the synapse are transported together, rather than
individually. This process would be analogous to carrying many passengers in a
canoe along a river, instead of letting each of them swim in the water. State-
of-the-art technologies will be used to visualize, with live imaging microscopy,
the simultaneous transport of individual proteins within neurons and to purify
and identify, with modern techniques of biochemistry, the components of the
molecular machinery that powers this transport. These studies are expected to
provide evidence for an alternate form of transport of synaptic components, thus
challenging the current view of transport within neurons. Novel tools for the
study of intracellular transport will be generated and made freely available to
the research community. The study will be conducted with a research team that
includes high school and Master's degree students, and will thus contribute to
the education of future generations of scientists. The results will be largely
disseminated via publications, meeting presentations, and inclusion in course
lectures. The successful completion of this work will constitute a major step
forward in understanding how brains develop and function at the cellular and
molecular level.