* 1347475
* NSF/CBMS Regional Conference in the Mathematical Sciences -- Inverse Scattering Theory for Transmission Eigenvalues -- May 27-May 31, 2014
* MPS,DMS
* 03/01/2014,02/29/2016
* Tuncay Aktosun, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 02/29/2016
* USD 38,000.00

A regional research conference during May 27-May 31, 2014 will be organized on
the campus of University of Texas at Arlington. This five-day conference will
feature David Colton of University of Delaware as the distinguished lecturer who
will deliver ten lectures on inverse scattering theory for transmission
eigenvalues. Prof. Colton will prepare an expository monograph based on his
lectures for publication so that the research findings can be made available to
the entire scientific community. The goal behind the inverse scattering problem
is to extract information about an unknown object by probing it with waves at
various energies and to determine its properties from the measurements on the
scattered waves. The transmission eigenvalues correspond to those energies at
which the scattering from the object is the same as the scattering as if the
object is absent from the medium. The topic has important applications in
electromagnetics, acoustics, medicine, and other areas. The conference will
cover both the topic of determining transmission eigenvalues when the object
properties are known as well as the topic of determining those properties when
only the transmission eigenvalues are known. In addition to the mathematical
theory, some applications will be considered such as medical
imaging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There will be about 30 participants supported,
including both established researchers and interested qualified newcomers, and
special efforts will be made to include postdoctoral fellows, graduate students,
women, and traditionally underrepresented groups. The broader impact of the
proposed activity is to bring established researchers and newcomers together to
an interactive environment, to promote interdisciplinary work and longtime
collaborations, to include women and minorities in the research activities, and
to stimulate the regional research activity. This project is jointly supported
by the Infrastructure and Applied Mathematics programs within the Division of
Mathematical Sciences.