* 1347725
* EAGER: Sweat, Sense, and Signal (S3) ? Demonstration of fM to pM Electrical Sensing of BioMarkers in Sweat
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2013,02/29/2016
* Ian Papautsky, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 02/29/2016
* USD 160,000.00

Objective&lt;br/&gt;Sweat for medical diagnostics has been largely overlooked in
comparison to blood, urine, breath, and saliva. Research now reveals that
numerous water-soluble biomarkers for health monitoring or diagnosis can be
found in sweat at comparable concentrations as in blood. Therefore, medical
science is potentially on the verge of a transformative shift in fundamental
approaches for non-invasive physiological sensing. Of particular impact would be
wearable biomarker sensors providing a fast readout of concentration(s).
However, this will require new electrical sensing technology, as current sweat
biomarker biosensing is capable of only inorganic ion sensing (hydration, infant
cystic fibrosis). Moving toward molecular biosensing in sweat will require
sensing of biomarker concentrations in the 1-10 pM range. Preliminary studies of
electrical sensing in biofluids suggest that sensing down to pM levels is
possible. However, neither sensing in the actual complex sweat sample matrix nor
sub-pM sensing have been demonstrated. Demonstrating sub-pM electrical sensing
of biomarkers in sweat would provide breakthrough evidence on the viability of
wearable sweat bio-sensing products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
merit&lt;br/&gt;The overall objective for this EAGER proposal is to demonstrate
sub-pM electrical impedance spectroscopy detection, in real sweat, of at least 3
biomarkers of significant medical diagnostics. Impedance spectroscopy is chosen
because it is highly tunable to the various biorecognition elements that are
immobilized on the sensing electrode surface, and it provides multifaceted
detection including resistance, capacitance, charge transfer, and voltage
responsive shape-change as biomarkers are captured by the biorecognition
elements. The proposed biomarker focus will be on those which exist in sweat in
at least the 1-10 pM concentration range: (1) pro-inflammatory and anti-
inflammatory cytokines; and (2) neurotransmitters. Specific aims leading to sub-
pM sensitivity include: (1) frequency matching of interdigitated electrodes to
the biomarker / biorecognition element response; (2) discovery of the optimal
and highly homogeneous surface-orientation of the biorecognition elements for
maximum impedance response; (3) deep investigation of charge-transfer, shape-
change, ion-screening, and other factors as a function of finer stimuli such as
waveform shape, potential magnitude, electrolyte solution pH, and ionic
strength. Success with these aims will then stimulate a surge of interest in
sweat biosensing and enable pursuit of a broad array of commercial
products.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;It is expected that
the Success of the proposed work will lead to lower total health care costs by
advancing personalized medicine and preventative care. Broad social impacts
include heat-stress management in athletics and firefighters, augmenting
alertness in pilots and truckers, soldier PTSD prevention, and health baselining
for advanced theranostics. Dissemination plan includes organizing a self-
sustaining annual international workshop on the Sensing of Biomarkers in Sweat.
This EAGER will enhance infrastructure in research and education for sweat
sensing. Integrated education plan includes support of an undergraduate research
co-op at the university, who will then later intern at PI's partner federal
labs.