* 1347393
* University of Texas at San Antonio - Center for Innovation Technology Entrepreneurship Innovation Corps Sites Program
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2014,12/31/2017
* Cory Hallam, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 12/31/2017
* USD 294,103.00

This is an I-Corps Site project located in the Center for Innovation and
Technology Entrepreneurship (CITE) at the University of Texas at San Antonio.
UTSA has history of bringing students, researchers, and community resources
together to assess market potential of products and ideas. This project builds
on those efforts. With the designation as an I-Corps Site, and the NSF resources
proveded by this award, CITE will expand the opportunities for nurturing
innovation on its campus. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This institution has a track
record of creating and maintaining a transformational entrepreneurial ecosystem
within the university environment to foster, support, develop, and commercialize
new technologies. This ecosystem not only contributes to transforming academic
cultures but also contributes to competiveness in global markets, increased
external funding, and an enhanced educational environment for students and
faculty. These activities contribute to the goals of improving Texas' economy
and elevate the visibility and success of the UT System by implementing
entrepreneurial evolution at the University. Commercialization of Intellectual
Property (IP) also impacts the San Antonio region, the University of Texas
System, and the State of Texas, attracting further outside
investments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With NSF I-Corps designation and the
formalization of local partnerships, UTSA's CITE will increase the number of
teams yearly from an average of 15, to more than 30. Collaboration described in
the proposal, such as with Startech, has the potential to commercialize new
innovations in the life sciences, information technology, and engineering.