* 1347350
* EAGER: Collaborative: Holistic Security for Cloud Computing: Oblivious Computation
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2013,02/29/2016
* Daniel Wichs, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 02/29/2016
* USD 100,000.00

One of the main impediment to a wider adoption of cloud storage and computing
services is the need to keep data private. Recently, several research
communities have begun exploring new techniques that allow a client to outsource
storage and computation over private data to a potentially untrusted cloud
service, while maintaining the privacy of the data. These techniques are highly
varied depending on a large number of factors, like the ownership of the input
and output data, the type of processing required, the desired level of
protection, and the level of trust that the client is willing to put in
different components of the outsourcing service. This highly collaborative
project combines many different areas of expertise with the aim of substantially
changing the way outsourced data and computation are perceived and used in the
real world.

This project focuses on finding a modular approach to the specification, design
and analysis of privacy preserving mechanisms in the context of outsourced
computation. The investigators explore a broad solution space that combines
algorithmic techniques, limited use of trusted hardware, and distributed
computation and trust, and create a common framework that allows one to compare
and analyze vastly different solutions in a modular and composable manner. The
project will also explore the theoretical and practical limits of what each of
these solutions can achieve and hone in on a practical solution that possibly
combines many different techniques to achieve the right balance of efficiency
and security.