* 1347953
* Exploratory Studies of New Automata Models and Algorithms for TCAM-based Regular Expression Matching
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2015
* Eric Torng, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Rahul Shah
* 08/31/2015
* USD 50,000.00

Regular expression matching is the core operation in a wide range of networking
and security services (such as malware filtering) on most networking middleboxes
and security devices. As each packet is processed by such a device, the packet
payload is examined to determine if it matches any of the specified regular
expressions, each of which might correspond to a specific security threat. In
most regular expression matching solutions, the regular expressions are
converted into a finite state automata model which is then used to perform the
search. Because each packet must be searched, high speed and low memory regular
expression matching solutions are required. Unfortunately, the standard automata
models, deterministic finite state automata (DFA) and nondeterministic finite
state automata (NFA), are insufficient because neither can achieve both low
memory and high speed. This project explores the feasibility of new high speed
low memory regular expression matching solutions based on ternary content
addressable memory (TCAM). If successful, the result will be a fundamentally new
regular expression matching solution that will help make the Internet both
faster and more secure.

This project will develop new regular expression matching solutions by
developing new finite state automata models such as the overlay deterministic
finite state automata (ODFA) that account for memory inefficiencies in DFA.
Along with developing new automata models, the project will develop new scalable
and automated algorithms for efficiently constructing the automata from the
input regular expressions as well as efficient algorithms for encoding these
automata in TCAM. A key design constraint for the automata models and algorithms
will be leveraging the prioritized parallel search and ternary compression
capabilities of TCAM to reduce automata size and decrease the time required for
each automata lookup.