* 1347669
* The Spread of Inquiry-Based Learning in Undergraduate Mathematics: An Ecosystem Approach to Studying a Community of Educational Change
* EHR,DUE
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2018
* Sandra Laursen, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Connie Della-Piana
* 12/31/2018
* USD 499,999.00

Grounded in the context and practice of an effort to reform the teaching and
learning of college mathematics, this WIDER research project applies an
ecosystems approach to conduct three interrelated studies that investigate the
development, growth, and sustainability of an established mathematics education
community whose members are proponents of inquiry-based learning (IBL Math). The
research project identifies, clarifies, and iteratively examines the elements of
a professional community that supports and sustains reform in higher education
and investigates the relative impacts of top-down and bottom-up approaches to
the diffusion of innovation. The research site is defined as a professional
community of mathematicians who are dedicated to the reform of the teaching and
learning of college mathematics based on the Socratic methods of R.L. Moore, a
renowned topologist and teacher of mathematics. The historical study examines
the evolution of the community, focusing the sources of the challenges it faces
and promise for the future. A network analysis study investigates the linkages
between people, university programs, and a private foundation that champions
inquiry-based learning in college mathematics. An uptake study examines the use
of inquiry-based learning among past participants in workshops, focusing on the
long-term impact on individuals of the workshops and other forms of community
support. The mixed-methods set of studies investigates two research questions:
What human, structural, and intellectual elements emerge as important to the
past development, current growth, and future sustainability of the IBL Math
reform movement when it is viewed as a dynamic ecosystem of interlinked people
and university programs? What useful lessons are offered to other communities
engaged in STEM education reform?