* 1347456
* AmeriMech Symposium on the Dynamic Response of Periodic Materials and Structures; Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia; April, 2014
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Michael Leamy, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 12/31/2014
* USD 4,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The ability to control wave and acoustic response by
designing microarchitecture has led to the emergence of linear and nonlinear
acoustic metamaterials and phononic crystals. While there has been great and
growing interest in this area, much of the research has been performed with
little cooperation on a large or national scale, and with little input from
major funding establishments. The timing of the field is such that a great need
exists to bring together members of multiple research communities (dynamical
systems, mechanics of materials, MEMs, mathematics, physics, and others) and
program managers from major funding sources (National Science Foundation, Army
Research Office, Office of Naval Research, and others) to identify needs and
research directions. Recognizing this need, the investigators will hold an
inaugural AmeriMech Symposium on the Dynamic Response of Periodic Materials and
Structures at the Georgia Institute of Technology in April, 2014. The symposium
aims to bring together 40-50 junior and senior researchers working on periodic
materials and structures in order to a) share recent and emerging developments
in periodic structures and materials (cellular/lattice materials, acoustic
metamaterials, phononic crystals); b) identify areas requiring new developments
in theory, manufacturing technologies, and applications; and c) gather input
from program managers on promising applications of periodic structures that are
driven by national needs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The symposium is anticipated to
have broad impacts on national funding priorities and research directions in the
area of periodic structures and materials. Participant presentations and panel
discussions will be shared amongst a diverse audience of stakeholders with the
intent purpose of identifying research needs, directions, and promising
applications. The assistance of NSF funds will be targeted at broadening the
participation of the symposium attendees to younger researchers (Assistant
Professors and Postdoctoral Researchers), graduate students, and
underrepresented groups via grants waiving the symposium registration fee and
covering limited travel expenses. This funding will supplement funds already
received from the National Academies' US National Committee on Theoretical and
Applied Mechanics (USNCTAM), and matching funds committed by Georgia Tech and
the University of British Columbia. Highlights from the symposium will be shared
in electronic format on a dedicated symposium web page and distributed widely to
participants, colleagues, and via requests from other interested parties.