* 1347407
* OPTION 1:  Small-Business ERC Collaborative Opportunity for the Commercialization of an Extreme Ultraviolet source at 13 nm for EUV lithography tool inspection
* ENG,EEC
* 03/01/2014,02/29/2016
* Margaret Murnane, KAPTEYN-MURNANE LABORATORIES, INC.
* Fixed Amount Award
* Deborah Jackson
* 02/29/2016
* USD 199,936.00

Overview:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, KMlabs will work with the
currently active ERC in EUV Science and Technology&lt;br/&gt;in an effort to
optimize and commercialize a tabletop coherent extreme ultraviolet
source&lt;br/&gt;based on high-order harmonic generation (HHG), targeted
specifically for 13.5 nm wavelength.&lt;br/&gt;The end goal of this project is
to produce a commercial prototype that can produce efficient&lt;br/&gt;13.5 nm
light to support EUV lithography tool development. Such a small-scale laser
source&lt;br/&gt;can be used for a variety of lithography support applications
including optics characterization,&lt;br/&gt;metrology, and mask inspection,
which can help to ensure the rapid deployment of this
critical&lt;br/&gt;technology, currently planned for
~2015.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit :&lt;br/&gt;CU-Boulder, as a part
of the EUV ERC, has been developing coherent EUV technology for
more&lt;br/&gt;than a decade. Their recent work has led to a more comprehensive
understanding of how to optimize&lt;br/&gt;the HHG upconversion process to
generate EUV or x-ray light at a particular target wavelength.&lt;br/&gt;This
for the first time allows us to identify specific approaches that may allow for
significant&lt;br/&gt;(up to 3 orders of magnitude) increases in coherent flux
capability at 13 nm.&lt;br/&gt;KMlabs has proven track of record for
successfully commercializing cutting edge scientific&lt;br/&gt;results?for
example the eXtreme Ultraviolet Ultrafast Source (XUUS), introduced in 2009.
The&lt;br/&gt;XUUS is a broadband coherent ultrafast EUV source optimized to
generate 30 nm light, and &gt;15&lt;br/&gt;XUUS setups have been delivered to
research customers worldwide. Optimization of this source&lt;br/&gt;for 13 nm
will make it possible to address a much greater range of industry needs. We
have&lt;br/&gt;identified three possible approaches for optimizing 13 nm flux.
In this project we plan to&lt;br/&gt;perform a direct comparative evaluation of
these approaches. Based on our physical understanding,&lt;br/&gt;we believe we
can determine the global optimum for HHG conversion to 13
nm.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts :&lt;br/&gt;KMlabs and the EUV ERC will
each leverage their technical strengths, and this project will&lt;br/&gt;serve
to leverage the impact of EUV ERC technology on the science and technology
enterprise.&lt;br/&gt;The rapid advance of microelectronics technology, as
described by Moore?s law, has been a&lt;br/&gt;major driver of the global
economy. This advance has been driven primarily by progress
in&lt;br/&gt;lithography that allows for shrinking feature size. Current visible
wavelength tools are straining&lt;br/&gt;against fundamental limits, and the
International Technology Roadmap for Semiconductors has&lt;br/&gt;been
anticipated a shift to EUV lithography for quite some time. The timeline for EUV
had&lt;br/&gt;repeatedly experienced delays because the use of EUV light, which
is strongly absorbed by&lt;br/&gt;all materials, is radically more difficult to
work with than visible/UV.&lt;br/&gt;Nevertheless, recent progress in 13 nm EUV
light sources for lithographic exposure has made&lt;br/&gt;its adoption for the
22 nm node-size in the next generation computer chips a high
priority.&lt;br/&gt;EUV lithography remains untested at the systems and large-
scale production level, with many&lt;br/&gt;unknowns. Improved capabilities for
mask defect detection and characterization, for characterizing&lt;br/&gt;optics
degradation with long-term use, and for tasks such as alignment and quality
control,&lt;br/&gt;can all benefit from a usable tabletop at-wavelength laser
source. An HHG-based coherent 13&lt;br/&gt;nm EUV light source is a relatively
low cost, small-scale, contamination-free coherent source&lt;br/&gt;suitable for
industrial application, and which has already been proven to enable new
capabilities&lt;br/&gt;such as coherent diffractive EUV imaging with near-
wavelength resolution, and for materials&lt;br/&gt;characterization. KMlabs
plans to build on this proposed work in future with development
of&lt;br/&gt;reflectometer/ellipsometer instruments, as well as an inspection
microscope for EUV lithography&lt;br/&gt;applications.