* 1347344
* Runaway Slip:  Understanding Nucleation of Subduction Megathrust Earthquakes and Slow Slip Precursors
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2016
* Chris Marone, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 07/31/2016
* USD 110,000.00

Subduction zone earthquakes where 'runaway slip' allows faulting to rupture from
depth all the way up to the seafloor can cause enormous tsunamis that devastate
coastal population centers. Not all subduction zone earthquakes develop runaway
slip- details of a particular fault's frictional behavior dictate what happens.
This study will conduct laboratory experiments to determine how different types
of fault rock respond to applied forces. Results could improve understanding of
whether some subduction zones are more, or less, likely to generate megathrust
earthquakes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current understanding of the mechanical
response to shear stress of fault rock is limited by the lack of measurements on
relevant natural samples at in-situ conditions. Laboratory shear measurements
will document friction at in-situ pressures and temperatures using natural fault
zone material. A transition in clay structure is thought to play an important
role, along with mineral fabric and pore fluid pressure. A series of experiments
on both crushed samples and intact wafers will be conducted. Start and end
microstuctural and geochemical analyses will quantify the shearing impacts.
Interpretation will focus on the nucleation phase of megathrust earthquakes. A
female postdoctoral scientist will lead the study and the results will
contribute to advancing knowledge within the GeoPRISMS program initiative
'Subduction Cycling and Deformation'.