* 1347491
* Collaborative Research:   Observations and Modeling of Mesoscale Precipitation Banding in Cool-season Storms
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/2014,01/31/2019
* Sandra Yuter, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 01/31/2019
* USD 462,319.00

Improved forecasting of precipitation within extratropical cyclones requires
continued integration of observations and models to understand the evolution and
processes associated with precipitation bands. Mesoscale banding within the
comma-head portion of Northeast U.S. cyclones has been documented to cause
localized intense precipitation rates and amounts. The life cycle and
microphysics of the primary band within the comma head in the presence of mid-
level frontogenesis and reduced stability has been documented, but there has
been less attention investigating storms with multiple bands. The underlying
hypothesis is that many of the quantitative precipitation forecast (QPF) errors
associated with winter storms are the result of difficulties in models
predicting these multi-bands given their smaller spatial scales, more convective
characteristics, and their upscale growth to a single
band.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This team will integrate modeling and observational
study to understand the spectrum of precipitation features within extratropical
cyclones over the Northeast United States. Use ~20 years of radar data from the
WSR-88Ds, several years of Terminal Doppler Weather Radar (TDWR) at the major
airports, upper air soundings, observations from a vertically pointing radar, a
disdrometer, and Multi-Angle Snowflake Camera (MASC) at Stony Brook, NY on Long
Island, as well as high resolution gridded analyses and Weather Research and
Forecasting (WRF) predictions to characterize banded precipitation and ice
microphysics and to evaluate model output. The goal is to characterize band
lifecycle and tracks of cells and bands around the cyclone and to quantify the
importance to storm precipitation accumulation of multi-banded structures
relative to other precipitation features. We will also identify what set of
parameters are needed to realistically model multi-banded precipitation. Our
work will address the parameterization of ice microphysics and mesoscale
predictability of banded precipitation using an ensemble of historical runs and
sensitivity studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit:&lt;br/&gt;Improvement in QPF during the cool season continues to lag our
ability to predict the pressure and geopotential height fields within winter
storms. This award will improve the understanding of the spectrum of
precipitation features within the comma head of a mid-latitude cyclone by
completing a comprehensive climatology of the genesis, growth, and decay of
bands and cells over the Northeast U.S. region using an feature-based tracking
algorithm. To date, there have also been no modeling studies using real cases
focusing on the multi-band genesis and evolution around a mid-latitude cyclone,
and the microphysical verification within all scales of bands has been limited.
This work will provide an improved understanding of banded precipitation, which
can be applied to other regions with bands within the comma head. Our ground-
based microphysical work will evaluate and improve our new microphysics
parameterization focusing on improving riming representation within
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;Major winter storms in
the northeast U.S. have wide ranging societal and economic impacts. The New York
City Metropolitan Area is the home to nearly 20 million people and is a major
transportation hub along the East coast. This area has been hit by several major
storms in recent years
(http://www.nyc.gov/html/oem/html/hazards/winter_history.shtml). The results
from this project will help improve existing conceptual models used by
forecasters to anticipate banded precipitation within the comma head as well as
to improve the QPFs within mesoscale models. Dr. Colle and Dr. Yuter will each
support one graduate student per year under this award. Several undergraduate
research assistants will also be trained to do data processing and analysis.
Their results will be presented by the students as posters at research symposia
such as the ones held by NCSU and Stony Brook each spring and summer. Results
will also be disseminated in conference presentations and journal articles.
Additionally, Dr. Yuter plans to present a few general audience talks about snow
and winter storms at local North Carolina science museum.