* 1347502
* Woodstoich III -- A Workshop to Advance Integration Across Biology
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2015
* Robert Sterner, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 12/31/2015
* USD 48,934.00

Ecological stoichiometry has provided new insights into the functioning of
ecosystems as well as biological systems at lower levels of organization.
WoodStoich III will be held during August, 2014 and will follow the formula of
two previous WoodStoich workshops. Open applications from students and Postdocs
will be taken in advance, and an international group will be chosen and then
divided into 4-5 working groups, each led by a Postdoctoral-level scientist.
Each of these groups will work to identify crosscutting concepts as well as
potential contradictions between ecological stoichiometry and one other quickly
developing speciality in ecology (e.g. Metabolic Ecology, Spatial Ecology,
Landscape Ecology, Nutritional Geometry, or others). Each group will prepare a
review/concept paper on their topic. The first two days of the workshop will be
used to finalize the manuscripts. These will then be submitted to an accelerated
review process, with reviews returned to the authors within 24 hours. The rest
of the workshop will be spent revising the papers for resubmission. The
intellectual merit will come mainly from the set of papers to emerge, which will
advance stoichiometric theory as well as other theories in ecology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;WoodStoich III will provide unusual training and career
advancement opportunities. Participants will receive experience working in
diverse groups and receive mentoring from senior investigators, including the
two workshop organizers (R. Sterner, USA and D. Raubenheimer, Australia) as well
as at least two other senior scientists, who will participate and provide some
of the needed reviews of the papers. WoodStoich III will provide opportunities
for young scientists to gain experience with all phases of peer review. A senior
Postdoctoral scientist will receive support and will gain leadership experience
in helping to choose and mentor teams as well as organize the conference.