* 1347469
* Collaborative Research: Developing a high-resolution late Holocene sediment record of rapid Arctic climate change from the Beaufort Sea coastal zone
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2013,06/30/2015
* Thomas Bianchi, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* William J. Wiseman, Jr.
* 06/30/2015
* USD 120,826.00

The PIs propose to develop a new, high-resolution (annual to subdecadal)
paleoclimate record (0 to ~2,000 y) from sediment cores taken in Arctic lagoonal
settings adjacent to rivers emptying into the Beaufort Sea. This effort is a
follow-up to an EAGER award that allowed collection of initial core material and
a seismic dataset in Simpson Lagoon near the Colville River delta in August
2010. Initial results suggest that these sediment cores contain a valuable
history of system response to climate change on the adjacent continent (e.g.,
river drainage basins) and terrestrial-marine linkages. All cores will be
analyzed for stratigraphy (X-radiography), bulk organic and mineral content,
granulometry, and geochronology (239,240Pu/137Cs). Detailed analysis for
paleoclimate proxies will be carried out: the age-depth relationship for the
deeper part of these cores will be determined using radiocarbon. Climate
indicators that will be applied are organic biomarkers (lignin-phenols, cutins,
plant pigments, and Ã¤13C) and mineral tracers (major and trace element
chemistry, stable isotopes, clay mineralogy, heavy mineral assemblages,
granulometry, event-layer stratigraphy). The central hypothesis is that lagoonal
settings within the Beaufort Sea contain high quality sediment records because
they receive sediment input from larger rivers that drain the Brooks Range,
that, if exploited, will dramatically improve our knowledge of high Arctic
paleoclimate over the last two millenia. The PIs hypothesize three distinct
sources: 1) rivers that drain the Brooks Range and the Arctic Coastal Plain
(ACP), 2) storms that erode shoreline permafrosted ACP deposits and overwash
barrier islands, and 3) marine primary production by phytoplankton, ice algae,
and benthos. After an initial micro-scale examination of recent event layer
(annual and storm deposits) mineral and POC succession, necessary to interpret
paleoclimate-induced fluctuations in composition, they will examine the downcore
record of temporal variations in layers, contrasting sites to decouple spatial
changes in sources. Since the three source end-members have distinct mineral/POC
composition, they believe that temporal variations will provide proxy
information about climate changes that influence their flux magnitude including
1) landfast ice extent, 2) river sediment supply from the glaciated uplands, 3)
permafrost thawing, 4) summer-fall storminess, and 5) coastal primary
productivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Noting the rapid changes that have occurred
in the Arctic during the latter half of the 20th century, the federal
interagency Study of Environmental Arctic Change (SEARCH) program has cited the
need to determine to what extent recent and ongoing climate changes in the
Arctic can be attributed to anthropogenic forcing. A successful project will
contribute to answering that question.