* 1347817
* Enhancing STEM Education at Oregon State University (ESTEME@OSU)
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2018
* Thomas Dick, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 12/31/2018
* USD 1,999,987.00

In this Institutional Implementation project, learning and retention is being
enhanced for students in STEM disciplines at Oregon State University resulting
from the broad implementation of evidence-based instructional practices (EBIPs)
in calculus based freshmen and sophomore level courses in biology, chemistry,
engineering, mathematics, and physics. The introduction and expansion of EBIP
courses are based on two instructional approaches with a broad evidence of
effectiveness, interactive engagement in lecture and formal cooperative learning
in studio workshop laboratory/recitation sections. Growth of EBIP implementation
is being catalyzed through a theoretically grounded action research approach to
organizational change, namely the establishment of inter- and intra-disciplinary
communities of practice (CoP) focused on instructional design and learning.
These CoPs include innovators, instructional faculty, and graduate and
undergraduate assistants. The CoPs themselves are the subject of action research
that is examining the participants' interpretations, meanings, and connections
related to curricular and pedagogical reform and how these influence their
decision making processes related to implementing EBIPs. The research is
evaluating the effectiveness of EBIPs using a mixed methods approach to
measuring student learning, beliefs related to learning, and social variables
that facilitate learning. The research results are being shared more broadly
across the university to facilitate further awareness and change. The goal of
this effort by its conclusion is broad implementation of EBIPs courses in STEM
disciplines, evidence of their effectiveness on student success, and an
institutionalized infrastructure to continue the reform process through faculty
development and monitoring of effectiveness after the conclusion of this
project. Project success is facilitated by a detailed and theoretically grounded
plan of action and research and a highly qualified team. The project team
includes provosts, deans, department chairs, educational innovators and
educational researchers. The project builds on successful past innovations from
NSF funding. The advisory panel includes prominent expertise in educational
practices of curriculum and instruction, organizational change, psychometrics,
and educational research. The organizational research plan is founded on
theories of emergent organizational change, communities of practice, and
intentional conceptual change.&lt;br/&gt;Approximately 10,000 OSU STEM students
will be exposed to EBIPs annually, with highly likely impacts on their learning
and retention. Approximately 50 OSU faculty and 300 student instructors will
have enhanced knowledge of and changed beliefs about interactive engagement and
formal cooperative learning environments. A sustainable infrastructure for
continued improvement and implementation of EBIPS will be in place. At the
conclusion of this project we will understand (i) how common EBIPs are
manifested in different academic environments and disciplines, (ii) how singular
and multiple experiences with EBIPs courses impact student learning, motivation,
self-efficacy, personal epistemology, sense of community, and social networks,
and (iii) how elements of communities of practice enable faculty to learn about
and implement EBIPs in their own courses. Collectively, these intellectual
contributions will have long lasting impact on others attempting to encourage
the increased implementation of EBIPs.