* 1347577
* Catalyzing Institutional Change Through  Synergistic Observation and Professional Development Programs
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2018
* Susan McKay, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 08/31/2018
* USD 249,851.00

This project catalyzes institutional efforts to broaden and enhance the use of
evidence-based teaching and learner-centered practices in STEM courses
throughout the University of Maine (UMaine). The intellectual merit of this
project derives from the collaborative work of a diverse group of STEM education
stakeholders including faculty, undergraduates, graduate students, university
administrators, and pre- and in-service teachers. Specifically, these
collaborators work together to: (1) systematically observe and document the
nature of UMaine STEM instruction; (2) establish a program in which faculty
members observe each other, discuss observation results, and collaborate on
improving instruction in their courses; (3) use observation data to guide the
development of a series of university-wide professional development workshops
that explicitly target the instructional needs of the faculty; and (4) create a
novel program in which experienced undergraduates partner with faculty to
implement innovative instructional practices.

Data from this project are expected to substantively enhance the research base
on institutional change in STEM courses. In particular, a model, university-wide
observation program is measuring the extent to which STEM instruction is
learner-centered before, during, and after targeted efforts to transform
instruction at UMaine. In addition, an in-depth analysis of the impact of the
project's faculty peer-observation program on instructional practices is adding
to a growing body of work on the use of peer observations for professional
development. Finally, project personnel are investigating whether a novel
program that pairs undergraduates with faculty leads to the sustained
implementation of learner-centered strategies.

The implications for university-level professional development arising from this
project lay the groundwork for other institutions across the country to develop
and implement similar programs to catalyze institutional change. The
deliverables developed over the course of this project include: (1) training
materials and a model program that can be used to facilitate the systematic
collection of data on the prevalence of learner-centered instruction in STEM
courses, (2) an analysis of how groups of faculty performing peer observations
can promote instructional change, (3) an investigation of a novel model program
in which undergraduates partner with faculty to promote effective peer
discussion, and (4) a set of multimedia resources expressly designed to help
undergraduates prepare for and benefit the most from learner-centered
instruction.