* 1347553
* EAGER: Northwest PULSE-Departmental Transformation through Vision and Change
* BIO,EF
* 09/01/2013,02/29/2016
* Joann Otto, Western Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 02/29/2016
* USD 130,171.00

An award has been made to Western Washington University to form a regional
network in support of the Partnership for Undergraduate Life Science Education
(PULSE). Last September, the PULSE partners (HHMI, NIH, and NSF) appointed 40
Vision and Change Leadership Fellows to stimulate transformative changes in the
undergraduate life science education community. Fellows from two-year colleges,
liberal arts colleges, comprehensive universities and research universities were
selected. All Fellows met in October 2012 and organized into four working groups
for developing approaches to help departments implement recommendations made in
the Vision and Change report. Such improvements in how biology is taught at all
types of undergraduate institutions should increase student learning of core
concepts, should increase retention rates for students in the sciences, and
should prepare all students to be more curious and scientifically literate
citizens. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although individual faculty have been very
active in instituting reforms in their own courses, it is usually harder to
transform an entire department. This proposal plans to address that challenge by
forming a network of institutions in close geographical proximity so they can
support and advise one another as each implements change. Tools and resources
have been developed by the Leadership Fellows that will be field-tested by the
different types of participating institutions in the northwest. For example,
rubrics for departmental self-assessment and visits by trained Ambassadors will
be provided to assist departments in adopting reforms in how life science
courses are taught. Fifteen participating institutions will identify teams of
faculty, administrators, and students to participate in on-line training
sessions, in-person workshops, and a symposium for biology instructors in the
spring of 2014. It is hoped that this network will increase awareness of the
recommendations made in the Vision and Change report, accelerate the pace of
adopting those recommendations by different departments, and lead to a better
understanding of how change happens on diverse campuses. This regional network
will expand the impact of PULSE by including institutions in Alaska, Wyoming,
Montana, and Idaho that are currently not represented by the PULSE Leadership
Fellows. This regional network will be a "laboratory" for testing the resources
that have been developed by the four PULSE working groups, and will expand to
include new partners in the life sciences community in the northwest beyond the
Leadership Fellows themselves. Results from the workshop and the larger
conference will be shared with the life sciences community, primarily via the
www.pulsecommunity.org website and by continued partnerships with other groups
advocating for change in life science education in the
northwest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being funded jointly by the
Directorate for Biological Sciences and the Directorate of Education and Human
Resources, Division of Undergraduate Education as part of their efforts to
support Vision and Change in Undergraduate Biology Education.