* 1347132
* Moisture Budget and Air-Sea Interaction Associated with Atmospheric Rivers in the Northeast Pacific:  Observations and Climate Model Simulations
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2018
* Toshiaki Shinoda, Texas A&M University Corpus Christi
* Standard Grant
* Ming Cai
* 04/30/2018
* USD 513,479.00

The primary goal of this project is to evaluate the structure and mechanism of
atmospheric rivers (ARs) in the northeast Pacific and their impacts on U.S.
weather simulated by global climate models, and understand the physical
processes responsible for the systematic errors in the simulations. An analysis
of satellite observations and reanalysis products including computation of
composite sea surface temperature, air-sea fluxes and moisture budget associated
with ARs will be undertaken. An examination of the impact of low frequency
variability such as El Nino Southern Oscillation and Madden Julian Oscillation
on ARs will also be investigated. An intercomparison of global climate model
simulation, including the evaluation of AR simulations and the impact of the
double Inter Tropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ) problem on precipitation along the
U.S. West Coast through AR activity will be performed. The research will include
conducting atmospheric coupled model experiments with prescribed sea surface
temperatures (SST), which include the erroneous SST field associated with the
double (ITCZ) problem. Finally upper ocean processes associated with ARs that
could influence SST and air-sea fluxes of moisture using ocean coupled modeling
experiments will be examined.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will shed
insights into ARs that are an important mode of providing precipitation to the
western US. Enhanced understanding of ARs thus has important societal impacts
and benefits.