* 1347911
* Pilot Study:  Addition of Biological Sampling to Drake Passage Transits of the "L.M. Gould"
* GEO,OPP
* 12/01/2013,11/30/2016
* Valerie Loeb, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Christian Fritsen
* 11/30/2016
* USD 171,991.00

A 50+ year warming trend in the Southern Ocean has been most dramatic in Drake
Passage and likely impacts ecosystem structure here. Acoustic Doppler Current
Profiler (ADCP) records from multiple ?L.M. Gould? supply transits of Drake
Passage from 1999 to present demonstrate spatial and temporal variability in
acoustics backscattering. Acoustics backscattering strength in the upper water
column corresponds to zooplankton and nekton biomass that supports predator
populations. However, for much of Drake Passage the identity of taxa
contributing to this acoustically detected biomass is not known. This project
would introduce a biological component to ?L.M. Gould? transits of Drake Passage
with the goal of determining the identity of taxa responsible for the
backscattering records obtained by ADCP and relating these to higher trophic
levels (seabird/marine mammal). Net sampling during spring, summer and fall
transits will permit assessment of diel and seasonal changes in the abundance
and taxonomic composition of zooplankton and top predators represented between
Patagonia and the Antarctic Peninsula. Net samples and depth-referenced video
records taken in conjunction with ADCP profiles will permit the identification
of the dominant acoustic backscatters in the 3 biogeographic regions represented
here, the Subantarctic, Polar Frontal, and Antarctic Zones. The validity of
dominant backscattering taxa in the Antarctic Zone will be tested by comparing
the ADCP records with abundant zooplankton data collected off the Antarctic
Peninsula during January-March 1999-2009 as well with long-term top predator
surveys. The broader impacts also include a cruise blog, the production of an
article for an online outreach publication based at Moss Landing Marine Labs and
a YouTube video featuring shipboard research in the Southern Ocean.