* 1347267
* MIT VMS I-Corps Site
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2014,11/30/2020
* Roman Lubynsky, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Shearman
* 11/30/2020
* USD 359,991.00

This Innovation Corps (I-Corps) Site is housed at the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology (MIT) Venture Mentoring Service (VMS). MIT has a track record of
transitioning activities from research laboratories into inventions and
discoveries with broad economic and societal impact. This new NSF I-Corps Site
at the MIT VMS will build upon existing resources and expertise to increase the
successful transition of university research to commercialization and diffusion.
This project enables VMS to reach and influence more researchers, and
underrepresented participants in particular, from across the MIT campus to
explore getting their inventions and discoveries to the marketplace. VMS is
expanding its existing entrepreneurial and education services to increase
support specifically for early stage research-based ideas including: customer
exploration, development and validation as well as understanding the
stakeholders, relationships and dynamics in the targeted marketplaces. VMS
employs a Team Mentoring approach that may potentially be transformative by
increasing the rates of learning and progress of Sites team participants.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MIT's activities are likely to have broad impact
including: encouraging entrepreneurial aspirations and providing researchers
with training and activities to understand the entrepreneurial process allowing
them to greatly increase their future prospects while still within the academic
environment; attracting and supporting a greater number of students, faculty and
other researchers to actively explore the possibilities of translating their
research into future commercial applications, ensuring the supply needed to fuel
the continuous flow of innovations needed by society; and, encouraging more
women and other underrepresented participants to become engaged and reach
successful outcomes, serving as visible role models to accelerate the
participation of others. Finally, through its existing and active Outreach
Program, MIT VMS will disseminate both the knowledge and practical techniques to
its large and growing network of universities that have launched mentoring
programs based upon the VMS model.