* 1347831
* NetSE: Small: A Market Approach to Controlling the Proliferation of Internet Routes
* CSE,CNS
* 06/30/2013,08/31/2013
* Roch Guerin, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 08/31/2013
* USD 36,122.00

As the Internet grows, so do Internet routing tables. This growth has so far
been manageable, i.e., routing tables count fewer than 300,000 entries versus
several hundred millions entities connected to the Internet; but this status-quo
is ending. Core routing tables have experienced exponential growth far exceeding
the pace of technology improvements. This has become cause for alarm for
equipment vendors and standard organizations (the IETF recently created a
?Working Group? dedicated to the problem). Solutions will, however, take time to
mature and likely require significant changes to Internet technology.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: This project explores whether market
mechanism can help control the growth of Internet routing tables. Specifically,
Internet users contribute to this growth primarily through multi-homing and
traffic engineering, both aimed at improving local performance and reliability.
These local improvements have global consequences: they increase the number of
routing entries in the Internet core. Market-based solutions can introduce
incentives and pricing mechanisms that capture this tension and allow users to
realize their goals while explicitly reflecting their costs to
others.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this research is in
accounting for both technical issues and user goals in developing solutions to
preserve Internet growth. Market solutions are effective in tackling complex
problems involving diverse parameters, as is the case here, and can also evolve
with technology. Ensuring the continued growth of the Internet has obviously
broad impact. The impact should, however, also extend to improving the
engineering curriculum; in particular through examples illustrating the
importance of interactions between economic factors and technology&lt;br/&gt;