* 1347385
* Mobility of Pyroclastic Density Currents: Integrating Field and Experimental Techniques to Understand the Controls and Consequences of Erosion
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/2014,02/28/2018
* Brittany Brand, Boise State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 02/28/2018
* USD 262,068.00

Pyroclastic density currents (PDCs) are the most dangerous hazard associated
with explosive volcanism. These unpredictable currents consist of searing hot
clouds of gas, ash and rock that travel down the slopes of erupting volcanoes
with tremendous force and velocity. The driving force for these devastating
currents is their dense nature (due to the mixture of ash and rock) relative to
the ambient air. PDCs will travel across the landscape, potentially many miles
beyond the volcano flanks, until the ash and rock within the current has dropped
out and the current density decreases to match that of the ambient air. Despite
the pervasiveness of PDCs and their deadly consequences, many fundamental
aspects of their behavior and controls on runout distance remain poorly
understood. One of the most important gaps in our understanding of these
currents is the mechanism(s) for eroding into the surface over which a PDC
flows, and the influence of mixing substrate material into the current on
downstream flow dynamics. Given that the primary control on runout distance is a
current?s density relative to the ambient air, bulking of the current due to
entrainment of the substrate would influence and possibly extend the ultimate
runout distance, thereby increasing destructive potential. This work combines
field techniques and scaled laboratory experiments to examine the complex
relationships between PDC conditions and erosion, and the consequence of erosion
on current mobility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will explore the control
of three main parameters on a current's ability to erode from the substrate:
slope, degree of fluidization (pore pressure), and nature of the substrate
(particle size, particle density, thickness of erodible bed and substrate
roughness). This work will be conducted in three phases. The first phase
includes field studies on the well-exposed PDC deposits from the May 18th, 1980
eruption of Mt St Helens (MSH), which builds on the previous work on these
deposits of the lead investigator. Field work includes textural, granulometry
and componentry studies to determine (or infer) the source of eroded lithics
within the PDC deposits, the substrate conditions that favor erosion (e.g.,
slope, surface roughness) and the influence of erosion on downstream flow
dynamics of the eroding PDCs. The second phase involves scaled experiments to
explore the general conditions that favor erosion via shear at the base versus
underpressure in the head of fluidized currents, which build on the fundamental
work of collaborator Dr. Roche. The third phase includes experiments that
specifically explore our interpretations and hypothesis developed from the phase
one field results from MSH by assessing (1) the influence of topographic
obstacles on erosion and downstream flow dynamics, (2) the role of an increased
density gradient on basal shear stress and erosion, and (3) the development of
fabric in laboratory flows as a function of degree of fluidization and
interaction with obstacles. The ultimate goal is to develop a more comprehensive
understanding of the controls on PDC damage potential and runout distance, which
will enable better assessments and mitigation of the hazards associated with
future explosive eruptions.