* 1347325
* ZagApps: Mobile Device Applications Laboratory
* EHR,DUE
* 05/20/2013,10/31/2014
* Christopher Smith, Lake Superior State University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 10/31/2014
* USD 26,158.00

The Computer Science Mobile Device Application Lab project (ZagApps) at Gonzaga
University is creating a curriculum to enhance computer science study with
mobile device/smart phone application development. The laboratory and curriculum
use Apple 'Touch' technology. Gonzaga computer science students work closely
with area STEM teachers to create applications for use in K-12 classrooms. The
STEM teachers are involved in both the design and the use of the applications
and provide feedback on the usefulness of the applications. As a result of
working with their high school teacher and student 'customers', Gonzaga students
are better prepared for the software industry processes of developing
applications based on user needs and of testing the final application for
reliability. They expand their technical skills in mobile device/smart phone
application development, testing, and field deployment and their people skills
in customer relations, active listening, and problem solving.

The project impacts high school students in the selected STEM classrooms by
generating positive experiences between teachers, students, and collegiate
computing majors. The high school students meet college undergraduates and learn
about the importance of computer science as well as the importance of their math
and science studies. The project also provides a foundation for better
collaboration between university computer science programs and high school STEM
teachers and students. The developed curriculum is applicable to other colleges
and universities.