* 1347767
* Professional Development Program: Building a Multi-Level Diverse Workforce in Astronomy
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Jerome Shaw, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Linda French
* 08/31/2017
* USD 713,181.00

This award is to support the Professional Development Program (PDP), run by the
Institute for Scientist &amp; Engineer Educators. The PDP trains graduate
students and postdoctoral researchers to teach effectively and inclusively as a
complement to their research training, and simultaneously seeks to retain
undergraduates in the STEM pipeline. The work will facilitate the expansion of
the PDP to a nationwide level from its traditional Hawai?i-based roots, allowing
teams of 3-4 at any US institution to apply for and participate in the program.
This will help address numerous outstanding shortcomings in the astronomy
workforce and educational pipeline. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
diversify and improve the astronomy-related workforce at multiple levels of
degree/training and experience. The team will (1) develop the teaching,
mentoring, and professional skills of graduate students and postdocs in
astronomy; (2) develop the teaching, mentoring, and professional skills of
current astronomy professionals with a focus on Hawai?i; and (3) advance
undergraduates in STEM with a focus on broadening participation. The PDP will
have a strong synergy with the Akamai Workforce Initiative, and the two programs
will jointly address critical Hawai?ian workforce needs that are highly relevant
to the forthcoming Advanced Technology Solar Telescope (ATST) and Thirty Meter
Telescope (TMT).