* 1347942
* Building India: Clues from the Singhbhum Craton & Southern India
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2014,08/31/2018
* Joseph Meert, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 08/31/2018
* USD 230,007.00

This award is focused on understanding the geological history of the Indian
subcontinent and the complexities of its formation. Like many continents, India
is composed of several geographically and geologically distinct elements that
were welded together to form modern-day Peninsular India. The principal
investigators for this project are examining two regions in India that are
poorly studied (Singhbhum craton-northeast India and the southern Indian Dharwar
craton and surrounding region). The project involves a combination of
paleomagnetic and geochronologic studies that provide us with information
regarding where and when these continental blocks were incorporated into India
along with their relationship to other landmasses during the Proterozoic Eon
(2.5 billion to 540 million years ago). It is hypothesized that the Indian
subcontinent or some of its sub-regions may have been part of two ancient
supercontinents called Rodinia and Columbia. This research is aimed at
deciphering the complexities of how these supercontinents were assembled and
subsequently dispersed due to plate tectonics, as well as examining any
potential links to concomitant changes in the biosphere and climate. This
project will provide key information regarding the timing and location of the
suture/rift zones between continental blocks within India and the larger
landmasses of Columbia and Rodinia. The work involves an international team of
scientists from the United States, India, and Canada. In addition to the
research objectives of the project, the award is supporting the training of
undergraduate and graduate graduate students in a STEM discipline. The principal
investigators are working to broaden participation of underrepresented groups in
STEM by recruiting students from under-represented groups in the Geosciences.
The research results from this project will be disseminated through top
journals, meetings, presentations at K-12 educational institutions and other
public outreach efforts. Our knowledge of Proterozoic supercontinents such as
Rodinia and Columbia are based on a relatively small (but growing) paleomagnetic
database. East Gondwana (Australia, Antarctica, India, Madagascar and Sri Lanka)
is a critical piece of the supercontinental models. Only India and Australia
contain rocks that are relatively un-deformed and un-metamorphosed considered
useful for paleomagnetic studies. Our goal in this proposal is to fill in
critical gaps in India's drift history through the combined use of
paleomagnetism and geochronology. The results are providing researchers with key
tie points in reconstructing past continental assemblies. These reconstructions,
in turn, will be evaluated for their effects on global climate change,
evolution, mantle dynamics and mineral exploration. The key focus of this
proposal is to obtain high-quality paleomagnetic data from a series of dykes in
the Singhbhum craton and localities in southern India. These data will include
geochronological data and field tests to fully constrain the age of
magnetization in the rocks. The methodologies employed in this proposal have
already proven effective in improving our knowledge of India?s relationship to
other landmasses. This proposal will obtain well-dated paleomagnetic poles from
the Singhbhum craton (east-central India) and the southernmost Dharwar craton
(south India) in an effort to: (a) expand the Proterozoic paleomagnetic and
geochronological database for India (its barcode); (b) use paleomagnetism to
test cratonic coherence between the north and south Indian cratons across the
Central Indian Tectonic zone during the Proterozoic; (c) establish the extent of
a proposed ~1.9 Ga radiating dyke swarm already established in the Bastar and
Dharwar cratons and (d) establish the position of India in the supercontinents
of Rodinia and Columbia. These ideas will be tested by collecting paleomagnetic
and geochronologic samples from the targeted regions within India.