* 1347566
* CAREER: Fundamental Analysis and Computational Modeling of Acoustic Radiation in Turbulent Reacting Flows
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2013,09/30/2015
* Matthias Ihme, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Song-Charng Kong
* 09/30/2015
* USD 184,626.00

0844587&lt;br/&gt;Ihme&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;This research is intended to achieve new, useful insights into
control of noise pollution from jet aircraft by studying turbulent reactive
flows and developing computational models. Remarkable reductions in jet noise
have been achieved with high-bypass turbofan engines, which made combustion
noise a leading noise contributor. Furthermore, new clean-combustion
technologies have had the unwanted effect of increasing combustion noise.
Predictive modeling capabilities are not available largely because of the
limited scientific understanding of these phenomena, which forces the
implementation of costly passive sound-mitigating programs on the
ground.&lt;br/&gt;Fundamental understanding of this acoustic radiation will be
sought by combining fundamental analysis, development of predictive modeling
capabilities on the NSF TeraGrid system, and experimental validation. Direct
numerical simulations of benchmark flame configurations will be conducted on
turbulent premixed, partially premixed, and diffusion flames to identify and
understand the processes controlling acoustic radiation. Using this knowledge, a
consistent modeling capability will be developed applicable for reliable noise
predictions in combustion LES. This model will be validated in simulations of
complex flame configurations for which experimental data are available.
&lt;br/&gt;Such detailed simulation data will be valuable in identifying
acoustic sources, understanding acoustic-thermochemical coupling mechanisms,
characterizing sound-refraction effects, and guiding experimental
instrumentation. Model capabilities developed in this research can also be
integrated into simulation tools for designing advanced combustion systems in
aircraft engines, gas turbines, and other applications. This improved
understanding of noise mechanism could also be of potential relevance to areas
outside the power generation field, such as acoustic sensing and helioseismic
applications that deal with solar-acoustic oscillations.&lt;br/&gt;A
comprehensive education and outreach program is part of this CAREER grant. Its
particular emphasis is to recruit underrepresented high-school students from
communities in proximity to local airports that are directly affected by
aircraft noise pollution. Through summer internships and the close interaction
with undergraduate students through classroom projects on specific problems
addressing various noise and air pollution aspects they can relate to, these
high school students will be encouraged to pursue engineering careers to work on
issues that have a direct benefit to their community. Another component of the
education plan is to expose a group of motivated and diverse undergraduate
students to computational modeling and high-performance computing through
research activities, summer schools, and undergraduate curricula. Acquiring such
skills early in their careers is increasingly important with the growing use of
computational modeling to solve the technological challenges of our world.