* 1347463
* Experimental Investigation of Chlorine Substitution into Calcic Amphiboles
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2018
* David Jenkins, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 03/31/2018
* USD 264,672.00

The results from this study should provide insights into such basic processes as
the interaction of seawater with oceanic crustal rocks, the role of chlorine-
rich fluids in producing mineralogical changes in deep-crustal rocks, and the
compositions of fluids associated with ore-mineral formation. Chlorine-rich
amphiboles have been observed in a wide range of geological settings yet little
is known about how they form. The focus of this proposal is to investigate
experimentally the partitioning of chlorine between the common rock-forming
mineral amphibole and chlorine-bearing brines. Calibrating how the concentration
of chlorine in the amphibole varies with both the composition of the host
amphibole (such as its iron content) and the chlorine content of the ambient
brine permits geologists to determine the chlorine content of fluids that were
once in contact with the amphibole but are no longer present. Important outcomes
from this project will be to identify what compositional variables in the
amphibole are most important in controlling its ability to incorporate chlorine,
and quantifying the distribution of chlorine between mineral and fluid.

This research project will provide some of the first experimental data on the
compositional controls on the substitution of chlorine into amphibole by
examining some of the crystal-chemical correlations that have been proposed in
the literature. Four specific correlations will be investigated: (i)
substitution of Fe2+ for Mg at octahedral sites (i.e., the Fe#) and determining
whether or not the Cl content varies linearly with the Fe#, (ii) occupancy of K
at the crystallographic A site, (iii) substitution of tetrahedral Al for Si, and
(iv) substitution of octahedral Fe3+ for octahedral Al. These compositional
variables will be studied primarily using the amphiboles ferro-pargasite and
hastingsite, both of which have been observed with high Cl contents in nature
and which can be synthesized with sufficient size for routine electron
microprobe analysis. A complementary set of experiments will be done where
amphiboles are synthesized in brines of varying types and Cl concentration in
order to determine the maximum Cl content, or saturation level, obtained in the
amphibole at a given set of pressure?temperature?oxygen-fugacity conditions. The
results of this study should improve our understanding of what compositional
variables are most important in controlling the substitution of Cl into
amphibole and quantify the partitioning of Cl between calcic amphiboles and an
ambient brine. This information has applications to diverse areas in the
geological sciences, including seawater-rock interaction, chorine concentration
in fluids associated with Cl-metasomatism, the role of saline solutions in
forming high-grade metamorphic rocks, and characterizing fluids that yield
economically important deposits.