* 1347186
* EAGER: Social Cybersecurity: Applying Social Psychology to Improve Cybersecurity
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Laura Dabbish, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 08/31/2016
* USD 232,000.00

Past research investigating the human side of cybersecurity has treated people
as isolated individuals rather than as social actors acting within a web of
relationships and social influence. We are investigating how social influence
can and does affect cybersecurity. More specifically, we are studying how people
learn about new security behaviors from their social network, using both
qualitative and quantitative methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We are also
developing and evaluating novel techniques for leveraging social influences to
improve people?s awareness and knowledge of cybersecurity, as well as motivation
to act securely. These techniques make use of established principles from social
psychology for influencing people, specifically similarity and social norms. We
are applying these same ideas towards influencing people?s attitudes and
behaviors towards cybersecurity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Success in this work will
open up a new dimension to cybersecurity and add to the toolbox for researchers
and practitioners, in terms of applying known ideas from an established field in
a new context to improve cybersecurity. Our work will also improve the
community?s understanding of how people learn their cybersecurity behaviors (of
which currently there is little literature), and will lead to a rigorous
evaluation of how effective two different social mechanisms are in influencing
people?s awareness, knowledge, and motivations towards acting more securely
online.