* 1347868
* Collaborative Research: Expanding the Tephrochronologic Record of the Northern Lesser Antilles Arc: Rapid Identification of Cryptotephra Using Multiple Methods
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2014,02/28/2017
* Bradley Thomson, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 02/28/2017
* USD 80,360.00

Explosive volcanic eruptions can disperse large amounts of pyroclastic material
(tephra) over a wide geographic range. When preserved in the sedimentary record,
these layers often serve as important stratigraphic marker beds that can be
correlated spatially and temporally and related to the magnitude, source, and
timing of eruptive activity. Sedimentological analysis of these deposits enable
investigation of fundamental geologic questions related to arc generation,
maintenance, and destruction processes. These include: (1) the rates, timing,
frequency and magnitude of volcanic eruptions, 2) identification of systematic
patterns or variance in the time series of volcanic eruptions in terms of
eruptive style, eruption magnitude, and repose periods, (3) assessing the
completeness of the onshore record, especially if the marine record contains
events not archived onshore, and (4) the nature of volcanism during the
construction of a volcanic complex (magma evolution, production rate, eruptive
styles, spatio-temporal distribution of eruptive vents and products, and
importance of constructional vs. destructional processes). This information is
essential to inform assessments of present-day hazards from active arc
volcanoes. However, while constraining the long term eruptive history of a
volcanic arc before the start of written historical records or beyond well-
preserved subaerial tephra fall deposits (often representing only a few thousand
years) is important, it is inherently difficult. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Key to
establishing an accurate geologic record is the development of a methodology
capable of accurate, replicable, quantitative, and routine identification of
these tephra layers in marine sediment sequences. Traditionally,
tephrochronologic methods have been applied to visible tephra beds that are
typically characterized by discrete, often dark-colored depositional layers.
This limits tephrochronology studies to areas proximal to volcanic sources
capable of producing voluminous deposits. Cryptotephras, fine layers of ash that
may not be visible to the naked eye, may either represent smaller eruptions or
eruptions from more distal sources. Identification of cryptotephra has now
become essential in order to fully constrain the eruptive history of a volcanic
center. Previously cryptotephra have been identified by a variety of time-
intensive and destructive methods. The goal of this proposal is to document and
characterize different sedimentary properties and semi-quantitatively identify
the distribution and magnitude of cryptotephras in the sediment record at
millimeter scale resolution from the surrounding sedimentary matrix using high
resolution continuous scanning techniques. These techniques include: (1)
magnetic measurements, particularly magnetic susceptibility; (2) reflectance
spectroscopy; (3) core XRF scanning using the ITRAX system; and (4) Computer
Tomography (CT) scans. While these four techniques have demonstrated their
potential for the identification of tephra, they have rarely been used together,
especially at the resolution required to document cryptotephra. Combining these
three methodologies will provide a comprehensive assessment and evaluation of
the sedimentological, geochemical, magnetic, and spectral properties of
sediment, all of which have independently been shown to vary substantially with
the presence of tephra and also allow evaluation of the efficacy of these
techniques for cryptotephra identification. The described techniques will be
applied to IODP cores drilled off Montserrat to establish a long term
tephrochronologic record of Montserrat and to better constrain the evolution of
the Lesser Antilles arc. This research will generate: (1) an expanded geologic
history of the volcanic system driving Montserrat and an associated hazard
assessment; (2) a better understanding of the evolution of the Lesser Antilles
arc; and (3) an evaluation of a set of techniques that can be used to rapidly
identify cryptotephra layers in sediment sequences by non-destructive means.