* 1347790
* Encouraging the use of Evidence-Based Instructional Practices through Research Initiatives: An assessment of university climate
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Heidi Steinhauer, Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 08/31/2016
* USD 248,395.00

This award is for a WIDER program planning grant. The purpose of this planning
grant is to identify the current usage of evidence-based instructional practices
and the balance between restricting and driving influences for their
implementation at Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University (ERAU) using the
Transtheoretical Model for Health Behavior Change. Not previously applied to
education, this model acknowledges that change can be cyclic and include
relapses to a previous state, similar to findings from research into diffusion
of education innovations and use of signature pedagogies in STEM education. The
model is being used to guide the collection of mixed-methods data from faculty
in the College of Engineering and College of Arts and Science that teach first-
year general education STEM courses in the engineering curriculum. Data are
being analyzed to identify evidence-based instructional practices currently used
by these faculty, distribution of stages of change, processes used to advance
through the stages of change, and the balance between the magnitude of driving
and restricting forces. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outcomes of this project will
be used to provide a guide to develop interventions, based on specific
independent variables associated with each individual faculty member in general
education mathematics, physical sciences, and engineering courses, encouraging
use of evidence-based instructional practices. The inventory of evidence-based
instructional practices currently implemented at ERAU collected through this
planning grant will allow ERAU's Center of Teaching and Learning Excellence to
utilize appropriate faculty activities with respect to particular stages of
change. The analysis will also result in a plan to encourage driving forces and
limit restricting forces, shifting the balance towards a progressive stance on
the implementation of evidence-based instructional practices. The enhanced use
of these practices, especially beneficial to underrepresented groups, encourages
student learning in first year engineering courses that is expected to reduce
student attrition at ERAU. Dissemination of the findings of this project will
provide other institutions with a plan to apply the Transtheoretical Model of
Health Behavior Change and associated analyses to assess faculty use of
evidence-based practices at their institution, as well as to increase the
likelihood of adoption of those practices.