* 1347511
* Sixth Annual Graduate Student Mini-conference on Computational Mathematics, March 7-8, 2014
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2015
* Lizette Zietsman, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 03/31/2015
* USD 8,966.00

This award supports participation in the Sixth Annual Graduate Student Mini-
conference on Computational Mathematics, held at Virginia Tech on March 7-8,
2014. The conference series engages researchers and graduate students from a
number of research universities in the southeastern Atlantic region of the
United States. The primary objective of this meeting is to provide a venue for
graduate students to present their research in either poster (interactive) or
short presentation formats. The conference also includes a plenary speaker from
one of the participating universities. This conference series exposes students
to modern research directions in a wide range of areas in computational
mathematics including, but not limited to: turbulent flow, large eddy
simulation, optimal control, groundwater flows, magnetohydrodynamics, numerical
approximation for stochastic partial differential equations, model reduction
methods, fluid-structure interaction, and climate modeling. The meetings lay the
groundwork for future collaborations in these important research
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For most of the student participants, this mini-
conference provides their first presentation experience within a supportive
atmosphere and provides valuable exposure to a large network of researchers with
the same or related research interests. The mini-conference has always attracted
participants of different backgrounds and nationalities. Underrepresented
groups, including women and minorities, are strongly encouraged to
participate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Conference web site:
www.icam.vt.edu/Conferences/johnfest_2014/