* 1347561
* Enhancing Diversity in the Geosciences by Testing the Rigidity of the Eurasia Plate Using GPS
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/2014,03/31/2018
* Richard Bennett, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 03/31/2018
* USD 171,728.00

Preliminary analyses of GPS-derived crustal motions from 251 continuous GPS
stations in west and central Europe cast doubt on the rigidity of western
Eurasia. Possible belts of concentrated deformation appear to coincide with
prominent seismically active and/or geologically distinct features, such as the
Trans-European Suture Zone, the Rhine Graben, and the Pyrenees Mountain belt.
But the motions are small and many additional tests of the internal kinematics
of the region are required. This project exploits existing data from hundreds of
continuously operating GPS stations located in west and central Europe to
determine whether or not intraplate seismicity is accompanied by observable
intraplate deformation. The project involves: (1) acquisition and analysis of
new data from existing continuous GPS networks in Europe and the Mediterranean
region; and (2) statistical tests of western Eurasia plate rigidity in order to
explore possible explanations for observed crustal motions such as microplate
motion, interplate and inter-microplate elastic strain accumulation, diffuse
intraplate deformation, ephemeral strain accumulation associated with glacial
isostatic adjustment, site specific secular motion, and time correlated
measurement error. The science objectives will provide an opportunity to attract
new Geoscience majors with physical disabilities, an important underrepresented
group in the Geosciences. Specifically and in conjunction with the University of
Arizona Disability Resource Center, the project will (1) increase awareness of
Geoscience research opportunities; (2) develop strong mentoring relationships
between undergraduate students with physical disabilities and more senior
researchers; and (3) create meaningful undergraduate research experiences,
including hypothesis testing and dissemination of results at a student-run
symposium and at national level scientific conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
main objective of this project is to test the internal rigidity of the western
Eurasia plate. The theory of plate tectonics is based upon the idea that
relative motion between adjacent plates is accommodated mostly within narrow
zones of intense deformation. However, abundant intraplate seismicity and strain
accumulation observed by space geodesy indicates that this hypothesis is not
strictly valid. Where plate boundaries involve continental lithosphere the zones
of interplate deformation may extend hundreds of kilometers into the continental
interiors, blurring the distinction between interplate and intraplate
deformation. This project exploits existing of data from hundreds of
continuously operating GPS stations located in west and central Europe to
determine whether or not intraplate seismicity is accompanied by observable
intraplate deformation. Understanding the rigidity of continental plate
interiors is also important for earthquake hazards assessment because intraplate
earthquakes may have very long recurrence periods, and are thus difficult to
anticipate. The project will broaden participation and diversity among
Geoscience majors by creating meaningful and broadly accessible undergraduate
research experiences, including hypothesis testing, and dissemination of results
at a student run symposium and at national scientific conferences.