* 1347346
* Symposium &amp; Workshop: Shaking, dripping and drinking: surface-tension phenomena in organismal biology, SICB Annual Meeting, Austin, Texas, January 3-7, 2014
* BIO,IOS
* 11/01/2013,10/31/2014
* David Hu, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Steven Ellis
* 10/31/2014
* USD 15,913.00

The symposium and associated workshop at the 2014 Meeting of the Society of
Integrative Comparative Biology (SICB) will encourage investigators in
organismal biology to understand and employ recent experimental, computational
and theoretical advances in flows involving water surfaces. Such flows are both
ubiquitous and diverse, involving the drinking of birds and bees, the footprints
of whale flukes, the flow of xylem in plants, raindrop impacts on animals, and
disease transmission through raindrop impacts. The fundamental physical
principles underlying such flows provide a unifying framework to interpret the
adaptations of the animals and plants that rely upon them. The symposium will
provide a much-needed unifying physical framework to understand surface-tension
phenomena in biological systems. The speakers will provide the audience with a
broad understanding of successful mathematical and biological techniques used in
this area, such as scaling laws, calculus for describing water surfaces, as well
as scanning electron microscopy, surface moulding using clay, and high-speed
videography. The workshop provides an opportunity for biology students to learn
new tools from fluid mechanics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results will be
disseminated through publication of a pair of journal articles. The first
article will be a view of the future of the field of capillary biology in
Integrative and Comparative Biology, as seen by the expert speakers in the
symposium. The second article will be a synopsis of the Visualization Workshop,
which will discuss the generation, presentation, and interpretation of flow
visualization generated from experiments and simulation. The workshop will focus
on the use of visual imagery to transcend the language barriers between biology
and the mathematical sciences, and to disseminate science to the public.