* 1347737
* EAGER: Rational Modification of Enzyme Charge for Enhanced Biocatalyst Stability in Ionic Liquids
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2014
* Joel Kaar, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 08/31/2014
* USD 84,487.00

Widespread interest in the use of ionic liquids (ILs) as solvents for
biocatalytic reactions, which stems from their exceptional solvent properties,
has largely been met with underwhelming results. Such results can be directly
attributed to the current lack of understanding of how ILs interact with enzymes
at the molecular level. The PI, Prof. Joel Kaar of the University of Colorado,
hypothesizes that altering the charge state of residues on the enzyme surface
will provide a route to mediate electrostatic interactions between ILs and
enzymes. Moreover, altering the surface charge of an enzyme should also prevent
hydrophobic interactions that can influence IL-enzyme binding as well as enzyme
aggregation in ILs. The National Science Foundation Catalysis & Biocatalysis
Program will offer an EAGER Award to support this highly exploratory
experimentation which will specifically enable preliminary demonstration of the
role of electrostatic interactions in the association of enzymes and ILs at the
molecular level. The role of electrostatic interactions in the association of
enzymes and ILs will be quantified as a function of enzyme surface charge via
fluorescence quenching assays. The potential use of charge modification to
increase the tolerance of cellulases to ILs will also be demonstrated. This has
implications in biomass conversion technology.

This research will begin to uncover the mechanisms by which enzymes are
inactivated in ILs by characterizing the biophysical basis for the impact of
charge modification on IL-induced inactivation. The results of this work will
ultimately support the use of enzyme charge modification as a means to enhance
the utility of ILs for biocatalysis in general.

This research will enable opportunities to train students in molecular biology,
biochemical, and biophysical techniques while providing practical laboratory
experience. Training in new protein engineering techniques developed in this
work will be extended to students in the University of Colorado iGEM
(international Genetically Engineered Machines) program, which the PI has helped
grow. These techniques may be implemented in student iGEM projects for the
purpose of developing novel biological systems with utility in areas of
medicine, energy, and sustainability.