* 1347115
* Collaborative research: An integrated theory of syntactic acquisition - Realistic input, quantitatively defined target states, and computational models of the learning strategy
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2017
* Jon Sprouse, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 12/31/2017
* USD 231,102.00

Understanding how the human mind creates the intricate system of syntactic
structure that underlies human language has long been a central question in
cognitive science. A complete theory of the cognitive architecture scaffolding
this complex process needs to specify at least three components: (i) the input
children use to learn their language's syntax, (ii) the gradient adult syntactic
behavior that serves as the target state for learning, and (iii) the learning
mechanism that children use to map between the input and the target state. The
field is closer than ever to constructing its first set of large-scale theories
because both the computational and experimental methodologies necessary to
specify these components are now available to researchers willing to combine
their expertise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project leverages a research
framework that integrates realistic data about children's input, experimental
syntax techniques, and computational modeling approaches to explain how children
successfully acquire knowledge of multiple syntactic phenomena. The goal is to
integrate the successful learning strategies for several complex syntactic
phenomena into a cohesive theory of syntactic acquisition, identifying what the
necessary elements of each strategy are and how children would know to utilize
these strategy elements in just the right way. This represents a major advance
for theoretical linguistics, developmental linguistics, and the broader
psycholinguistics community, as it connects theoretical and experimental work in
linguistics with computational modeling to yield broader insights than ever
before.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project provides an empirical foundation for
studies of syntactic acquisition and a template for future projects that involve
a coordinated synthesis of theory, experimentation, and computation. In
addition, it provides hands-on research experience in theoretical linguistics to
multiple undergraduate students and a graduate student each year, giving them
access to professors engaged in highly relevant research that promises to have a
significant impact on the field.