* 1347738
* A Modeling Study of Tropical Intraseasonal and Synoptic Variability in West Africa and the Americas
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2017
* Eric Maloney, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 12/31/2017
* USD 288,205.00

This project is a study of tropical easterly waves with two distinct components.
The first component is an examination of the influence of the Madden-Julian
Oscillation (MJO) on African Easterly Waves (AEWs). The research would focus on
the hypothesis, motivated by the PI's prior research, that the MJO affects the
"triggering" of AEWs in the region of the Darfur highlands at the entrance to
the African Easterly Jet (AEJ). The proposed mechanism for this influence is the
westward propagation of MJO-induced Rossby waves from the Indian Ocean, which
modulate the meridional transport of moisture in the AEJ entrance region. The
second component addresses the origins of easterly wave activity in the
Caribbean Sea and the Eastern Pacific (EP). Previous studies have argued that
easterly waves in this region are actually AEWs which become re-invigorated
after crossing the Atlantic. Work performed here will test the alternate
hypothesis that the conducive basic state and multiple vorticity sources in the
region should suffice to generate easterly waves in the absence of any "seeding"
from trans-Atlantic AEWs. The work performed in both components consists of
numerical experiments with the Weather Research and Forecasting (WRF) model, a
regional model in which the boundary conditions can be filtered to allow or
exclude the influence of Rossby waves and AEWs propagating into the model
domain.

Tropical easterly waves are the precursors of tropical cyclones (including
landfalling hurricanes), and thus are important for the prediction of
significant weather hazards. Thus, the work has societal broader impacts through
its relevance for practical weather prediction. In addition, the work will
support and train two graduate students, thereby providing for the development
of the future workforce in this research area.