* 1347828
* PLANNING GRANT - Transforming the Culture of Teaching and Learning at UCLA: Development of a Change Strategy for STEM Education
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2016
* Arlene Russell, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 09/30/2016
* USD 249,529.00

Through this WIDER planning grant, UCLA creating a strategic action plan for the
institution-wide adoption of student-centered, evidence-based teaching practices
in undergraduate science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM)
courses. A new STEM Education Steering Committee comprised of leadership from
relevant academic and administrative departments is spearheading this
initiative. The overarching goal of the Committee is to catalyze a campus-wide
expansion in the adoption and practice of evidence-based teaching. Seven Sub-
Committees are assessing current practices, identifying barriers, identifying
best practices, understanding department-specific attitudes. Ultimately, the
Sub-Committees are using this information to create a granular action plan for
change informed by department-specific characteristics. As an integral part of
the planning, members of the Steering Committee are working with campus
leadership to leverage existing resources in support of cultural change and to
address barriers such as campus teaching structures and/or lack of appropriate
recognition systems for instructors who excel in the delivery of effective STEM
instruction.

By creating a strategic plan to implement and sustain student-centered, active
learning pedagogy, UCLA is demonstrating its commitment to confronting a
nationally recognized problem and transforming institutional culture about the
teaching enterprise. Project activities are having three major outcomes: 1) STEM
faculty are using online teaching and assessment resources with increased
frequency and effectiveness, 2) a professional development plan for STEM
educators is being designed according to organizational change literature and
attuned to the discipline- and/or department-specific teaching/assessment needs
and constraints identified during campus inventory/assessment, and 3) department
chairs and high level campus administrators are enabling improvements in
teaching and learning by leveraging innovations within the faculty reward
systems.

The insights gained from developing a change strategy and identifying processes
for implementing this strategy at a large, research-intensive institution like
UCLA, where institutional attitudes and policies sometimes introduce barriers
that hinder undergraduate STEM education reform, is being shared widely to
inform other research universities experiencing similar challenges. The change
strategies created as a result of this planning grant are moving UCLA forward in
terms of enhanced STEM student learning and retention, and participation of
groups traditionally underrepresented in STEM fields.