* 1347968
* RAPID: Natural Disasters and Risk, Time, and Trust Preferences
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2013,09/30/2014
* Scott Loveridge, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 09/30/2014
* USD 39,910.00

This Rapid Response Research (RAPID) Grant will enable researchers to begin
investigating whether life coping strategies change in the aftermath of a
significant natural disaster such as the category five tornado in Moore,
Oklahoma. On May 20, 2013 a category five tornado struck the Oklahoma City
suburb of Moore. The tornado, more than a mile wide, resulted in massive damage
and 24 fatalities. This research will investigate whether a natural disaster
such as this alters a person's propensity to; 1) think and plan for the future
or 2) accept more or less risk or 3) trust government and neighbors more or
less. Knowledge about what happens to risk, time and trust preferences after a
disaster is important since these preferences can directly affect individual and
government post-disaster decisions about investing in rebuilding, recovery and
future disaster preparation. We will use surveys that incorporate time and risk
preference experiments as well as standardized trust questions to get data from
individuals directly affected by this disaster as well as individuals outside
the affected areas. Specifically, we will survey three populations; 1)
individuals impacted directly (i.e., loss of life, injury or property damage) by
the 2013 tornado event, 2) individuals from the surrounding community who
experienced the event, but were not directly impacted, and 3) individuals
residing in a similar (demographically) community in the Oklahoma City metro
area, but which has not experienced a significant tornado event recently.
Comparing the responses of these three different samples should allow us to
identify any significant changes in individuals' views on risk, time or trust.
In addition, there will be a second survey completed approximately 9 months
later to see if any impacts on risk, time or trust preferences are short-term
only or if they seem persistent.

This information is potentially very important in understanding and helping to
guide both individuals' and governments' willingness to invest in private and
public rebuilding and recovery efforts. For example, if a disaster causes
victims to put less importance on the future and focus on the here and now right
after disasters, it may be prudent to counsel victims to hold off making major
reinvestment decisions in order to protect their long-run welfare. The research
may also help understand which types of individuals are most susceptible to
post-disaster life-skill shifts, so that such counseling can be targeted towards
those most at risk. Finally, the findings from this grant can be integrated into
a broader disaster research program designed to identify government-level
changes in emergency preparedness and infrastructure investments that can reduce
tornado fatalities.