* 1347309
* Collaborative Research:   Deformation-induced Hydration of Peridotite Mylonites in Nature and Experiments
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2018
* Mark Zimmerman, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Steven Whitmeyer
* 03/31/2018
* USD 141,705.00

Studies of oceanic fault zones have shown that fluid circulation may drive
weakening and seismic failure in the shallow brittle part of these faults. It is
generally assumed that fluid circulation ends when rocks transition from brittle
failure (fault) to plastic flow (mylonite). However, recent analysis of oceanic
peridotite mylonites has revealed the ubiquitous presence of hydrous mineral
phases. This project assesses the degree to which water circulates though the
brittle-ductile transition in oceanic fault zones, where fracture propagation
during seismic events can send water downward into mylonite zones. In this
project, peridotite mylonites are analyzed from shear zones in two complementary
settings, the St. Paul?s Rocks on the Mid-Atlantic Ridge and the New Caledonia
ophiolite. Methods used in this research include fieldwork, microstructural
analysis, stable isotope measurements, and mineral thermometry. In addition,
laboratory rock deformation experiments are used to investigate the behavior of
fluid inclusions during deformation, the chemical environment in which water
reacts to form hydrous minerals, and the influence these hydrous phases have in
weakening mantle rocks and therefore localizing
deformation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plate tectonics cycles water from the
hydrosphere to the deep mantle. Subducted oceanic plates drive water to several
hundred kilometers depth, and volcanism brings it back to the Earth?s surface.
This research focuses on how water is incorporated into rocks beneath the ocean
floor at mid-ocean ridges, where extension and transform faulting combine with
heating from shallow magma to drive seawater circulation. Faulting creates
pathways for water flow: during a seismic cycle, fractures propagate to the
deeper part of fault zones, allowing water to penetrate the region where rocks
normally deform plastically. These fractures heal over time and the fluids are
trapped as numerous fluid inclusions. This project investigates the fate of
these fluid inclusions during long-term deformation and chemical reaction with
mantle rocks to form hydrous minerals, which act as capsules of water-rich
material. When the plate eventually dives into a subduction zone, this water
will be available for global circulation. Results of this research are relevant
to disciplines that are concerned with the role of water in Earth processes,
including seismology, petrology and geochemistry, tectonics, and geodynamics.
The proposed study would advance desired societal outcomes through: 1) full
participation of women in STEM; 2) development of a competitive STEM workforce
through training of graduate students and in-reach efforts to undergraduate
students; and 3) increased international partnerships through collaboration with
New Caledonian geologists and public outreach to New Caledonian communities.