* 1347609
* Catalyzing Transformative Change in the STEM Disciplines at Georgia State University
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2018
* Dabney Dixon, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 08/31/2018
* USD 249,226.00

The goal of this WIDER planning grant program is to enhance the educational
experience of STEM majors at Georgia State University (GSU) by encouraging the
faculty to make evidence-based changes in their pedagogy. GSU is notable as a
highly diverse campus, with strengths in the STEM disciplines. Four strategies
are being employed in this project. First, the current pedagogical knowledge,
educational goals, and career motivations of GSU instructors (both tenure track
and non-tenure track) are being assessed in order to help the University support
the faculty in their efforts to implement pedagogical change. Second, the data
"dashboard" needs of instructional faculty are being assessed, in order to
create readily accessible quantitative data sets that allow rapid assessment of
changes in teaching practices. Third, forums for sharing ideas, expertise and
pedagogical help with GSU faculty members via outside mentors are being
established. Finally, four Faculty Learning Communities centered on peer-led
team learning, the hybrid classroom, training and support of graduate teaching
assistants, and integration of science concepts into the mathematics curriculum
are being created, to provide sustained engagement and feedback for the reform
efforts underway. In all four of these areas, the goal is to nucleate change
starting from interdisciplinary groups of faculty with similar pedagogical
goals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broad goal of this program is to significantly
increase GSU's institutional commitment to evidence-based teaching and learning
in the STEM disciplines. Increased student engagement should in turn increase
both retention and progression toward the degree. Full-time non-tenure track
faculty have a significant role in STEM education at GSU and increasingly in the
nation as a whole. A detailed study of the pedagogical knowledge, educational
goals, and career motivations of these key instructional players is therefore
important to all institutions that use a specialized faculty model. A model of a
"dashboard" of readily accessible quantitative data of student performance will
be of broad interest as the United States seeks to encourage evidence-based
pedagogical innovations throughout the STEM disciplines.