* 1347814
* WIDER:Adopting Research-Eased Instructional Strategies for Enhancing STEM Education
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2019
* Lance Perez, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie August
* 03/31/2019
* USD 1,990,279.00

This project at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln aims at bridging the gap
between research and practice in STEM education. The project is drawing upon
prior research on effective pedagogies and theories of change to effect
institutional transformation in undergraduate STEM education with a particular
emphasis on introductory classes where student attrition is most pronounced.
Within the implementation component of the project, over one hundred faculty
members in fourteen STEM departments are being provided professional development
on research based instructional strategies and course design. The faculty
members are using this professional development to change their instructional
practices with the overall goal of improving student learning outcomes. This is
impacting approximately 5000 students, including a significant number of
underrepresented students, over the life of the project. The research team will
use this context of instructional transformation to study factors that influence
faculty and departmental adoption of effective pedagogies. The results of these
studies are contributing to the higher education knowledge base and could
influence how other institutions seek to enact transformations in STEM teaching
and learning. The research results are being broadly disseminated to other
institutions and to the public through a variety of mechanisms.