* 1347691
* Redefining the College Lecture: Facilitating Discussions in STEM Undergraduate Courses
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Catherine Halversen, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 08/31/2017
* USD 750,000.00

The Lawrence Hall of Science, with support from the University of California
Berkeley Center for Teaching and Learning and Educational Technology Services,
is developing the Faculty Learning Program for changing STEM undergraduate
faculty instructional practices and improving student learning gains and
experiences in large STEM lecture courses. The project team is developing a
blended professional learning program to deepen faculty understanding of how
learning happens, and develop their abilities to facilitate discourse
opportunities to support student learning in their classes. Faculty members are
also learning to use digital technologies to "flip their classrooms" as a means
to create time during lecture for students to reflect, explain, argue, and talk
science with their classmates and instructor. The changed instructional practice
requires faculty to rethink their role in teaching, and thus redefine how
lecture courses are designed and taught. The goal of Redefining the College
Lecture project is to improve university STEM faculty instructional practice
through a blended professional learning program that nurtures a learning
community, provides continuous support, and is situated within their everyday
work.

The intellectual merit of this project lies in the distinctive design which
creates an adaptable and adoptable professional learning (PL) program for
changing STEM undergraduate faculty instructional practices. The project
leverages the PI's experiences and proven ability to develop PL programs as
demonstrated through prior NSF projects; collaborators bring online learning
technology expertise. The support and involvement of STEM Deans and Chairs, STEM
faculty, faculty development staff, and the Vice Provost reflect strong
institutional commitment. Three bodies of literature support the project's
theoretical framework and program design. First, professional learning, which
has been found to have significant positive impacts on knowledge and use of
effective pedagogy, involves developing faculty STEM education expertise within
a learning community situated within their everyday work. Second, students'
learning of complex STEM concepts is facilitated by student discourse including
opportunities to talk, argue, and defend their ideas with peers and the
instructor. Third, online technologies, used strategically with knowledge of
evidence-based practices, are powerful tools that can be leveraged to support
learning in university courses.

The broader impacts of the project arise from the fact that within the three
institutions participating, up to 102 STEM faculty will have participated in an
in-depth professional learning program and applied what they learned in the
reconceptualization of their role in the lecture hall, and the redesign and
instruction of their existing courses. This will result in an impact in the
educational experience of over 18,000 students. The collaborative, customized
nature of the professional learning program's design and implementation at each
university and the inclusion of faculty development centers will position it to
be sustained beyond the three-year tenure of this grant.