* 1347786
* The NCC Math Science Learning Community
* EHR,DUE
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2016
* Dennis Ebersole, Northampton Community College
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 12/31/2016
* USD 212,489.00

Northampton Community College's Math Science Learning Community is creating two
Faculty Learning Communities (FLCs), one on NCC's Monroe Campus and one on NCC's
Bethlehem Campus. Each FLC is developing a sustainable plan for increasing the
use of evidence-based practices that have been proven in both the national
literature and in NCC practice to positively impact student success. The FLCs
are exploring inquiry-based learning, experiential learning, and modified STEM
student learning communities in math and science gateway courses. FLCs are each
developing a plan that reflects the unique institutional culture of each campus
and presenting the plans to college administration for implementation. Each FLC
member is working on an individual project to improve learning in a STEM gateway
course that he or she is teaching, and the group members are collectively
sharing their knowledge and accomplishments with the wider college and STEM
community. Community colleges face unique barriers to scaling up high impact
strategies. Many have not yet adopted an institution-wide culture of evidence-
based decision making. Moreover, the heavy teaching loads of community college
faculty inhibit their ability to research and implement reforms, yet they are
the very group who must implement the reforms. The change strategies being
implemented include faculty learning communities and strategic planning. Lessons
learned from this project are impacting the outcomes of nearly half the nation's
STEM students by adding to the body of knowledge on the effect of increased use
of inquiry based learning, experiential learning, and learning communities on
student learning, especially for members of underrepresented groups.