* 1347343
* Collaborative Research: The Aleutian megathrust from trench to base of the seismogenic zone; integration and synthesis of laboratory, geophysical and geological data
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2014,01/31/2018
* Demian Saffer, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 01/31/2018
* USD 179,850.00

Earth's largest and most destructive earthquakes and tsunamis are generated
along subduction megathrusts. The portion of these plate tectonic boundary
faults that ruptures in earthquakes is known as the siesmogenic zone. Recent
observations of high slip that propagates to the near surface, and new
discoveries of anomalously slow slip events, have raised fundamental questions
about widely held hypotheses that explain seismogenic zone behavior. In
particular, the seismogenic zone of many subduction faults appears to be
'patchy', with some regions that fail suddenly in large earthquakes and others
that slide by stable, aseismic creep. Additionally, in certain depth ranges,
typically at the shallow and deep fringes of the seismogenic zone, slow slip
events and earthquakes with anomalous low frequency energy have been observed at
many margins. Current knowledge of the fault zone conditions and processes that
cause these different modes of slip is limited, largely because quantitative
constraints on in situ conditions in the subsurface are scarce. As a result, the
associated earthquake and tsunami hazards are similarly poorly constrained. This
project will combine high quality regional geophysical studies from the Aleutian
subduction margin with laboratory experimental measurements on relevant rock and
sediment, to calibrate the geophysical data and quantify in situ pore fluid
pressure and stress along the subduction megathrust. Ultimately by providing
quantitative estimates of the subsurface conditions along the plate boundary
from the trench through the seismogenic zone, this study will test hypothesized
mechanisms for the wide range of earthquake behavior.

To accomplish this, the study will integrate laboratory data from modern oceanic
sediment and exhumed metapelites with existing, multi-resolutional geophysical
data to improve our understanding of in situ conditions and processes along the
plate boundary megathrust from the trench to ~30-40 km depth. The project will
address the following questions: 1) What are the in situ conditions, materials,
and properties along the subduction megathrust that are sensed by low Vp, high
Vp/Vs ratio, and high reflectivity? To what extent do seismic data image weak
metasedimentary material vs. high-porosity channels or patches at near-
lithostatic pressure and low effective stress? 2) How do the properties of the
plate boundary change with depth and along-strike, and how do they relate to
seismicity and upper plate deformation? These two overarching questions will be
addressed by: (1) extracting detailed constraints on geophysical properties of
the megathrust (Vp, Vp/Vs, reflectivity) from active and passive source datasets
from the trench to depths of ~30-40 km; (2) defining elastic and hydrologic
properties of sediment and rock relevant to the in situ subduction interface at
the Alaska margin, via lab experiments on IODP cores from offshore Alaska and
samples from exhumed fault zones on Kodiak Island; (3) integrating the
geophysical and laboratory components to test hypotheses about the roles of
material properties and state variables on geophysical signatures along the
subduction thrust; and (4) investigating the correlation of megathrust
properties with earthquake locations via precise relocation of microseismicity.
The work will leverage several existing high-quality geophysical datasets, a
suite of already collected samples, and DSDP/IODP cores and data. As a whole,
this coordinated study will vastly improve our understanding of the conditions
and materials along the megathrust, their relationship to seismicity, and serve
as a template for similar studies at other margins.