* 1347075
* EAGER: Human-Centric Predictive Analytics of Cyber-Threats: a Temporal Dynamics Approach
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Ronald Breiger, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Shands
* 08/31/2016
* USD 200,000.00

Cybersecurity is paramount to protecting national interests in domains that
include but extend well beyond defense and finance. However, current state-of-
the-art cyber-defenses have severely limited predictive and attribution
capabilities. Detecting and understanding cyber attacks is not sufficient--we
can liken that to "studying symptoms instead of a disease."&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This research carries out a synergistic approach to integrating cyber
data forensics with human-centric social network analysis under a common
framework. The three major activities of this project are as follows: (a)
comprehensive models of cyber-attack characteristics are developed using feature
extraction techniques on diverse data sources, (b) adversarial groups are
classified according to their feature similarities, and (c) group classification
is enhanced using analytic techniques from social network science.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;To accomplish these activities: (1) different models for constructing
joint representations of computer and social networks are investigated within a
multi-mode graph framework; (2) data reduction and feature extraction techniques
are developed for associating large datasets with this unified graph model; (3)
an existing system is leveraged to discover invisible and missing links between
adversarial networks of individuals; and (4) social network models and tools, as
well as case studies, are applied to infer adversarial group
typology.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research is expected to benefit computer
science, cyber security, and social sciences by improving detection methods for
cyber attacks. Applying time-series analysis in creative ways to multi-mode
networks should contribute to the field of artificial intelligence. This joint
work should apply also in fields such as health care, marketing, or forecasting
technology adoption trends.