* 1347204
* Collaborative Research:  Improving the Generic Mapping Tools for Seismology, Geodesy, Geodynamics and Geology
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2017
* David Sandwell, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 04/30/2017
* USD 97,845.00

1347184 Wessel

This EAR Geoinformatics Program (NSF 11-581) grant supports a three year project
to develop enhancements to the Generic Mapping Tools (GMT) software package for
analyzing and displaying geoscience data. GMT now includes more than 80 modules
that share a common set of command options, file structures, and documentation.
It is used widely to produce publication-quality graphic presentations. GMT now
has more than 25,000 individual registered users. This award will support
expansion on GMT capabilities to include: 1) code for plotting, velocity vectors
from GPS measurements and their uncertainties as arrows with confidence
ellipses, earthquake focal mechanisms as hemispherical projections on
cartographically correct maps, ternary diagrams and geologic symbols; 2) an
Application Programming Interface (API) between GMT and Python to support
computational workflow scripting; and 3) tools for Interferometric Synthetic
Aperture Radar (InSAR) processing and analysis for spatially resolved imaging of
Earth surface deformation associated with earthquake-generating faults, active
volcanoes, moving glaciers, and unstable landslides, as well as the engineered
withdrawal and/or injection of petroleum, natural gas, geothermal fluids, and
carbon dioxide. The developed GMT source code will be distributed, free of
charge, under the GNU Lesser General Public License.

***