* 1347558
* Collaborative Research: Interrelations Between Foreland Deformation and Flat-slab Subduction: Integrated Analysis of the Sierras Pampeanas to Cordillera of the South-central Andes
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2014,08/31/2020
* W.A. Yonkee, Weber State University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 08/31/2020
* USD 135,647.00

The modern-day topography of western South America results from the convergence
and collision of two tectonic plates wherein the Nazca Plate is being shoved at
a shallow angle beneath the South American plate in a process called subduction.
This project will address the effects of flat-slab subduction in producing the
continental deformation that has resulted in the dramatic uplift of the Andes
along the western margin of South America. The PIs seek to provide better
understanding of the geologic and geodynamic processes that have resulted in the
growth of the Argentine Andes, and their results will have important
implications for the understanding of ancient mountain building processes, such
as the tectonic processes that formed the Rocky Mountains of the western United
States during the Sevier and Laramide orogenies. The project involves a
significant scientific collaboration with Argentinian geoscientists from the
Argentina National Council of Scientific and Technical Research (CONICET) and
their students, who will be involved in all facets of the project. The project
will contribute to the training of undergraduate students through involvement of
students in high-impact research projects and participation in cross-cultural
international experiences; it will also contribute to the broadening of
participation of underrepresented groups in STEM. Results of the research will
be incorporated into research curricula and will be widely disseminated through
presentations at meetings and publications. The project also has the potential
to improve understanding of seismic risks in the study region that has
experienced multiple devastating historic earthquakes.

First-order questions persist regarding fundamental controls of continental
deformation along convergent plate margins, including causes and interactions of
thin-skin upper crustal to thick-skin lower crustal deformation, influences of
pre-existing crustal weaknesses, and relations to subduction dynamics. This
project will integrate a variety of structural and rock magnetic techniques in
order to better understand the spatial and temporal changes in deformation that
have resulted from flat slab subduction of the Naza plate and its interaction
with the overriding South American plate. The project will involve the
measurement and analysis of faults, folds, and fracture systems; measurements of
the anisotropy of magnetic susceptibility to characterize deformation fabrics;
will utilize paleomagnetic analysis to understand how crustal blocks have
rotated due to deformation; and will use construction of geological cross-
sections utilizing geophysical data. The work will focus on five transects that
span the effects of normal to flat-slab subduction, and which cross the thick-
skin Sierras Pampeanas, thin-skin Precordillera, and mixed mode Principal
Cordillera belts of northwest Argentina. The project will: quantify both
vertical-axis rotations and spatial-temporal changes in stress/strain fields
across a complex mountain system (thick-skin foreland, thin-skin fold-thrust
belt, mixed mode belt); provide a new model for the 3-dimensional kinematic
evolution of the region; test geodynamic models that predict different along-
strike variations in structural style, stress patterns, rotations, and
intraplate shortening rates related to a transition from normal to flat-slab
subduction; evaluate effects of crustal rheology, basement weaknesses, and basin
inversion on patterns of structural trend, stress refraction, and deformation
partitioning; and statistically compare stress/strain directions estimated from
fault data, magnetic fabric analysis, earthquake focal mechanisms, and available
global positioning satellite data.

Funds to support the international activities associated with this project are
being provided by the NSF Office of International Science and Engineering.