* 1347727
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:  WIDER:  Improving Undergraduate Education Through Community Building and Adoption of an Evidence-based Practice to Evaluate Undergraduate Research
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2019
* Elizabeth Ambos, Council on Undergraduate Research
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 12/31/2019
* USD 127,273.00

This project is testing, refining, and disseminating a promising evidence-based
model for guiding effective undergraduate research. The model is based on five
years of data. Additional testing and refinement activity are underway to ensure
applicability across diverse institutional settings. The project will create and
provide the resources needed to support successful implementation at any
undergraduate institution. Through collaborations with the Council on
Undergraduate Research (CUR) and the Science Education Resource Center SERC) at
Carleton College, the project intends to foster national communities of STEM
scholars who are trained and motivated to sustain and expand this model.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The model is designed to ensure that the student learning
outcomes from participation in undergraduate research are as strong as possible.
It deliberately generates formative guidance during the research through a
series of quantitative, built-in formative evaluations conducted over the
duration of each research experience. Evaluation is a central component of this
model. The model emphasizes multiple progress assessments by both faculty and
students across a wide range of desirable outcomes, so that the evaluation
process provides essential information used by both students and faculty to
advance learning objectives. The design approach transcends specific STEM
disciplines. This transcendent feature offers an opportunity to aggregate impact
results across a series of undergraduate research experiences. The model's
built-in evaluation feature will provide summary data on student learning that
could be used to inform resource allocation decisions.