* 1347166
* Human Response To State Collapse And Social Transition
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Charles Spencer, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2018
* USD 109,356.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Nicola Sharratt and Dr. Charles
Spencer will examine the long-term impacts of violent state collapse. The
breakdown of complex societies is a recurring process in the human past and
present. While existing archaeological research has substantially advanced
understanding of why and how states fragment, it has focused primarily on the
immediate political and economic outcomes. By examining social dynamics that
occurred over several centuries following the collapse of one of the earliest
states in Andean South America, the Tiwanaku (AD 500-1000), this project
investigates the lasting repercussions of political disintegration for social
cohesion, instability, and cultural continuity. Bringing together an
international team of specialists from the United States and Peru the project
will provide training opportunities for American and Peruvian students, as well
as data for theses and dissertations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As in many other
examples of state collapse, although Tiwanaku's disintegration resulted in
radical changes in political and economic organization, considerable continuity
is evident in the ways that people lived their daily lives, the materials and
architecture they constructed and the rituals they enacted. This continuity has
been clearly demonstrated at the site of Tumilaca la Chimba, located in southern
Peru. The site was first established around AD 1000 by refugees fleeing the
turmoil of Tiwanaku state collapse. Previous research shows that although the
site's inhabitants lived through drastic political change, they maintained
Tiwanaku ways of life and cultural practices for more than two hundred years.
However, around AD 1250, Tiwanaku materials and practices disappear from the
site and from the region more broadly. The research will investigate the social
processes that resulted in the drastic disappearance of Tiwanaku affiliated
communities after several centuries of cultural continuity and resilience.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers will test whether the Tiwanaku affiliated
population abandoned the site, was displaced by outsiders, or was assimilated
into a new community. The validity of each of these explanations will be
determined by characterizing the nature of the relationship between the Tiwanaku
affiliated population at Tumilaca la Chimba, and the population who inhabited it
after AD 1250. This will be achieved by excavating and analyzing data from the
post-AD 1250 occupation that is comparable to that for the Tiwanaku affiliated
community. By excavating houses and burials, investigating diet, craft
production, and ritual practice researchers will determine whether the two
communities shared a cultural identity. Through osteological analyses,
particularly of genetically determined dental traits, researchers will examine
whether the two populations were biologically related. By extensively radio-
carbon dating archaeological contexts researchers will investigate whether the
two populations ever co-existed at the site. Political collapse is a process
that affects societies in numerous geographical, temporal, and cultural
contexts. Building on existing research on the short-term impacts that socio-
political disruption has on communities, this project takes a long-term
perspective to investigate how populations can be affected by and respond to
such turmoil for centuries.