* 1347282
* Collaborative Research:   Active Kinematics of Lithospheric Extension Along the East African Rift
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Robert King, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 12/31/2014
* USD 53,906.00

This 1-year, collaborative proposal is aimed at creating a community solution
for tectonic velocities throughout the East African region. This region hosts
the foremost example of continental rifting, where Africa stretches and splits
into a two pieces, Somalia and Nubia in the East African Rift and beyond.
Observations of the speed and pattern of continental break-up serve as a
framework for other geosciences research on continental rifting, including in
volcanology, petrology, geochemistry, and solid earth-climate interactions. They
also offer the possibility of general results for the material properties of
continents and the basic physics of how plates are formed, move, and change.
Beyond the science, mapping patterns of surface deformation in East Africa
informs earthquake and volcano hazard assessments and development of geothermal
energy and water resources. A final contribution of this project is to foster
data sharing and community model building among academic institutions throughout
the U.S. and East Africa.

Specific initiatives we propose include: 1) formally combine GPS results from
all available prior studies, along with any other available GPS data in the
region for a fully self-consistent, continent-scale solution and to identify
future needs and data acquisition strategies, 2) maintain existing geodetic
assets developed over the past 6 years to extend GPS time series to reduce rate
uncertainties, 3) extend or establish agreements (Memoranda of Understanding)
with host-country partners (Ethiopia, Eritrea, Kenya, Tanzania, Mozambique,
Zambia, and Malawi) for future joint initiatives, 4) measure a first epoch on
nine campaign GPS sites in the Turkana Depression, and 5) develop a framework
for data sharing and data product development to serve the broader African Rift
scientific community.