* 1347706
* CAREER: Machine Learning Approaches for Genome-wide Biological Network Inference
* CSE,IIS
* 11/15/2012,04/30/2014
* Xue-Wen Chen, Wayne State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 04/30/2014
* USD 85,226.00

NSF-0644366&lt;br/&gt;Chen, Xue-Wen&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this
research program are (1) to develop and apply novel
computational&lt;br/&gt;approaches for uncovering genome-wide networks of
interactions between genes and proteins, and (2) to conduct related educational
activities in a newly established bioinformatics program in the Department of
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science at the University of Kansas.
Specifically, built upon reconstructing biological networks of moderate size,
the new research will computationally uncover genome-wide biological networks
and map interactions of genes and proteins across a variety of organisms. The
research directions include: Simultaneously integrating multiple biological
knowledge into dynamic Bayesian networks for learning networks of gene
interactions; learning networks of protein interactions from heterogeneous data;
learning integrated networks of gene and protein interactions; learning genome-
wide networks of gene and protein interactions; and cross-species network
learning. It will advance the state of the art by developing machine learning
methods for effectively integrating multiple prior knowledge from different
sources of data, including learning for highly heterogeneous data and large-
scale network. The research will also produce new methods and user-friendly
software that can be applied by molecular biologists to gain insight into
diverse biological problems, such as how biological processes are regulated on a
genome scale and how individual bio-molecules interact with one another in the
cell.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Learning with prior knowledge and highly
heterogeneous data sources are fundamental to computational biology, information
theory, machine learning, data mining, and other areas. Thus, the proposed
research will benefit a variety of application domains including research in
biology and medicine. The biological discovery derived from this project will
also contribute to a variety of fields that include agriculture development,
rational drug design, and health care. The research program will foster and
facilitate collaborations between biologists and the PI. The educational
components are closely tied to the research activities, which include (1)
developing and improving bioinformatics courses that are closely related to the
research outlined here and integrating them into the core bioinformatics
curriculum, and (2) providing special training opportunities in the
interdisciplinary area of bioinformatics for a wide-range of students, from high
school through graduate school, including groups typically underrepresented in
the field of science and technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;