* 1347183
* Workshop: Faculty Development Needs for Advanced Manufacturing in the USA; Arlington, Virginia; January, 2014
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2014
* Delcie R. Durham, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Zhijian Pei
* 08/31/2014
* USD 49,926.00

This grant provides funding to support a workshop on "Faculty Development Needs
for Advanced Manufacturing in the USA". The workshop will be held in January
2014 in Arlington, Virginia. The objective of this workshop is to provide the
academic community with insights into areas where the development of faculty
scholarship is needed in order to support future US manufacturing enterprise.
The workshop will provide the opportunity for academic faculty development in
advanced manufacturing through interactions with program directors of NSF and
program managers of other agencies (such as Department of Defense, Department of
Energy, and Department of Commerce) involved with manufacturing research and
innovation. Major activities of the workshop include presentations by program
directors of federal agencies, as well as interactions among workshop attendees.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;US global competitiveness in manufacturing will require
significant advances in research and curriculum development at universities
across the country. The workshop will help establishing a strong, innovative
faculty cohort to enable a more sustainable US manufacturing base. It is
expected that interactions of the participants at this workshop will contribute
to a better understanding of the future needs for manufacturing faculty human
resource development, and will positively impact academic growth in educators
and researchers for the manufacturing enterprise.