* 1347640
* SPARCT:  STEM Professional Academy for Reinvigorating the Culture of Teaching
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2013,12/31/2017
* Tanya Kunberger, Florida Gulf Coast University
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 12/31/2017
* USD 249,240.00

This Widening Implementation &amp; Demonstration of Evidence-Based Reforms
(WIDER) planning grant provides STEM faculty at Florida Gulf Coast University
with training in evidence-based practices and course design. By participating in
the STEM Professional Academy for Reinvigorating the Culture of Teaching
(SPARCT), faculty are learning guiding principles for change in STEM
instruction. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: By applying Rogers'
Diffusion of Innovation, a change theory, SPARCT is creating ongoing changes
among SPARCT faculty and within the larger university climate. The project
encompasses all main STEM disciplines and includes faculty participants from the
Colleges of Arts and Sciences, Education, and Engineering. Combining content
experts with educational experts, SPARCT is strengthening pedagogical
understanding and serving as a model program for other universities. Training
for SPARCT faculty includes participation in a three-week (4 hours per day) STEM
Summer Academy followed by an academic year-long faculty learning community,
training in peer observation, and participation in a seminar series. As SPARCT
faculty measure and assess the effects of their teaching practices, they also
evaluate the program. Both disciplinary and program findings are disseminated
throughout the STEM learning community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
By involving at least 25% of Florida Gulf Coast University's STEM faculty,
SPARCT is creating a community of STEM scholars, reinvigorating
interdisciplinary connections, developing learning threads, and increasing the
university community's potential to transform the teaching culture. SPARCT
targets introductory STEM courses, thereby positively impacting student
recruitment, retention, and learning among STEM and non-STEM majors. Moreover,
SPARCT is helping to develop a more "STEM-literate" population, therefore
enabling a stronger, more competitive STEM workforce in Southwest Florida.