* 1347772
* Recycling of Noble Gases in Ring-bearing Silicates
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2018
* Stephen Parman, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 06/30/2018
* USD 300,000.00

Volatiles such as water (H2O) and carbon dioxide (CO2) are well-known to be key
to the climate and atmosphere of the Earth, and the life that depends on them.
Less well known is that these volatiles are also abundant in the Earth's
interior. Indeed, there is probably as much water inside the Earth as on the
surface. Thus the transfer of volatiles in and out of the Earth exerts a
fundamental control on both the climate and the large-scale movement of the
Earth's interior. However, it is difficult to geochemically trace the major
volatiles (H2O, CO2, S, Cl and F) as they have few isotopes, which are key
geochemical tracing tools. The noble gases (He, Ne, Ar, Kr and Xe) are also
volatile. Though low in concentration, they are isotopically rich and so are
ideal for tracing the movement of volatiles. However, there is little data on
how the noble gases behave at high pressures inside the Earth, greatly
restricting their use as tracers. Building on our previous high-pressure noble
gas experiments, this study will measure the solubility of noble gases in a
range of minerals. This will allow better estimates of volatile fluxes into and
out of the Earth, as well as better tracing of the geochemical evolution of the
Earth's interior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fundamental issue that will be
addressed by the project is how noble gases are incorporated into subducting
lithosphere (slabs). Subduction is the main mechanism for bringing volatiles
into the mantle. Most models have assumed that noble gases, having no charge,
would not bind into minerals, and so slabs would not contain significant noble
gas contents. In a previous study, my group demonstrated that He, Ne and Ar are
incorporated into amphibole and that they are bound into Si-O ring structures in
the crystal lattice. Such ring structures are present in a variety of minerals
in subducting slabs. The proposed research will use high-pressure experiments
combined with laser-ablation noble gas mass-spectrometry to determine noble gas
solubilities in ring-structured minerals (e.g. serpentine, chlorite and mica).
The data will be used to quantify both the amount of noble gases incorporated
into slabs as well as how the noble gases are fractionated from each other. The
data will be used to construct models aimed at matching the observed noble gas
concentration and isotopic ratios in the mantle, which will constrain rates of
cycling of noble gases into the mantle. As the noble gases should trace the
movements of H2O and CO2, the noble gas flux model will constrain H2O and CO2
cycling as well. This work fits well with a number of recent geochemical
observations that indicate recycling of noble gases is more important than
previously thought. It will provide the first measurements of noble gas
solubilities in a range of minerals and so will allow, for the first time,
quantitative estimates of noble gas recycling rates.