* 1347563
* OPTION 1: Small-Business ERC Collaborative Opportunity for the transitioning of agile broadband transmitter for integrated access networks to market
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2014,07/31/2015
* Christopher Chase, Bandwidth10 inc
* Fixed Amount Award
* Deborah Jackson
* 07/31/2015
* USD 199,875.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small-Business ERC Collaborative
Opportunity transitioning agile broadband&lt;br/&gt;transmitter for integrated
access networks to market will address the challenge of achieving
high&lt;br/&gt;bandwidth (100+ Gb/s), low power, low cost wavelength division
multiplexed (WDM) optical&lt;br/&gt;communications links of distances up to 2 km
for applications such as data centers and&lt;br/&gt;aggregation networks. These
links are necessary for next generation data center and&lt;br/&gt;supercomputing
applications that are a focus of the CIAN ERC?s
research.&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this project will improve the lasers in these
systems, which drive much of&lt;br/&gt;the cost, performance, and power
requirements for the links, to meet current commercial&lt;br/&gt;specifications.
The tunable VCSELs offer a 10X reduction in power and cost over
conventional&lt;br/&gt;solutions and enable high bandwidth links within data
centers that not economically feasible with&lt;br/&gt;current
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact/commercial potential of this project is a drastic reduction in
the cost&lt;br/&gt;and energy requirements of optical links inside of data
centers and supercomputers. Companies&lt;br/&gt;such as Google, Microsoft and
other large data-centric companies have been clamoring for this&lt;br/&gt;type
of product in the last year to maintain the rate of growth in their data center
facilities.&lt;br/&gt;Present WDM laser array solutions using DFB lasers require
10X the power and 10X the cost of&lt;br/&gt;a VCSEL-based approach and are not
economically feasible. Present 850-nm VCSEL-based&lt;br/&gt;links, on the other
hand, cannot be made into a WDM source without power-hungry TEC
coolers&lt;br/&gt;due to their lack of precise, gridded, wavelength control,
limiting the overall link speed. Using a&lt;br/&gt;1550 nm tunable VCSEL solves
both the problem of gridded wavelength control and allows the&lt;br/&gt;use of
low cost single mode fiber and the developed infrastructure for 1550 nm WDM
optical&lt;br/&gt;links. The realization of tunable VCSELs in WDM systems will
result in a 10X reduction in&lt;br/&gt;both cost and energy requirements in
high-speed optical links for data centers, enabling the&lt;br/&gt;further
scaling of computational power for next generation data center and
supercomputer&lt;br/&gt;applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Besides the
technological impact, this collaboration program will offer CIAN
students&lt;br/&gt;insight and experience with the real world commercial product
development process. The&lt;br/&gt;students will be testing and giving feedback
into the product development process, enhancing&lt;br/&gt;their educational
experience. The enhanced capabilities of the VCSELs will enable
new&lt;br/&gt;applications and enhance CIAN in it?s mission of supporting
transparency wherever possible&lt;br/&gt;with flexible wavelength conversion and
optical switches, and supporting dynamically&lt;br/&gt;reconfigurable
heterogeneous traffic in the network.