* 1347887
* Collaborative Research:   Experimental Investigation of Magmatic Processes at Volcan Quizapu
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2014,02/28/2018
* Julia Hammer, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 02/28/2018
* USD 275,530.00

Volcanic eruptions taking place along subduction zones (arcs) are commonly
interpreted as triggered by the influx of new magma to their shallow storage
systems. This project aims to explore the late-stage changes in temperature,
pressure, water content, and composition of arc magmas on the "crystal cargo"
they carry, by testing the premise that the textures and compositions of erupted
materials preserve this chronology. Comparison of experimental and natural
samples will shed light on magma chamber and transit processes occurring between
magma mixing and eruption.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two historical eruptions of
Volcan Quizapu (Chilean Andes), one effusive and one explosive, have been
characterized petrologically and geochemically in prior studies. Evidence points
to a magmatic system of predominantly dacite with single-episode, eruption-
triggering influxes of andesitic magma. The relative simplicity of these
interactions makes Quizapu an ideal starting point for a targeted experimental
study addressing questions related to magma mixing and ascent/eruption. Key
lines of inquiry include constraining resorption/de-stabilization kinetics of
plagioclase and amphibole in response to perturbation, as these minerals
preserve evidence of magma storage conditions prior to eruption. The goals of
this investigation are to (1) establish pre-eruption environmental conditions of
Quizapu dacite and andesite, (2) examine response times of key thermobarometers
and hygrometers through a series of step-heating experiments, (3) explore the
formation conditions of sieve-textured plagioclase, and (4) broadly examine
crystal-scale responses to thermodynamic perturbations through high-resolution
chemical analysis and diffusion modeling. The results will have general
implications for magma mixing processes among intermediate-composition arc
magmas, not only because the recharge-triggered Quizapu events are typical of
arc volcanoes, but also because the crystal-scale processes on which the study
focuses (the influence of halogens on amphibole composition and stability,
plagioclase dissolution kinetics upon heating, and formation of sieve-texture
via several proposed mechanisms) are germane to a broad spectrum of magmatic
settings.