* 1347521
* EAGER: Sonifying Cyber-Security Cues  for Internet Users Who Are Visually Impaired
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2013,02/28/2018
* Keith Jones, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 02/28/2018
* USD 173,783.00

The Internet is one of the primary communication media for users who are
visually impaired. However, the vulnerability of this underserved population of
Internet users to various forms of cyber-attacks has deteriorated the effective
use of online services offered for general Internet users. The screen reader
tools often overwhelm users with visual disability by providing large amounts of
text, which may lead those users to ignore that information. An ignored security
warning may harm users and make them vulnerable to various forms of cyber-
threats. This project translates security cues and warnings into various forms
of tones and sounds through sonification. It takes a security cue or warning
message and composes the most effective pitch/sound to represent the security
warning and conveys the security information to the users who are visually
impaired through sounds instead of text verbalized by screen readers. The
sonified security warnings undergo extensive usability testing in order to
assess the effectiveness of the sonified security cues. The broader impact of
this sonification project includes providing a sonification-based technology to
alert Internet users who are visually impaired and assist them to make an
informed decision when encountering security warnings and to ensure that those
security warnings are not overlooked. The sonification-based technology for
transforming security warnings to sounds can be integrated to any popular
Internet Web browser.