* 1347390
* USC I-Corps Site Program
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2014,08/31/2017
* Peter Beerel, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 08/31/2017
* USD 297,398.00

With this project, the University of Southern California I-Corps Site leverages
two successful commercialization support programs at USC; the Maseeh
Entrepreneurship Prize Competition, run by the Viterbi School of Engineering,
and the Ideas Empowered Program, run by the USC Stevens Center for Innovation.
Both of these programs offer faculty/student teams start-up/commercialization
educational programs, industry/business mentors, and gap funding.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In keeping with national entrepreneurship trends in
colleges and universities, the USC I-Corps Site program will provide funds to
support customer discovery, equipment or materials for prototypes, and travel
expenses to consult with potential clients or experts. In addition, the USC
I-Corps Site program will create a start-up/commercialization workshop for
student/faculty teams. This workshop will introduce student/faculty teams to the
basics of the commercialization process, the challenges they will face, the
questions they must answer, and the value of the USC I-Corps Site program,
including the possibility of additional funding through the NSF I-Corps program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The USC Viterbi School of Engineering practices an
"engineering+" focus in which engineering plus some other discipline is the key
to achieving broader impact. This proposal is in line with
engineering+innovation, at the center of innovation and entrepreneurship. This
goal is important for the US economy and to solving many global challenges that
call for innovations that will change the world in fundamental ways. This Site
strives to be a place where engineers, medical professionals, scientists, and
all researchers can learn how to navigate entrepreneurial waters and better
support the commercialization of their ideas. The process of exploring the
commercialization of inventions will empower faculty and student inventors to
understand what it takes to assess the feasibility of their ideas for
commercialization, empowering them to better evaluate and push their subsequent
inventions into the market in years to come.