* 1347749
* Effectuating Evidence-based Transformative Pedagogical Approaches in STEM Foundational Courses at AAMU
* EDU,DUE
* 02/15/2014,08/31/2018
* Mostafa Dokhanian, Alabama A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 08/31/2018
* USD 249,998.00

Through this WIDER Program planning project a team of faculty and administrators
at Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical University (AAMU) is establishing
professional development opportunities in the use of evidence-based
instructional practices in STEM courses for both faculty and students.
Recognizing that it is essential to implement effective pedagogy in gateway
courses (where most attrition occurs), the project team is focusing on
collecting baseline data about the extent to which evidence-based practices are
currently being used in these courses and training faculty members to
incorporate classroom and laboratory activities that require active student
engagement, conceptual understanding, critical thinking, and problem-solving
into the first two years of the curriculum. Moreover, eight STEM faculty
"catalysts," including the four PIs, are designing courses in which evidence-
based practices are central to student leaning. Model students are being trained
to lead Supplementary Instruction (SI) courses using evidence-based peer-to-peer
learning strategies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this project is
twofold. First, data generated through assessment and evaluation is expected to
support the theoretical rationale that systematic change in STEM education must
include a wide spectrum of stakeholders (administrators, faculty, staff, and
students). Formative evaluation will examine the fidelity of implementation of
evidence-based practices and the quality of the projects major components.
Summative evaluation will focus on determining the overall diffusion of
evidence-based practices throughout the STEM fields. Secondly, dissemination of
the results of this work is expected to provide a model for institutional
implementation of evidence-based practices at colleges or universities of
similar size and/or student body demographics (AAMU is a Historically Black
University). Several deliverables are being developed over the course of this
project including (a) new gateway course materials (classroom and laboratory),
(b) SI-leader training materials, and (c) evaluation and assessment materials
for faculty and SI leaders.