* 1347718
* Collaborative Research: Understanding and Reducing Student Resistance as a Barrier to Faculty Change
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Cynthia Finelli, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 08/31/2017
* USD 211,669.00

This WIDER research project focuses on understanding student resistance as a
barrier to STEM faculty adoption of evidence-based teaching methods in the
context of introductory engineering courses at University of Michigan, Virginia
Tech, North Carolina A &amp; T, and Bucknell University. The project is
investigating three related research questions, including: 1) What factors
(including faculty strategies, student experience, institution and course type,
and student and faculty characteristics) influence student resistance to
nontraditional teaching methods? 2) To what extent does expectancy violation
theory explain student resistance to nontraditional teaching methods? and 3)
What specific, evidence-based strategies (and in what contexts) can faculty
employ to significantly reduce student resistance? To address these questions,
the project team is employing rigorous instrument development procedures to
design surveys to measure student resistance and expectancy violation, and
conducting in-depth studies at a range of institutions, combining qualitative
methods with quantitative surveys to identify additional factors related to
student resistance. The final phase of the project includes a full-scale study
of 20 introductory engineering courses. Expected products include evidence-based
strategies faculty can use to reduce student resistance, student surveys that
faculty can use to monitor their own progress in reducing student resistance,
and a classroom observation protocol focusing on student resistance.