* 1348450
* An open source framework for metadata exploration and discovery of Polar Data
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Chris Mattmann, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Marc Stieglitz
* 08/31/2016
* USD 350,000.00

This project will deliver an open source framework for metadata exploration,
automatic text mining and information retrieval of polar data that uses the
Apache Tika technology. Apache Tika is currently the de facto ?babel fish?,
aiding in the automatic MIME detection, text extraction, and metadata
classification of over 1200 data formats. The PI will expand Tika to handle
polar data and scientific data formats, making Polar data more easily available,
searchable, and retrievable by all major content management systems. The
proposed activity will lay the framework for a thorough automatically generated
inventory of polar metadata and data. Expanding Tika to handle polar data will
also naturally invite the technology/open source community to deal with polar
use cases, helping to increase understanding of the arctic.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The resultant software produced through effort will be
disseminated to the software and polar communities through the Apache Software
Foundation. A computer science graduate student and postdoc will be exposed to
Cryosphere and Arctic data, helping to train the next generation of cross
disciplinary data scientists in the domain. The PI?s Search Engines (20-40
students annual enrollment) and Software Architecture (30-50 students annual
enrollment) graduate courses at USC will benefit from the Arctic
cyberinfrastructure use cases disseminated through course projects and lecture
material. The PI will also work collaboratively with NSF-funded projects dealing
with projects focusing on the archiving, discovery and access of polar data,
such as ACADIS and the Antarctic Master Directory.