* 1348957
* After-School Activities: Identifying Risk and Protective Factors for Community Violence Exposure
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2020
* Jacquelynne Eccles, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Peter Vishton
* 08/31/2020
* USD 474,997.00

Community violence has profound implications for youth development. Youth who
are exposed to community violence are at risk for a variety of psychological and
behavioral difficulties, including poor academic performance, anxiety,
depression, post traumatic stress disorder, and substance abuse. Yet, very
little research examines why the impact of community violence exposure varies
among children. The goal of this research is to identify the characteristics of
after-school activities, within schools, homes, and neighborhoods, that protect
adolescents from the adverse effects of community violence. By identifying
factors that reduce adolescents' risk for violence exposure, this research can
have a broad impact, informing after-school programming for poor, urban
youth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;First, Dr. Ceballo will utilize longitudinal data
from the Project on Human Development in Chicago Neighborhoods (PHDCN). The
PHDCN data was drawn from a random, multiracial sample of 6,228 children and
mothers residing in Chicago. PHDCN data will allow Dr. Ceballo to examine the
impact of mothers' exposure to community violence on maternal mental health and
parenting approaches that can impact children's risk. Second, new survey data
will be collected with 500 Latino adolescents. This survey will examine the
relations among after-school activity participation, culturally-specific values
like familismo (e.g., prioritizing family unity) and parenting approaches on
Latino adolescents' violence exposure and psychological well-being. Finally, the
third study will recruit a subsample of 100 adolescents to participate in a
daily diary study of experiences with community violence. This study addresses
one of the greatest limitations in the literature: a reliance on children's
retrospective recall of violent events. This study will avoid the biases
inherent in participants' recall of traumatic events and will investigate
youths' experiences with violence as it occurs, providing unique data about the
effects of violence exposure on youth.