* 1348944
* Unity and Diversity in Self-Regulation and Executive Functioning
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2014,02/28/2019
* Brandon Schmeichel, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 02/28/2019
* USD 424,654.00

Persisting with a challenging professional goal, saving money, making ethical
decisions, choosing healthy options despite temptation: while these activities
cross different domains, they all depend in part on effective self-regulation,
or the capacity persons have to guide their thoughts, feelings, and behaviors in
a purposeful manner. Social psychological research has shown that self-
regulation can lead to a number of positive outcomes, including better mental
and physical health. Conversely, self-regulation failure or a lack of self-
regulatory abilities is a component of some psychological and behavioral
problems. Therefore, research that seeks to understand what drives successful
self-regulation is critically important. However, the core cognitive processes
involved in self-regulation are not well known, in part because self-regulation
has been studied with different methods across different subfields of the social
and behavioral sciences. Do these diverse measures of self-regulation actually
reveal the same underlying processes? And what are the core cognitive processes
that contribute to success at self-regulation? The current proposal will advance
research and theory on self-regulation by answering these questions. A large
sample of participants will complete several tests of self-regulation, including
tests designed to measure delay of gratification, effortful persistence, and
emotion regulation. The PIs will use factor analysis to examine the common but
untested assumption that these different behavioral tests of self-regulation
measure the same latent construct. Participants will also complete several
cognitive tasks that measure aspects of executive functioning (i.e., inhibition,
updating, and set shifting) that are assumed to underlie self-regulation.
Performance on these cognitive tasks will be used to predict performance on the
self-regulation tests. This evidence will reveal the cognitive processes that
are essential for self-regulation and reveal the extent of empirical overlap
between self-regulation and executive functioning.

Isolating the key cognitive processes underlying various forms of self-
regulation is essential for developing effective methods to improve the self-
regulation necessary for overcoming common personal and societal challenges,
such as helping people manage their emotions, inhibit unwanted thoughts and
behaviors, focus their attention, and maintain a healthy lifestyle. The proposed
research will also aid understanding of behavioral problems and psychological
disorders that have self-regulation failure as a core feature. In addition to
these potential societal benefits, the proposed research will promote teaching,
training, and learning by involving a diverse group of graduate and
undergraduate students in all portions of the research process.