* 1348284
* Webinar on Transformative Technologies
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2014
* Greg Valero, NATURE AMERICA INC
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 08/31/2014
* USD 25,000.00

The brain is one of the most intensely studied areas in modern biology and yet
remains poorly understood. To interrogate its functioning and mis-functioning
requires the deployment of a variety of new technologies currently under
development for use in neuroscience research. This award will support production
of Nature Publishing Group (NPG) Webinar(s), to explore potentially
transformative technologies that are, or will be, critical for the study of
neuroscience.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;'Beyond Optogenetics' : The field of
Optogenetics promises to revolutionize neuroscience by using light to manipulate
neural activity in genetically or functionally defined neurons with millisecond
precision to alter neuronal activity at the circuit level. Optogenetics has
exploded into the cellular neuroscience field, evolving from a sophisticated
approach to a standard expertise for any neuroscience lab to master. By making
it possible to selectively activate individual neurons in a living brain,
optogenetics provides one of the most temporally precise and phenotypically-
selective technologies available to neuroscientists doing research on brain
function. To help in implementing these advancing technologies and interpreting
the data they produce, the Webinar would focus on practical aspects about how to
become acquainted with the technique, what considerations should be made when
designing experiments, and how to stay current with new developments in this
area. Such topics and insights would be extremely valuable to a broad audience,
including not only neuroscientists who are researching the complexities of the
brain, but also those who are designing future technologies aimed at adding
functionality during the measurement and manipulation of nervous system
activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;'Subcellular Imaging' : Recent developments in
microscopy methods are making it possible to image below the diffraction limit.
To date, most of the attention has been focused on super-resolution methods
(like STED, PALM and STORM) that significantly push spatial resolution to the
limit. For biology and subcellular imaging, there are now exciting new methods
that double the resolution of microscopes and allow imaging of larger areas and
at faster speeds than the currently available technique. Because of the huge
number of methods and confusion surrounding them, a Webinar on this topic would
offer biologists guidance and discussion to address these important issues.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Webinar(s) will feature a set of discussions with
leading experimentalists concerning emerging technologies that are poised to be
used in innovative ways to generate new insights into the functioning of the
nervous system. In addition, the Webinar(s) will include comments from NSF staff
to place the discussion in the context of NSF's interest in the Brain Research
through Advancing Innovative Technologies known as the BRAIN Initiative.
Dissemination to a broad audience of scientists/researchers in the neuroscience
field will occur via the NPG website, and the Webinar(s) will be aired at the
NSF booth during the Society for Neuroscience Meeting in November 2013 in San
Diego, CA.