* 1348971
* Collaborative research:  a multi-tracer (U, S, B, and Sr) approach to fingerprint and quantify anthropogenic salinity sources in the semi-arid Rio Grande watershed
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/2014,04/30/2017
* Anna Szynkiewicz, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 04/30/2017
* USD 23,148.00

Broader significance.

Elevated salt content (salinity) in the Rio Grande River, which serves as a
critical source of irrigation water in the semi-arid southwestern US, has led to
severe reductions in crop productivity and an accumulation of salts in soils.
These pressing salinity problems have also been observed for other arid rivers
worldwide. In this study, the research team will determine the sources of
salinity in the Rio Grande. This study has implications for informing land and
water management practices, and as such can contribute to ensuring maintance of
U.S. agriculture and the longevity of freshwater supplies. Notably, this work is
applicable to understanding processes affecting salinity in related systems
worldwide. In addition to the potential utility of this work for US agriculture
and water resources, this has impact scientifically in that it focuses on the
development of a new geochemical tool for understanding near-surface / surface
water flow paths and transit times. This tool can potentially be applied to
water systems across the US and beyond, again providing information that may
assist in water resource management in both natural and managed systems.

This project will integrate expertise and resources in environmental isotope
research from four institutions at both national and international levels: U. of
Texas El Paso (UTEP; minority serving public university), U. of Arizona, U. of
Tennessee, and the Institut de Physique du Globe de Paris (IPGP). By training
two graduate and three undergraduate students, the project will contribute to
the training of a future US STEM workforce. Notably, a UTEP student will also
gain international professional experience by working with the IPGP in France
with a highly-regarded top research group in isotope geochemistry. In addition
to this international experience, the student will receive training in isotope
geochemistry methods and will bring this knowledge back to the US research team.
This international collaborative component of the work will be supported by NSF
International Science and Engineering. Outreach activities will also bring
cutting-edge research topics such as interactions between human and water,
soils, and environments, as well as local pressing environmental problems to the
attention of U.S. high school students, teachers and general public in the
rapidly growing and diverse El Paso region.

Technical description.

The research will revisit an important salinity issue in the semi-arid portion
of the lower Rio Grande watershed in New Mexico and Texas. The goals of this
project are: 1) to fingerprint and quantify salinity sources in the lower Rio
Grande in New Mexico and Texas using emerging isotopic (uranium), traditional
isotopic (boron, sulfur, strontium), and elemental (major dissolved ions)
tracers, with a concerted effort on understanding impacts related to human
activities; and 2) to understand the controlling factors on uranium and sulfur
isotope variations in natural streams in the Jemez River Basin Critical Zone
Observatory (JRB-CZO), a headwater region of the Rio Grande with limited human
activities. The combination of the above isotopic and solute tracers has
particular resolving powers in distinguishing salinity from agriculture, urban
activities, and geologic sources. The gained insights will improve our
understanding of human impacts on water quality and elemental cycles, one of the
most pressing issues facing the Earth Sciences community. This study will also
advance our understanding of the controlling factors on uranium and sulfur
isotope variations in headwater streams in the Jemez River Basin. Such
information will provide an important natural baseline to understand human-
impacted waters. With the multi-tracer approach, we will achieve the following
objectives: 1) to characterize the U, S, B and Sr isotope and major element
signatures in anthropogenic and natural salinity sources in the Rio Grande
watershed; 2) to establish both spatial and temporal variations of these tracers
in the Rio Grande and to quantify the contributions from various salinity end
members with mass balance constraints; 3) to link U and S isotope variations in
natural streams to different water sources that have evolved via different flow
paths controlled by climatic, geological and hydrologic conditions.