* 1348396
* Quantitative Salinity &amp; Water D/H from Paired H &amp; C Isotopes in Mangrove Lipids
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/2014,02/28/2017
* Julian Sachs, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 02/28/2017
* USD 450,001.00

Global patterns of rainfall have been changing over the last half-century,
impacting the lives of people worldwide. A full understanding of these changes
has not yet emerged, but they have been linked to a warming of global
temperatures in response to the buildup of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere.
Among the more widespread changes in precipitation have occurred in the tropics,
where wet regions have been getting wetter and dry regions drier. It remains
unknown whether the changes in tropical rainfall observed over the last 30 years
are unusual when viewed on a multi-century or multi-millennial time scale. As
yet it is therefore not possible to say whether recent precipitation trends are
outside the range of natural variability. Any such conclusion will require
records of rainfall from the tropics extending back in time a thousand years or
more. But at present there are few, if any methods to accurately reconstruct
rainfall in most locations on the planet prior to the advent of rain gauges and
satellites, especially in the maritime tropics. The goal of this project is to
develop a method for determining the salinity and deuterium-to-hydrogen ratio of
water, two parameters very closely linked to rainfall in the tropics, from the
chemistry of mangrove lipids that can be recovered from ocean and lake sediment
cores.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mangroves are remarkable trees that have adapted to
living in saltwater. They inhabit the intertidal zones of the global tropics and
subtropics. The approach of the proposed study is based upon the investigator's
recent observation that the ratio of both deuterium (2H) to hydrogen (1H) and
carbon-13 (13C) to carbon-12 (12C) in the lipids of mangrove leaves changes
systematically when the salinity of the water in which they live changes. This
study will calibrate that response in multiple species of mangroves by growing
them in the laboratory at a range of different salinities. The investigator will
then test whether those calibrations are consistent when applied to multiple
mangrove species inhabiting the shorelines of saline lakes on the tropical
island of Palau that span a wide range of salinities. Because the hydrogen
isotope composition of mangrove lipids incorporates the deuterium-to-hydrogen
ratio of the water in which the mangroves live, as well as the salinity of that
water, and the carbon isotopes only respond to the salinity, it is possible to
calculate both the salinity and the hydrogen isotope ratio of the coastal water.
From these two parameters one can make good estimates of rainfall, since both
the salinity and the deuterium-to-hydrogen ratio of coastal water decreases when
rainfall increases. When measured on mangrove lipids extracted from sediment
cores taken in coastal settings and maritime lakes it will be possible to
reconstruct rainfall estimates back in time, thus providing the long-term view
needed to conclude whether recent trends in tropical rainfall are outside the
range of natural variability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported
jointly by the Marine Geology and Geophysics Program in the NSF Division of
Ocean Sciences.