* 1348929
* Big Data, Big Decisions: A Workshop for a Research Agenda on the Social, Economic and Workforce Implications of Big Data
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2013,01/31/2015
* M. Lynne Markus, Bentley University
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 01/31/2015
* USD 49,998.00

This project will support a two-day workshop entitled "The Social, Economic and
Workforce Implications of Big Data Analysis and Decision-Making" to be held in
January 2014. Big Data, the analysis and application of very large datasets, is
an important new area of computer science research that has given rise to a
number of new journals, conferences and funding opportunities as well as great
interest in practice. Public and private sectors organizations of all kinds,
including the National Science Foundation, are making huge investments in Big
Data in the well-justified belief that innovations in data analytics can bring
enormous benefits in such areas as public health and safety, economic
competitiveness and consumer welfare. At the same time, history makes clear that
innovations do not always realize their intended benefits and that they
sometimes have negative (in addition to positive) unintended consequences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the workshop is to develop an agenda for
research on the Social, Economic and Workforce consequences of Big Data to
mobilize research momentum in this important area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
workshop will bring together policy makers and subject matter experts
representing a range of relevant disciplines and perspectives, including
computer science, economics, social sciences, and philosophy. The workshop will
be organized as plenary and breakout sessions, organized around four major
themes: 1) consequences for citizens and social life (e.g., democratic
participation and interpersonal interaction), 2) consequences for employment and
economic opportunity (e.g., job availability and quality and access to credit
and investment opportunities), 3) consequences for science and innovation (e.g.,
scientific practices and rewards and the structure of R&amp;D), and 4)
consequences for critical infrastructure (e.g., public health and safety and
financial system stability). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The
workshop will advance computer science and engineering by developing an agenda
for systemic research to document emerging consequences and to anticipate
plausible future consequences of Big Data. The science of the social, economic,
and workforce consequences of revolutionary technological innovations like Big
Data is challenging for at least two reasons. First, it is inherently
interdisciplinary. Second, to be useful, such a science must be anticipatory as
well as post-hoc, but criteria and approaches for evaluating forward-looking
research are still nacent. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Big data is
growing in importance for many areas critical to society, including health,
finance and science. However, current research is focused primarily on the
underlying technology, leaving the societal, economic and workforce impacts
largely unexamined. The outputs of this workshop will help researchers identify
the key issues in understanding these impacts and articulate possible approaches
for future research.