* 1348462
* Collaborative Research: Expansive Meanings and Makings in ArtScience
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2013,03/31/2019
* Megan Bang, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Celestine Pea
* 03/31/2019
* USD 676,775.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Expansive Meanings and Makings in ArtScience will
design and develop an innovative model of ArtScience learning for middle and
high school age youth from communities underrepresented in STEM fields.
ArtScience is an emerging movement emphasizing commonalities in thinking
practices used by artists and scientists as they explore complex 21st century
problems. Youth will engage in ArtScience inquiries in two scientific domains of
significance to them and their communities: climate change and the human
microbiome. The project investigates the hypothesis that an ArtScience approach
will expand opportunities for historically underrepresented youth to develop
meaningful understanding of core ideas related to Earth?s systems, ecosystems
and microbiology as well as increased fluency with scientific and artistic
practices related to the interpretation, production, and use of complex
scientific visualizations. Design and research activities will be carried out
collaboratively in informal and formal learning environments: in Seattle with a
youth theatre company, Red Eagle Soaring, that serves primarily Native youth,
and in Boston with a public high school, Boston Arts Academy, that serves youth
from underrepresented communities. A multidisciplinary team of learning
scientists, scientists, and artists will collaborate in the research, including:
the Ch√®che Konnen Center at TERC, University of Washington, Broad Institute, and
locally-based artists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In Seattle and Boston, youth will
learn to interpret and investigate scientific visualizations from open access
data exchanges. To help students connect with the larger, more complex
visualizations, they will construct their own data on a smaller scale. Guided by
participating scientists, artists and teachers, youth will learn to develop
creative responses to the visualizations in ways that integrate scientific and
artistic ideas, practices, materials, and concerns. This design-based research
project will a) design and progressively refine an ArtScience model, b) document
and analyze youths? engagement with ArtScience practices and their articulation
with scientific practices, and c) assess growth in youths? conceptual
understanding, fluency in use of scientific and artistic practices, and emerging
identity relationships to science. A total of 100 youth will participate, 50 in
each of two design cycles. Data sources will include videotapes of
implementation sessions at each site, session log records, youth-generated
artifacts, pre- and post-clinical interviews, and academic performance and
attendance records. Data will be analyzed using interaction analysis,
descriptive data analysis, discourse analysis, and life story and cognitive
narratological approaches. Analyses will be coordinated across sites using
shared, secure database and analysis software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will establish an empirical foundation in ArtScience learning that
articulates with the new science frameworks and mobilizes the intellectual and
creative potential of youth from communities historically underrepresented in
STEM fields. Major outcomes will include an evidence-based model of ArtScience
learning and evidence-based design principles that can guide adaptation of the
model in formal and informal settings serving underrepresented youth. The model,
design principles, assessment results, and examples of ArtScience inquiries will
be shared widely through professional and community networks, locally,
nationally and internationally. Through these efforts the project addresses both
the STEM learning environments and broadening participation of the EHR Core
program.