* 1348589
* CAREER: Dynamics in Several Complex Variables, in Context
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2022
* Roland Roeder, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2022
* USD 460,000.00

Systems that evolve with time appear at the core of nearly all scientific
endeavor, including biology, chemistry, physics, and the social sciences. Given
the current state of the system, can one predict the future state? How does this
evolution of the state of the system depend on the parameters of the system?
Many such dynamical systems are far too complicated for a rigorous study, so one
resorts to simpler models, which are hoped to indicate the types of behavior
that one should expect experimentally. One venue for such simpler models is the
iteration of holomorphic maps, the topic of this project. Completing these
projects will provide a deeper understanding of fundamental properties of
dynamical systems in several complex variables and it will build connections
with other areas of mathematics. The broader impacts of this project are largely
educational, focusing on both high school students and Ph.D. students. Funding
for this project will help to develop an interest and talent in mathematics
among high school students, both local and throughout Indiana. It will help to
train at least one supported Ph.D. student at Indiana University-Purdue
University and also to train Ph.D. students from all over the United States by
means of two workshops on holomorphic dynamics in several
variables.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main research goal of this project is to
explore several examples where the iteration of a holomorphic self-map of a
complex manifold has a connection with another area of mathematics or
mathematical physics. Not only does the connection allow for applications in the
other area, but the context coming from that area usually gives the mapping
extra structure, allowing for a significantly deeper study. Four projects are
proposed relating dynamics in several complex variables to Thurston theory, the
Ising model from statistical physics, the spectra of certain operators arising
from self-similar group actions, and complex time ordinary differential
equations (the Painleve equations). The proposed research projects are designed
around three principles: (1) exploring connections between two or more different
areas of mathematics can lead to surprising new results, (2) dynamical systems
having an additional context from another field can be studied significantly
more deeply, and (3) a study of concrete examples often leads to statements and
proofs of more general theorems. Partnered with the main research goals are
several educational goals: (1) leading local high school students on specially
tailored research projects, (2) helping to run and improve the Indiana
University-Purdue University High School Math Contest, (3) leading Ph.D.
students on the main research projects mentioned above, and (4) organizing two
workshops on dynamics in several complex variables which have a training
component for Ph.D. students.