* 1348112
* EAGER: Exploring the role of polymer thermodynamics in the formation of patches on polymer-core-shell particles
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2014
* Carolina Salvador Morales, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 08/31/2014
* USD 74,054.00

1348112 PI: Morales

This EAGER award supports a research plan for exploring the role of polymer
thermodynamics in the formation of patches on polymeric cores. The PI has
recently discovered the formation of a new class of patchy particles with a
unique core-shell structure consisting of a hollow hydrophobic polymeric core
and a patchy surface made of single or dual lipid-polymer based patches
independently distributed and oriented on the surface of the core. The mechanism
of patch formation is not yet understood. The formation of patches on polymeric
cores was a somewhat unexpected phenomenon in light of the fact that amine
groups, having a positive charge at neutral pH, were expected to repel each
other rather than form clusters or patches. It is hypothesized that the patch
formation phenomenon observed experimentally is due to the polymer phase
segregation phenomenon. A determination of the driving forces involved in the
formation process is necessary to gain a deep understanding of the process. This
exploratory research aims to investigate the role that: 1) thermodynamic
interactions such as polymer-solvent and polymer polymer-solvent play in the
phase separation phenomenon and 2) the interfacial tension plays in the phase
separation phenomenon.

. At the fundamental level, this proposal will advance the self-assembly field
by adding new knowledge to the phase separation phenomenon. In the past, the
phase separation phenomenon has been observed, reported and discussed in systems
such as binary self-assembly monolayers (SAM) of n-alkanethiols on gold,
surfactant coated nanoparticles and surfactant-coated substrates, but not on the
surface of polymeric particles. The PI is the first to report that the phase
separation phenomenon also occurs in the presence of two different lipid-
PEGylated functional groups. The full understanding of this phenomenon is
critically relevant for the interaction between patchy particles and biological
entities such as proteins, cells and tissues. These patchy particles have
potential applications in drug and vaccine delivery.