* 1348008
* Collaborative Research:   Using Sulfur Isotopes to Identify Subducted Archean Crust in Modern Oceanic Hotspot Lavas
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2017
* James Farquhar, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 05/31/2017
* USD 95,024.00

A consequence of modern plate tectonics is that subducting ocean plates
transport oceanic crust and sediment into the mantle. However, the fate of the
subducted package--oceanic crust and sediment--in the mantle is poorly
understood. A long-standing hypothesis maintains that subducted materials
residue in the mantle for an extended, but unknown, period of time and are then
recycled back to the Earth's surface in regions of buoyantly upwelling mantle
and melted beneath hotspots. If this hypothesis is correct, ocean island basalts
(OIB) erupted at hotspots should exhibit geochemical signatures associated with
the crustal protoliths that were injected into the mantle at a subduction zone
in the geologic past. However, it has been difficult to unequivocally detect
geochemical signatures of ancient subducted materials in hotspot lavas. This
proposal will use measurements of mass independently fractionated sulfur (MIF-S)
isotope signatures--made using two complementary techniques--in key hotspot
lavas to trace crustal cycling from the surface, through the mantle and back
again.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MIF-S were recently discovered in olivine
phenocrysts and olivine-hosted sulfides in 20 million-year-old lavas from
Mangaia, the archetypal HIMU (high 238U/204Pb) locality. Widespread terrestrial
MIF-S isotope signatures were generated exclusively through atmospheric
photochemical reactions until ~2.45 Ga, and the discovery of MIF-S isotope
signatures in young hotspot lavas therefore appears to provide a "timestamp" and
"signature" for preservation of subducted Archean surface materials in the
mantle sourcing OIB. This proposal is a 1-year pilot study that aims to perform
a S-isotope study on olivine-hosted sulfides and phenocrysts in lavas from the
other two mantle endmembers found in OIB, EM1 (in Pitcairn lavas) and EM2
(Samoa), to determine whether these lavas also host an Archean recycled
component. We will also target large sulfides globules hosted in volcanic glass
from Loihi and Samoa for analysis by both ion probe and standard sulfur
extraction and isotope ratio mass spectrometry (IRMS) techniques, to further
establish a direct comparison between the two analytical techniques. A survey of
abyssal peridotite sulfides will be undertaken to identify primary mantle
sulfides of sufficient size for sulfur isotopic analyses, and if found, the
sulfides will be measured by ion probe and (if large enough) by sulfur
extraction and IRMS. The analytical campaign will allow us address whether
oceanic hotspots in general exhibit evidence for recycling of Archean
protoliths. This proposal offers an unprecedented test of the recycling
hypothesis.