* 1348865
* EAGER: Prototyping an Urban Data Cyberinfrastructure for Computational Social Sciences
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2016
* Charles Catlett, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Robert Chadduck
* 09/30/2016
* USD 299,998.00

Cities are the crucibles of civilization, and accelerating global urbanization
raises challenges and opportunities related to density and scale in areas
including transportation; food production and distribution; human health and
wellbeing; education; social policy and services; and management of water and
energy. Seeking to understand the human, social, and economic to help develop
effective education or public policy scientists, and thus city officials, have
traditionally been limited to qualitative studies or to using sparse, often
stale data sources. The open data movement is making an increasingly rich set of
urban data available, but the cyber infrastructure technologies and tools used
to make this data available were designed primarily to support the analysis of
individual data sets rather than exploring relationships among many data sets.
Consequently, urban scientists from sociology, economics, behavioral sciences,
education, engineering, operations research, and other disciplines lack the
tools and infrastructure to fully harness urban data for their research. The
questions these researchers ask are therefore constrained by the data they have
in hand. Two new cyber infrastructure capabilities have potential to unleash
these data sources, both exploiting the fact that most of the published urban
data sets share the attributes of location and time. The first is to allow a
scientist to assemble data from multiple, independent, data sources for a
specific geographical location point (latitude/longitude), city unit (street
segment, census tract, block), or area (polygon). The second is to select a
window of time and to normalize the selected data sources using a common
sampling interval, merging them into a composite structure for computational and
statistical analysis. Taken together, these capabilities will allow a scientist
to study urban areas, over specific time periods, with varied, relevant data
represented as a time series of vectors. We propose to develop, in partnership
with urban scientists and City officials initially from Chicago and eventually
from New York City, a proof-of-concept with these
capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The prototype will draw data from open data
portals, allowing a researcher to specify a location, a window of time, a
sampling period, and a list of data sets. The system will provide a matrix with
one row per time sample and columns representing each data set. By merging and
transforming urban data into matrices we will enable urban scientists to apply
the tools of mathematics and computation to understand urban challenges ranging
from youth violence and crime to graduate rates to employment and economic
decline and revitalization.