* 1348266
* Engineering Innovative Solutions to Storm Water Problems  through Diverse Community Participation
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* John Peckenham, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* chinonye nnakwe
* 09/30/2017
* USD 735,315.00

This three-year project focuses on the problem of storm water pollution which is
a significant issue in Maine. It seeks to engage high school students,
particularly female, Native Americans, African Americans, and students from
rural schools in Maine, in meaningful research and engineering education in the
area of storm water management and environmental pollution mitigation. In this
project, the high school student participants work with their teachers and the
University of Maine faculty and students, alongside local communities as well as
representatives from private, non-profit, and governmental organizations. This
project also supports the purchase of permanent laboratory equipment such as
spectrophotometers and water quality sensor packages for high school
laboratories.

Intellectual Merit The project participants plan to: (1) build a sensor network
for water quality evaluation along a section of the Penjajawoc stream going
through forested/residential/industrial parts of Bangor, Maine; (2) collect
real-time data on water quality from the sensors and laboratory analysis of
water samples; (3) use computer modeling for data analysis; and (4) produce
water quality maps for local water ways. A five-day Storm Water Institute,
offered annually at the University of Maine, prepares the participants to work
on participatory citizen science projects related to storm water management.
Anticipated results include increased student interest in STEM education and
careers, in particular about environmental science and engineering, through
their involvement in this project-based hands-on experience on topics that are
of societal relevance.

Broader Impacts The project plans to engage 180 students and 45 teachers from
schools and members of the public, including Native American communities from
the Bangor, Auburn, and Portland areas of Maine. At least 75% of the students
are female and from groups underrepresented or underserved in STEM including
students with disabilities. It is expected that at least 50% of the student
participants will later apply to and be accepted into a STEM-related post-
secondary degree program. The model of empowering underrepresented minority
students, teachers, and communities by engaging them in environmentally relevant
problems and engineering solutions is potentially transferrable and scalable
nationwide.