* 1348649
* Networking and Mentoring Travel Scholarship Program
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2015
* Robyn Hannigan, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 08/31/2015
* USD 99,999.00

Networking and mentoring are critical to scientific training. This is
particularly the case for undergraduate students. Undergraduate students
participating in Research Experiences for Undergraduate (REU) programs are often
able to present only to their REU peers or at their home institutions. Moreover,
if they do present at a national/international meeting they often do so without
the support of their REU mentor. To enable REU participants in Biology and
Oceanography REU programs to present the results of their research and to enable
REU mentors to attend these meetings and facilitate professional development of
their REU student, we propose a Networking and Mentoring Travel Scholarship
program that supports student-mentor teams to attend and present the REU
student's research at a national/international meeting. Central to our efforts
is longitudinal tracking of the scholarship awardees. Results from previous
travel scholarships showed significant learning gains. Moreover the travel
scholarship program supported a significant number of underrepresented minority
students and students from primarily undergraduate institutions enabling them to
attend scientific meetings and present their research thereby reinforcing the
value of diversity in biological and ocean science research. To ensure that the
Travel Scholarship program meets the goals of enhancing participation of
undergraduate researchers at scientific meetings we will use the data collected
to assess the impact of the program on the number of BIO and OCE REU students
who would not otherwise have the opportunity to present their research. These
data will enable us to evaluate the impact of the Travel Scholarship program,
particularly the mentoring of students at meetings by their REU mentor, on the
students as well as evaluate which programs/disciplines actively seek and
participate in these opportunities. All data will be reported, in aggregate
form, to the National Science Foundation in annual reports as well as
disseminated in aggregate form to the BIO REU community through the website as
well as at PI meetings. More information is available by contacting the PI, Dr.
Robyn Hannigan at robyn.hannigan@umb.edu.