* 1348109
* CAREER: A Multiagent Teacher/Student Framework for Sequential Decision Making Tasks
* CSE,IIS
* 01/02/2013,08/31/2018
* Matthew Taylor, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* James Donlon
* 08/31/2018
* USD 421,894.00

Physical (robotic) agents and virtual (software) agents are becoming
increasingly common in industry, education, and domestic environments. Although
recent research advances have enabled agents to learn how to complete tasks
without human intervention, little is known about how best to have humans teach
agents or agents teach other agents or even how agents might teach humans.
Considering the full matrix of agent/human learning, in which either an agent or
a human can play the role of teacher or student, would increase the potential
benefits of leveraging human and agent expertise and knowledge.

This project aims to study agent/human learning in the context of sequential
decision-making problems, a class of central importance for real-world agent
systems. This project aims to develop a novel teacher/student framework that
integrates autonomous learning with teaching by another agent or a human. The
project plans to develop and evaluate a set of core algorithms to allow: (1)
agents to teach agents, thus enabling robust knowledge sharing among agents; (2)
humans to teach agents, thus allowing humans to share or transfer common sense
or domain-specific knowledge with agents; and (3) agents to teach humans, thus
helping humans better understand how to perform or recast sequential decision-
making tasks already understood or performed by autonomous agents. In all cases,
the goal is to develop methods that significantly improve learning performance
relative to learning without guidance from a teacher. Issues to be explored
include mismatch between teacher/student abilities, learning from multiple
teachers, and shared knowledge representation between teacher/student. The PI
plans to focus on several scenarios, each with different sets of assumptions
about the knowledge or skill of the student or teacher and the kind of
interaction possible between them (e.g., whether the teacher can tell the
student what action to take). The techniques developed in the project will be
evaluated in a variety of tests domains and will involve simulations as well as
actual robots.

The teacher/student framework will enable agents to teach other agents and
humans, as well as integrate autonomous learning with agent and human teaching.
Understanding how to best teach agents is of key importance in developing
deployable agent systems. The platform- and domain-independent approach
incorporates ideas from multiagent systems, machine learning, human-computer
interaction, and human-robot interaction communities, and has the potential to
impact each of these areas. This work takes a step towards transitioning agents
from specialized systems usable only by experts into useful tools and teammates
for people without programming expertise.

This project has a strong educational component. The PI teaches at an
undergraduate college and undergraduate students will play a crucial role
throughout the project. Furthermore, the research produced by this project will
be incorporated into five of the PI's courses, providing exciting new material
to attract and retain computer science majors. The PI will also continue
outreach to secondary school students as well as to underrepresented groups via
Lafayette College's S-STEM and Higher Achievement programs.