* 1348222
* ARI-MA: Investigation of Structure Property Relationships in Metallic Actinide Alloys to Enable Forensic Analysis
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2015
* Chaitanya Deo, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Hicks
* 09/30/2015
* USD 221,675.00

This research program will develop atomistic and microstructural models of the
structure-property-processing relationships in actinide metals and alloys (U, Pu
alloys). The project focuses its attention on metallic actinide alloys that are
relevant to nuclear forensics. Metallic forms are the final forms of the
actinide before use in a weapon. By developing these microstructure and
atomistic models, we aim to understand how the microstructure evolves under
processing such as casting and rolling for the alloys. This understanding
provides the forensic scientist a capability to trace the provenance of such
special nuclear materials should they be interdicted in the alloy form.

This project will train graduate students and involve undergraduates in research
experiences through Georgia Tech Summer Undergraduate Research Experience and
broaden participation of under-represented groups, for example, by recruiting
students from minority serving institutions. It will by establish collaborations
with researchers in INL and PNNL where graduate students will interact directly
with researchers. Significant faculty involvement, participation by
underrepresented minorities, and active learning distinguish the education and
outreach component of this project. The outreach program is especially important
in the case of a topic where the general public is not conversant with the
science such as actinide chemistry and metallurgy. This program will educate a
new generation of undergraduate and graduate students on actinide chemistry and
metallurgy and provide resources to K-12 students to become interested and
conversant in the actinide sciences while enhancing national security by
providing a means to improve nuclear forensics science.