* 1348653
* EAGER: Silicon-compatible, Crystallographic Oriented Epitaxial Germanium for New Generation of Metal-oxide Semiconductor Field-effect Transistors
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2015
* Mantu Hudait, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Dimitris Pavlidis
* 09/30/2015
* USD 280,000.00

Objectives: The objectives of this research program is design, materials
synthesis and device based co-exploration of lattice-engineered,
crystallographic oriented epitaxial (100), (110) and (111) germanium (Ge) based
transistors using large bandgap barrier materials. The approach is a)
experimental investigation of p-channel (110)Ge and n-channel (111)Ge quantum
well transistors, b) experimental investigation of high hole mobility using
(110)Ge and high electron mobility using (111)Ge surface orientation, and c)
silicon compatible process flow of biaxially strained Ge transistors.
&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: The key scientific merits of this proposal are:
i) in-situ growth of Ge transistor structure; ii) tailor-made surface
orientations of Ge enable to achieve both high-hole and high-electron
mobilities; iii) biaxially strained Ge quantum well transistor using large
bandgap materials to enhance hole mobility, iv) larger valence band-offsets for
carrier confinement and prevents carrier spill-off, v) elimination of parallel
conduction, and vi) enhancement mode transistor operation. Our approaches are
most innovative and transformative of in-situ grown epitaxial surface oriented
Ge with large bandgap buffers that has a capacity to bring new
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The proposed Ge research seeks to
increase the speed of transistor and substantially reduce power consumption in
integrated circuits. Ultra-low power and high-speed computation will benefit
applications for industrial, medical, commercial and personal use. The proposed
research is interdisciplinary in nature. Through collaboration with industry, we
envision direct transfer of device prototypes, to open new avenues for
commercialization. The project will train graduate and undergraduate students in
the area of nano-scale material science, device physics, and semiconductor
fabrication