* 1348979
* Southeast Regional PULSE Conference Planning Meeting, Atlanta, GA, August 9-11, 2013
* BIO,EF
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2015
* Judy Awong-Taylor, Georgia Gwinnett College
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 07/31/2015
* USD 20,740.00

An award has been made to Georgia Gwinnett College to conduct a workshop from
August 9-11, 2013 to plan a regional conference to promote the mission of the
Partnership for Undergraduate Life Science Education (PULSE). In September 2012
the PULSE partners (HHMI, NIH, and NSF) appointed 40 Vision and Change
Leadership Fellows to stimulate transformative changes in undergraduate life
science education as recommended in the Vision and Change report. Fellows were
selected from two-year colleges, liberal arts colleges, comprehensive
universities and research universities. The Fellows have organized into working
groups with the overarching goal of helping departments transform their programs
in a national effort to increase student learning of core concepts, increase
student retention in the sciences, and prepare all students to be more curious
and scientifically literate citizens. The current award is to fund a workshop in
Atlanta, GA in which the fourteen Leadership Fellows located in the Southeastern
United States will plan a Southeastern (SE) Regional PULSE (SERP) Conference to
be held in spring of 2014. The SERP Conference will provide a venue for
institutional teams to build the awareness, skills, implementation plan, and
support network to undertake reform on their home campuses. The Fellows will
partner at the workshop with a scholar whose expertise includes evaluating the
outcomes of academic conferences and with representatives from the Association
of Southeastern Biologists and the American Institute of Biological Sciences to
plan synergistic activities in the region. This regional network will expand the
impact of PULSE by reaching out to institutions in states accredited by the
Southern Association of Colleges and Schools Commission on Colleges, many of
which are not currently represented by PULSE Leadership Fellows. While this
regional network will be one of several "laboratories" for testing the resources
being developed by the PULSE working groups, the workshop organizers recognize
that each region of the country faces unique challenges and opportunities in
moving Vision and Change efforts forward. One opportunity for the Southeast is
to engage the large number of HBCUs and other Minority Serving Institutions in
future Vision and Change activities. Results from the workshop and the larger
regional conference will be shared with other regional networks and with the
life sciences community, primarily via the www.pulsecommunity.org website, but
also through conference presentations and publications.

This project is being funded jointly by the Directorate for Biological Sciences
and the Directorate of Education and Human Resources, Division of Undergraduate
Education as part of their efforts to support Vision and Change in Undergraduate
Biology Education.