* 1348819
* The Role of Academic Achievement and Social Inclusion in Broadening STEM Participation: Intended and Actual Attainment at the Intersection of Gender and Race/Ethnicity
* EDU,EES
* 06/01/2014,09/30/2020
* Catherine Riegle-Crumb, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 09/30/2020
* USD 985,224.00

This study makes a major contribution to the literature on disparities in
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) education by providing
new information about the STEM trajectories of boys and girls from various
racial/ethnic subgroups from middle school through the end of college. Using
five comprehensive, large-scale and longitudinal datasets, researchers from the
University of Texas at Austin will examine differences between subgroups in
intended as well as actual STEM attainment and investigate how patterns of
academic achievement and social inclusion contribute to those differences. Three
of the five datasets are nationally representative samples while the other two
were collected in Texas and include large sample populations of Hispanic
students. Separately the five datasets provide the opportunity to examine
certain unique measures of academic achievement and social inclusion;
collectively they provide the chance to investigate STEM trajectories at the
intersection of race/ethnicity and gender from the 6th grade to the end of
college. Special attention will be paid to the experiences of minority
girls/women and minority boys/men to gain a more comprehensive and comparative
picture of contemporary patterns of inequality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
analysis focuses on two research aims: 1) to examine how academic achievement
and social inclusion contribute to differences in intended STEM attainment
during middle and high school by gender and racial/ethnic subgroup; and 2) to
examine how academic achievement and social inclusion contribute to differences
in actual STEM attainment during college by gender and racial/ethnic subgroup.
Statistical analyses include models using logistic and multinomial logistic
regression and multi-level models to examine school or classroom level effects.
Intended STEM attainment is measured using the answers to various survey
questions about desired occupation and comparing the relative preferences with
non-STEM occupations. Academic achievement is measured using grades, test scores
and course-taking. Social inclusion is measured using answers to questions about
perceived peer and teacher support and perceived equitable treatment. The
framework of the study is grounded in theories of intersectionality that focus
on the intersection of gender and race/ethnicity and the multiple jeopardy that
may apply when one is a member of two different groups with relatively lower
status. This analysis uses large-scale data to explicitly address the
experiences of different groups and to uncover patterns that may affirm this
jeopardy or identify instances of resiliency when students succeed in
educational environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ultimate goal of the project
is to broaden STEM participation by contributing new knowledge about the factors
that promote or impede the retention and attainment of women and minority youth
in STEM fields. Findings will be presented at academic and policy-related
conferences, published in top-tier peer-reviewed journals in education and
sociology, and distributed through press releases to local and national media
outlets to reach a broad public audience. The research team will also use their
extant relationships with national teacher professional development programs to
communicate research findings to key audiences of primary and secondary teachers
across the country. Additionally, the project is working to broaden
participation through the recruitment and training of women and minority
doctoral students in the fields of STEM education and sociology. The diverse
perspectives of these students, coupled with the rigorous analytical training
they will receive, are critical for preparing future generations of academic
researchers to study STEM equality.