* 1348097
* Support for US Young Investigators to attend IEEE International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging, Beijing, China, April 28-May 2, 2014
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2015
* Ge Wang, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Athanassios Sambanis
* 03/31/2015
* USD 8,000.00

1348097 Wang

The IEEE International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging: Innovative, Integrative,
Informative (ISBI) is a forum that has traditionally focused on the
computational and modeling aspects of biomedical imaging. The website is at
http://www.biomedicalimaging.org/2014/. It emphasizes methodologies that have
the potential to be applicable to multiple imaging modalities and to imaging at
different scales. Topics include physical, biological and statistical modeling
of biological and anatomical structures, image formation and reconstruction,
computational and statistical image analysis, visualization, and image quality
assessment. The meeting aims to facilitate cross-fertilization of methodologies
between different imaging modalities and scales, with applications ranging from
the nano, molecular and cellular levels through small-animal imaging to
macroscopic and whole-body clinical systems. Whereas many medical imaging
meetings focus on particular modalities, ISBI includes a diversity of novel
engineering and computational methodologies applied to biological and anatomical
imaging modalities, either emerging or well established. Applications of
interest include molecular pathology, drug discovery and delivery, molecular
imaging, functional brain mapping, computational neuroanatomy, cardiovascular
imaging, and cancer imaging. A principal goal of ISBI is to connect advanced
methodologies with important biomedical applications, from microscopic to
macroscopic scales. ISBI 2014, to be held April 28-May 2 2014, in Beijing,
China, will be the 11th in a series of meetings cosponsored by two IEEE
societies: the Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society (EMBS) and the Signal
Processing Society (SPS). The inaugural ISBI meeting was held in July 2002. The
success of the previous ISBI meetings bodes well for the future of ISBI. The
success of ISBI and its impact on the field, and indeed the future of the field
itself, relies on training young investigators to work with state-of-the-art
sophisticated computational or modeling tools and on informing the researcher
community of the latest progress in biomedical imaging protocols and modalities.
In addition, the inherently interdisciplinary nature of the biomedical imaging
field means that no single professional organization has the majority of
potential participants as its members. In this context, the tutorials series,
covering very diverse topics and offered on the first day of the symposium, is
an important component, which has been very popular in previous ISBI meetings.
This project will fund to support the participation and attendance at the
symposium by US-based students.

Intellectual Merit : The International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging provides
a forum where top-notch students interact with leaders in the field and engage
in intellectual discussions with other superlative students in a wide array of
bioengineering and related disciplines. Students are able to view presentations
on topics related to their own fields of academic study and participate in
didactic interaction. Without the support of this NSF proposal, many students
would be less likely to attend the conference, thus missing an introduction to
the world of knowledge available at such professional meetings. In addition,
this assembly provides a forum for recognizing the talents of women and
minorities in the field of computer science and bioengineering.

Broader Impacts : The International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging promotes not
only education within the computer science and engineering disciplines, but also
fosters the next generation engineers and computer scientists by providing a
unique opportunity for students to meet and network with the leading
computational biologists, bioinformaticians, and scientists in the world. It
also provides US students an opportunity to participate in grand challenges and
learn about the state of art computational methods for solving complex problems
present challenges in image analysis, and hypothesis generation from big data.
For the first time, ISBI-14 is enjoying a rapid growth in grand challenges and
data papers, and this process will be an extraordinary exposure for US students.