* 1348272
* ARI-MA: Trap-Triggered Organic Field Effect Transistor as Low-Cost, Uncooled, Highly Sensitive Solid-State Photodetectors for Radiation Sensing
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2015
* Jinsong Huang, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2015
* USD 150,000.00

The goal of this project is to develop a type of extremely high-gain, low-noise
organic photodetector as a replacement for expensive photomultiplier tubes
(PMTs) for applications in the low-cost radiation detectors systems. The
proposed device will use the incident photon as a switching valve to control the
source-drain output current of organic field effect transistors. These
photodetectors allow dramatic changing of the hole injection from electrode into
semiconductor channel by the trapped-electrons-induced charge injection at the
organic semiconductor-electrode interface. Because the trapped electrons are
injected by the incident photons, each absorbed photon will cause a large output
current change in the devices, producing a very large apparent gain. The
proposed photodetector will provide a new mechanism to achieve a high gain and
low noise comparable to that of PMTs driven by relative low bias, and has
substantial potential to replace PMTs due to superior characteristics including
compact size, robustness, high gain, low noise, low power consumption, low cost,
and excellent responsivity to the photon emission from scintillator.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The success of this project will yield a new generation of solid-
state photodetectors to achieve the NSF/Domestic Nuclear Detection Office
(DNDO)'s capital investment cost goals of less than $100 per detector/sensor.
This new, low-cost photodetector may then be integrated with future low-cost
nanocomposite scintillators, enabling the detection and interdiction of
nuclear/radiological devices or component materials by allowing for deployment
of many compact, unobtrusive detectors in remote areas - such as smuggling
routes - where persistent manned surveillance would be difficult. This will
significantly improve the nation?s ability to prevent nuclear or radiological
attacks. Successful execution of the proposed research will also have
significant importance for science, technology, and society, particularly in
industrial, medical, and other defense applications. For example, an increased
sensitivity photodetector would reduce the radiation dose exposed to the patient
in computerized tomography scanning. This project will also add another new
category of low-cost electronic device into the emerging class of printable
electronics. Further, undergraduate students will be recruited from well-known
undergraduate research and outreach programs at the University of Nebraska-
Lincoln, including the highly successful Undergraduate Creative Activities and
Research Experiences Program (UCARE) and Research Experience for Undergraduates
(REU) program in the Nebraska Center of Materials and Nanoscience.