* 1348140
* Core Systems for Learning Mathematics
* EDU,DRL
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2022
* Elizabeth Spelke, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Beth Herbel Eisenmann
* 03/31/2022
* USD 1,387,378.00

Although human infants readily develop some capacities for representing number
and geometry, children's thinking extends far beyond these capacities when they
learn school mathematics. The basic concepts and skills of arithmetic and
geometry that children learn in elementary school are critical for all
subsequent learning and practicing of mathematics and science, but their
acquisition, in relation to younger children's preexisting numerical and
geometrical concepts, is not well understood. The proposed experiments are
guided by the hypothesis that children learn school mathematics by using
symbols- both language and visual-spatial symbols such as pictures and maps- to
combine productively the early-developing numerical and spatial representations
that emerge in infancy. To test this hypothesis, the proposed experiments probe
the relationship between children's performance on tests of core numerical and
geometrical abilities and their performance on tests of symbolic arithmetic, map
reading, and abstract geometrical reasoning. Some experiments use individual
difference methods to test whether variability in children's sensitivity to core
numerical or geometric information is associated with variability in the mastery
of language or symbols or of more abstract mathematical concepts. Further
experiments use training methods to investigate whether tasks that exercise
children's core abilities or use of symbols enhance children's numerical or
geometrical reasoning in tests of school mathematics. The training experiments
probe both the existence of relationships between core and constructed
mathematical abilities and the underlying cognitive and motivational processes
that may account for these relationships. Through these investigations, the
experiments aim both to contribute to basic understanding of mathematical
cognition and to inform efforts to enhance children's mathematical learning and
reasoning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research has two complementary
goals. First, it aims to shed light on the fundamental cognitive capacities that
allow humans to develop knowledge of elementary school mathematics, especially
the abstract concepts and rules of arithmetic and Euclidean geometry. Second,
the research aims to develop better ways to aid children's learning of
mathematics, by building on basic research findings concerning the nature and
early development of reasoning in the core cognitive domains on which elementary
school mathematics may be founded. To accomplish these goals, tasks that
previously were developed as tools to probe the fundamental numerical and
geometrical abilities of infants, children, and adults in diverse cultures are
deployed both to assess patterns of variability in children's mathematical
abilities and to serve as training interventions with the potential to enhance
school math abilities. The experiments investigate not only the direct relations
between early and later developing numerical and geometrical concepts, but also
the ways in which children's developing mastery of symbols, cognitive control,
and attitudes toward learning may modulate those relations and impact on
children's learning and performance of school mathematics. Through these
laboratory experiments, the research aims to achieve a better understanding of
mature mathematical reasoning and to discover new ways to aid children's mastery
of this critical domain of knowledge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By investigating the
sources of variability in children's mathematical reasoning and the experiences
that enhance children's reasoning, the proposed research promises to contribute
to efforts both to foster all children's learning of mathematics and to aid
children who experience difficulty with learning in this domain. Because
children's learning of mathematics is affected by motivational patterns as well
as cognitive abilities, the experimental interventions aim to enhance not only
the cognitive processes underlying mathematical reasoning but also children's
attitudes towards mathematics, belief in the malleability of mathematical skills
with practice, and sense of their own competence as mathematical learners.
Because children often learn best in social contexts, the interventions aim to
create a set of training materials that children can use to play with others,
and experiments will compare these interventions to those instantiated in
individualized interactive computer-training programs. The findings of this
research should inform efforts to enhance children's learning of mathematics
both in and outside of school, for 4- to 10-year-old children at all ability
levels.