* 1348669
* Strengthening the Research Base that  Informs STEM Workforce and Curriculum Improvement Efforts
* EHR,DRL
* 11/01/2014,10/31/2018
* Heather Hill, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 10/31/2018
* USD 327,023.00

This project is funded by NSF's Research on Education and Learning (REAL)
program. REAL supports the accumulation of robust evidence to inform efforts to
understand, build theory to explain, and suggest innovations and interventions
to address persistent challenges in STEM interest, education, learning, and
participation. This project addresses a grand challenge facing contemporary STEM
education by identifying characteristics of effective teacher professional
development and curricular improvement efforts. The research will produce the
most comprehensive and rigorous synthesis to date of the causal research
evidence on this topic.

This project will accumulate evidence on the impacts of interventions intended
to improve instructional quality on preK-12th grade students' social-emotional,
behavioral, affective, and learning outcomes in mathematics and science. The
project has been designed to produce a comprehensive synthesis of research
exploring the (immediate, intermediate, and long-term) impacts of professional
development (and other) interventions intended to enhance teacher learning, and
initiatives to enhance teachers' use of novel curricular materials in the
classroom. Specifically, the researchers will build a comprehensive database of
studies will be constructed through searches of reference databases, review
articles, results of funded research projects, web-based resources, abstracts of
major STEM and general education conferences, and direct contact with
researchers, including principal investigators of NSF and U.S. Department of
Education supported studies. The database will include information on the key
moderators that likely impact the efficacy of the programs studied such as:
duration, intensity, format, grade, and disciplinary topic. The investigators
will then utilize meta-analytic techniques to synthesize findings from
methodologically rigorous studies of STEM interventions with the explicit intent
of improving mathematics and science teaching (e.g., interventions involving
professional development, curricular materials, or both).