* 1348075
* Collaborative Research: RUI: Plio-Quaternary History of Basin Evolution, Climate Change, and Fold Growth in the Qaidam Basin-Investigating Wind-enhanced Climate-Tectonic Feedback
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2014,01/31/2019
* Richard Heermance, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Whitmeyer
* 01/31/2019
* USD 187,620.00

The project aims to document acceleration in fold-growth due to increased wind
erosion within the hyperarid western Qaidam Basin, China, and thus would provide
the first example of wind-enhanced tectonics on Earth. In addition to
understanding climate-tectonic feedbacks, this project will yield multiple high-
resolution records of environmental change in the western Qaidam Basin across
the late Pliocene climate crash and onset of Northern Hemisphere glaciations.
This integrated, basin-scale dataset will provide evidence for desertification
rates resulting from this climate shift, and may be useful as an analogue for
comparable climate changes observed today. Moreover, the resultant new
stratigraphic and structural datasets will be incorporated into a geoscience lab
and made freely available via the Science Education Resource Center for
educators across the country to use as a teaching tool. The project develops
STEM workforce by training of graduate and undergraduate and the international
collaboration provides an opportunity for international research experiences for
those students. The project is supported by the Tectonics Program (Division of
Earth Sciences) and International Science and Engineering (Office of
International and Integrative Activities).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Global climate
changed to cooler, more arid conditions near the Plio-Pleistocene transition
(3.6 to 2.6 Ma), causing environmental changes worldwide. In many regions,
concurrent tectonic activity during this time period has evoked hypotheses of
climate-tectonic feedbacks, but a causal relationship between observed
depositional changes and local tectonics is difficult to quantify. One possible
mechanism for climate-enhanced tectonics includes focused erosion across fold
crests, or decreased overburden due to lake-level drop, both of which would
enhance the isostatic response of uplift. This project, in collaboration with
scientists from Lanzhou University (China) and Universite de Rennes (France),
will test the hypothesis that climate change (manifested by enhanced aridity in
central Asia) at about 3 Ma initiated episodic and spatially non-uniform wind
erosion in the western Qaidam Basin in China, which in turn led to an
acceleration and enhancement of fold growth. This research focuses on 8
stratigraphic sections spaced evenly throughout the Qaidam Basin and located on
the flanks of active anticlines and involves: measurement of detailed sections;
magnetostratigraphy; measurements of magnetic susceptibility, O and C stable
isotopes; mapping of lithofacies, bed thickness, growth strata, and
intraformational unconformities; and construction of 3-D structural models and
palinspastic kinematic restorations of the folds. Data from each fold will be
synthesized to test hypotheses that lake desiccation resulting from global
climate aridification at about 3.0 Ma facilitated wind-erosion that enhanced
fold growth on the basin floor; and that the western Qaidam Basin underwent
alternating episodes of lake-level lowstands (and wind deflation) and lake-level
highstands during Plio-Quaternary glacial and interglacial periods,
respectively, in phase with the loess-paleosol successions of the Loess Plateau
located to the east. The research project will provide basin-scale data on the
relationship between aridification and deformation, allowing a test of whether
wind erosion led to accelerated fold-growth.