* 1348066
* Quantum Mechanical Modeling of Major Mantle Materials
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Andre Mkhoyan, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 07/31/2018
* USD 805,227.00

Geophysics is currently undergoing a transformation with the integration of
three distinct modeling fields: computational mineral physics, geodynamics, and
seismic tomography. Cyberinfrastructure is enabling a leap in computational
capability and is helping to produce huge amounts of data on mineral properties
very quickly. Advances in seismic imaging of the Earth's deep interior are
providing structural information about convective and thermal patterns in the
Earth's mantle. Several fascinating structures holding keys to the nature of the
deep Earth are currently being mapped in detail. They are being interpreted
within geodynamically consistent scenarios that include detailed properties of
Earth forming minerals. Computational mineral physics, a field that evolved from
the materials simulation revolution of the late eighties and nineties, helps to
integrate these fields by contributing data on realistic mineral properties at
extreme conditions of Earth's interior. This project focuses on the synergy
between mineral physics and geodynamics. This research is establishing a new
modus operandi in geophysics research, a trans-disciplinary dialog, and a
global-scale modeling field that starts at the atomic scale. The emergence of
this modeling phenomenon illustrates what could become typical in other
scientific modeling fields, e.g., atmospheric and ocean science, astrophysics,
materials processing, biological systems, etc.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will continue a productive line of inquiry in the area of computational mineral
physics led by this team of researchers. The ultimate goals of the study is to
provide information on mineral properties that are needed to interpret seismic
tomography and bolster advanced and more refined geodynamics simulations.
Computational mineral physics, in particular, has contributed greatly to the
integration of these fields. Results from these type of modeling efforts
complement experiments by expanding the pressure and temperature range in which
properties can be obtained and offers access to atomic scale phenomena that is
sometimes suggestive of new interpretations of experimental and seismological
data. This project focuses on strengthening the synergy between computational
mineral physics and geodynamics. Sophisticated state-of-the-art quantum
mechanical simulations of minerals address key properties of Earth's solid
mantle needed to improve the realism of geodynamics simulations. Thermal
expansion, thermal conductivity, specific heat, thermodynamics phase boundaries
in mineral aggregates, all from low temperatures (~ 0 K) to near melting
temperatures can now be obtained reliably by means of high throughput
calculations distributed in the Extreme Science and Engineering Development
Environment (XSEDE). These results are to be integrated directly in simulations
to investigate Earth's current state and evolution.