* 1348115
* Conference: Increasing Participation of U.S. Students to the 9th International Conference on Micro-Manufacturing (ICOMM 2014); Singapore, 25-28 March 2014
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2013,06/30/2016
* Gracious Ngaile, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Steve Schmid
* 06/30/2016
* USD 25,000.00

The purpose of this award is to provide partial support to selected students
studying in US institutions to participate in the 9th International Conference
on Micro-Manufacturing to be held in Singapore, 25-28 March 2014. This is a
premiere global conference on micro-manufacturing which draws large attendance
of researchers and engineers each year from America, Europe, and Asia. Over one
hundred papers covering a wide range of topics pertinent to micro-manufacturing
and micro-engineering are expected to be presented at the conference. The
attending students will participate in the conference by presenting technical
papers they have authored. The funding opportunity will be broadly announced
giving students ample notice and time to apply. Applications will be reviewed by
the conference scientific committee. A total of sixteen students will be
partially supported from this award which will help offset expenses for travel,
conference registration, and lodging.

In addition to nurturing a global micro-manufacturing vision, participating
students will learn about the latest research progress and challenges in micro-
manufacturing by attending technical presentations by leading international
experts in the field. The students will also have opportunities to exchange
ideas with leading researchers and engineers from worldwide industrial and
governmental facilities, as well as the opportunity to visit companies and
laboratories involved with micro-manufacturing in Singapore.