* 1348403
* ARI: Synthesizing Conjugated Polymers with High Scintillation Light Yield
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2014
* Qibing Pei, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 09/30/2014
* USD 177,194.00

1348403 (Pei) Effective counter measures against potential radioactive and
nuclear threats call for a wide-spread deployment of sensors with high-
sensitivity isotopic identification of radiation sources. Detectors providing
gamma ray spectroscopy and neutron and gamma discrimination are keys in nuclear
sensing. This project aims to develop a new polymer scintillator that exhibits
high sensitivity comparable to inorganic crystals while maintaining an extremely
low production cost. The scintillators could be widely deployed at the nation?s
ports and large public venues to deter security threats. Current radiation
detectors are mostly based on single crystal inorganic semiconductors or
scintillators, none of which satisfy the demanding requirements of high
sensitivity, energy resolution, fieldability, and low cost. This proposal aims
at developing a fundamental approach to the synthesis of conjugated polymer
monoliths with scintillation performance comparable to inorganic single crystal
scintillators. The monoliths can be synthesized by thermosetting polymerization
in a mold at extremely low production cost. The research will investigate
conjugated compounds and polymers with large triplet energy levels as the host
material to transfer both singlet and triplet excitons to a blue phosphorescent
fluor for high scintillation light yield. Copolymerization of molten solutions
will be studied as an effective technique to synthesize bulk-size transparent
monoliths with uniform distribution of additives and negligible aggregation. The
objective of the project is to demonstrate transparent conjugated polymer
monoliths with a target light yield of 100,000/MeV, an improvement of almost 10
times that of current commercial plastic scintillators. Sensitizing agents with
high absorption cross-sections for neutron particles and gamma rays will also be
investigated for high sensitivity and neutron-gamma pulse discrimination. The
work is based on preliminary research on transparent polymer monoliths with a
measured light yield that is already 4.6 times that of a commercial plastic
scintillator. The proposed conjugated polymer scintillators with high
scintillation light yield and low production cost will open up a wide range of
new applications important to homeland security, medical imaging, and space
exploration. The research findings will be rapidly disseminated, and the
technology developed in the project is targeted to be transferred for rapid
commercialization. The project will have impact on education and mentoring of
students from high schools up to doctoral candidates. Education and training of
undergraduate and graduate students with dual specialties of materials science
and nuclear-material interactions is part of the project activities. Graduate
students and postdoctoral fellows will have the opportunity to intern in the
collaborating national labs to gain firsthand experience with radiation
detection.