* 1348063
* Generation of Subduction-Zone Magmas from Melange Diapirs
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2014,09/30/2016
* Horst Marschall, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 09/30/2016
* USD 390,509.00

On planet Earth, oceanic plates are constantly dragged down into the mantle
along destructive plate margins. This process is called "subduction" and it is
one of the fundamental manifestations of plate tectonics. Subduction zones
function as the primary transport mechanism for materials between the surface
and interior of the Earth. An understanding of chemical cycling in subduction
zones provides us with the tools to better understand the mountain-building and
magmatic processes that contribute to the global cycles of critical elements,
the formation of valuable natural resources, such as base-metal ores, and daily
hazards of subduction zones, such as earthquakes, tsunamis and
volcanoes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Traditionally, it is envisaged that fluids
expelled from the subducting oceanic plate migrate into the hot overlying
mantle, where they trigger melting and the generation of magmas that lead to the
formation of the volcanic chains that are ubiquitous along subduction zones
around the planet. These established models can explain a number of magma
compositions found in subduction-zone volcanoes. However, some magma types
observed in subduction-zone volcanoes cannot be explained by that traditional
model and require a source region that is different from the normal mantle. New
models on material transport have emerged from computer modeling, fieldwork and
geochemical studies. These new models suggest that mixing between rocks derived
from subducting oceanic crust and the overlying mantle leads to the formation of
thick layers of mixed rocks directly above the subducting plate. These mixed-
rock layers, so-called "mélanges", are predicted to buoyantly rise into the
overlying hot mantle wedge, where they start to produce significant amounts of
melt. In this project, researchers Marschall, Gaetani and Cruz-Uribe will
investigate for the first time the composition of melts produced from natural
mélange rocks under the pressure-temperature conditions prevailing in the mantle
by performing high pressure experiments in the laboratory. The melts and
minerals produced in these experiments will be characterized by modern micro-
analytical methods that are capable of determining the chemical composition of
the material very sensitively and at a very small scale. The compositions will
be compared to those of lavas erupted from subduction-zone volcanoes. Results
from this study may help to explain the formation of a larger range of
composition of volcanic rocks compared to the traditional model, and it help us
to understand the chemical and mechanical processes operating at depth that lead
to the formation of the most vigorous volcanism on the
planet.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study of the formation of arc magmas by
mélange melting in wedge diapirs will have important consequences for the entire
solid-Earth science community and thus, the results of this work will be of
interest to a broad range of scientists. This includes petrologists and
geochemists who are interested in the generation of magmas along subduction
zones, as well as geophysicists and numerical modelers with an interest in the
mechanical processes and the thermal state of subduction zones.