* 1348281
* Utilizing STEM Camps and STEM Clubs to Increase Interest in STEM Fields among Females and Students of Color
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2019
* Christa Jackson, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Chinonye Nnakwe
* 09/30/2019
* USD 749,999.00

This five-year project is a joint effort among the colleges of Education, Arts
and Sciences, and Engineering at the University of Kentucky. The goal is to
increase middle school students' interest and motivation to learn Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) content through providing
opportunities to develop identities as STEM learners and future scientists,
mathematicians, and engineers. The project focuses on examining the effect of
informal STEM learning environments on students in grades 5-8, particularly
females and students of color, by engaging them in hands-on activities provided
through summer STEM camps and academic-year STEM clubs. The model of increasing
the STEM engagement and interest in middle school students in the Fayette County
can be scaled, replicated, and adapted in other regions of Kentucky and across
the nation.

Intellectual Merit The project strengthens two existing programs: the See Blue
STEM Camp, run during summer, and the See Blue STEM Club, offered throughout the
academic year, by including the development of several hands-on activities.
Examples include Crime Scene Investigation involving analysis of chemicals and
dusting for fingerprints, model solar car designing and building, and robotics.
Pre-service teachers and engineering students at the undergraduate and graduate
levels from the University of Kentucky are also involved, contributing to and
benefiting from the summer and academic year programs. The project evaluation
includes formative and summative aspects and provides useful information on the
effectiveness of the middle school student engagement in informal STEM clubs and
camps.

Broader Impacts The project provides solid, replicable, well-tested, and
evaluated models for recruiting and conducting both a STEM Camp on a University
campus and a STEM Club in an urban community that targets diverse middle school
students. The project plans to engage over 700 middle school students, with at
least 60% being from groups underrepresented in STEM. The summer camps include
not only the students but their parents as well through social media (blog,
Twitter) and nightly emails. All curricula and instructional materials will be
made available online via Kentucky's public STEM education website so that they
may be replicated, continually modified, and sustained beyond the life of the
project. Research results will be made available through publications and
conference presentations.