* 1348513
* Collaborative Research:  SHINE:  Laboratory, Observational, and Modeling Investigations of the Torus Instability and Associated Solar Corona Eruptive Phenomena
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2017
* Haimin Wang, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Ilia Roussev
* 05/31/2017
* USD 204,006.00

This research project will extend understanding of solar corona plasmas beyond
what is possible using single approaches, such as just analyzing data, just
modeling, or just doing experiments. The cross-checking and discussion of these
different approaches will provide a robust means for getting to the heart of the
matter and finding out what is really going on. By reconciling first-principle
models, experiments, and analysis of observations, there is an excellent
prospect of achieving long-sought insights and improved understanding regarding
underlying solar eruption mechanisms. This 3-year collaborative SHINE project
would yield: (i) improved understanding of solar corona global phenomena since
eruptions impact the remainder of the solar corona by shedding magnetic energy,
magnetic helicity, and plasma particles; (ii) improved understanding of
phenomena associated with eruptions such as energetic particles and
electromagnetic radiation spanning from radio waves to gamma rays; (iii)
improved understanding of the terrestrial impact of eruptions such as the
effects on the magnetosphere and ionosphere, on radio propagation, and on
spacecraft; (iv) increased public interest in solar physics, because of the
highly visual nature of the experiments, the observations, and the numerical
modeling; and, (v) training of students in solar and plasma physics and
supporting a young female researcher. The research and EPO agenda of this
project supports the Strategic Goals of the AGS Division in discovery, learning,
diversity, and interdisciplinary research.

The main goal of this 3-year collaborative SHINE project is to combine
laboratory experiments, analysis of data from actual solar eruptions, and
numerical modeling of the fundamental magnetohydrodynamics (MHD). Laboratory
plasmas having morphology and dynamics similar to solar plasmas will be studied
by at Caltech. This study is feasible because MHD has no intrinsic scale so MHD
laboratory plasmas having dimensionless numbers and morphology similar to the
solar corona will exhibit similar behavior, but on much different temporal and
spatial scales. The analysis of actual solar eruptions and CME kinematics will
be performed at the New Jersey Institute of Technology. This analysis will focus
on the magnetic field structural properties in and above the source regions of
eruptions. The analysis will apply non-linear force-free extrapolations based on
magnetogram data obtained from spacecraft, such as Hinode and SDO, so as to
calculate the strapping field profile as a function of altitude and core
magnetic field. The dependence of CME acceleration profile and final speed on
the decay index will be analyzed and compared to the experiments and to the
numerical models developed at Predictive Science Inc. The project team will
compare numerical predictions to both the laboratory experiments and the solar
eruption analysis. This comparison will take into account both the strapping
field decay index and morphological changes of erupting flux ropes due to
kinking.