* 1348557
* Collaborative Research: STEM Education Effects on a Diverse Workforce's Development over the Life Cycle
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2018
* John Warren, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 09/30/2018
* USD 257,245.00

This collaborative study is investigating how the STEM skills and training that
individuals from underrepresented groups acquired during high school and
postsecondary education have contributed to their STEM workforce success and the
types of occupations they now enjoy in midlife. It is uses the High School &amp;
Beyond (HS&amp;B) database, a nationally representative study of high school
sophomores from 1980. HS&amp;B contains a large sample of African Americans and
Latinos, women, and people with disabilities, including those who earned
postsecondary degrees, to provide information about how our education system has
and can prepare diverse students to fully participate in a complex and rapidly
changing workforce, even during middle and later adulthood.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has the following three aims:&lt;br/&gt;1.
Identifying the aspects of STEM training in schools, from specific coursework to
degree attainment and field of degree, that contribute to workforce success and
flexibility during early adulthood and in later midlife work.
&lt;br/&gt;Research Question: Which STEM skills and training have high labor
market value in (i) early and (ii) middle to late
careers?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. Analyzing whether the relationship between STEM
training and workforce success is the same for all workers, and if not, how it
differs for women and men, African Americans, Latinos, and Whites, and for
persons with and without disabilities.&lt;br/&gt;Research Question: Do the
relationships between skills and the labor market generalize to underrepresented
groups?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. Producing a database, that will be released
through NCES, on HS&amp;B sample members' occupations that can be used by the
broader research community to generate new knowledge on workforce development
and broadening participation in STEM.