* 1348497
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Sign language development and socialization in a Chatino village
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2014,07/31/2016
* Lynn Hou, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 07/31/2016
* USD 15,107.00

Science rarely has the opportunity to study a new language that is in the
process of emerging de novo; the study of certain signed languages has provided
this opportunity. The emergence of a new language may be crucially dependent on
children, as suggested by research on Nicaraguan Sign Language. This project
investigates deaf and hearing children who are acquiring -- and perhaps
developing -- a young sign language, Chatino Sign Language, that has
spontaneously emerged out of a constellation of home sign systems in an
indigenous Mesoamerican community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Working under the
supervision of Dr. Richard P. Meier and Dr. Angela Nonaka, doctoral student Lynn
Hou will conduct ethnographic fieldwork in two neighboring Chatino villages, San
Juan Quiahije and Cieneguilla, in the Sierra Madre mountains of southwestern
Oaxaca in Mexico. Ms. Hou will examine the language-learning environments of
four deaf children of hearing families and four hearing children of mixed deaf-
hearing families through a three-pronged methodology that combines language
acquisition and language socialization approaches: (1) videotaped, longitudinal
participant observation of linguistic, communicative, and interactive practices
between children and their families as they go about their daily lives; (2)
semi-structured lexical elicitation tasks using culturally appropriate visual
stimuli; and (3) extended interviews about the families' beliefs, attitudes, and
knowledge about child-rearing, language and cognitive development, deafness,
signed and spoken languages, and education. Qualitative and quantitative
analyses will describe each child's language-learning environment to show what
kind of input the child is receiving and the context in which the input is
embedded, and what output the child is producing. Furthermore, analyses will
compare the lexical variation within and between the families in order to
ascertain whether there is a shared lexicon across these families.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is the first study of an emergent sign language that
will pay close attention to naturalistic observations of children and their
interactants (whether children or adults). Studying deaf and hearing children's
use and acquisition of Chatino Sign Language will shed new insight on how
communicative practices in a rural signing community can facilitate the
emergence and maintenance of a new sign language.