* 1348382
* Framing the Chemistry Curriculum
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2019
* Johnny Jones, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Chinonye Nnakwe
* 09/30/2019
* USD 749,285.00

The project, "Framing the Chemistry Curriculum," led by the University of
Nebraska-Lincoln, plans to develop a sustainable two-semester chemistry course
sequence at Nebraska Indian Community College (NICC, a tribal college). The
course is being designed to be relevant to American Indians by including
culturally rich examples and real-life applications. Possible topics include
water and wastewater treatment, Missouri River water quality, organic farming,
alternative energy, ethnobotany, honey bee colony collapse disorder, and Type 2
diabetes. These topics are being developed into case studies, the findings of
which will be disseminated at faculty workshops and enrollment campaigns.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;American Indian students are
underrepresented in all STEM fields. This proposal addresses an opportunity and
a need to create an introductory chemistry course sequence at NICC, to be
disseminated to other tribal colleges, including nearby Little Priest Tribal
College (LPTC). Science education studies have shown that science courses are
made relevant to American Indian students through the inclusion of culturally
rich examples. To do this for chemistry, the project team is developing case
studies based on community topics, each of which is linked to specific
laboratory methods or measurements. The laboratory experiences are modular for
use in a variety of courses. This project advances and improves current STEM
education practices at tribal colleges by developing a sustainable process that
involves community engagement. Students learn how to connect topics of interest
to the community to curricular materials by way of a partnership that involves
community leaders, college faculty, college students, and community outreach.
This facilitates student learning and deepens existing Native American student
knowledge and engagement in STEM fields. The resulting materials and practices
are applicable to all educators seeking to increase participation of
underrepresented STEM groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;This project promotes STEM learning by Native American
students, as well as learning about chemistry instruction by studying these
students? attitudes toward continued enrollment in chemistry courses. The
process for making deep connections between community-relevant topics and
laboratory exercises shows how to connect the mission of community colleges to
the sciences in a way that attracts and retains individuals from other
underrepresented groups to STEM education - leading to more students pursuing
higher education in STEM fields and a more diverse and stronger STEM workforce.
The results of the methodology and assessment lead to measurable outcomes that
are used to inform others through local outreach, publications in tribal college
and science education literature, and presentations