* 1348368
* STEM-IQ: Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics Inquiry- Enhancing Science Education in Southeast Alabama
* O/D,OIA
* 03/15/2014,07/31/2020
* Mary Lou Ewald, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 07/31/2020
* USD 742,711.00

This project tests the extent to which science fair participation addresses the
opportunity gaps that limit STEM pipeline diversity, such as access to
educational opportunities, exposure to career possibilities, quality of
educational programs, and institutional and personal competitiveness. It focuses
on advancing secondary school teachers' motivation and ability to lead their
students in science fair projects, and develop a long-term appreciation for the
effectiveness of inquiry-based learning. The five-year program targets rural,
high-need schools, and economically disadvantaged students from underrepresented
minority (URM) groups. The high quality, competitive, inquiry-based science fair
projects lead students through a strong STEM pipeline leading to increased
participation in higher education and potentially STEM
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The project goals are
to: (1) establish a network of STEM teachers and area administrators that pro-
actively engage students in project-based learning and give them access to
university resources and guidance to empower inquiry-based STEM learning; (2)
increase the number of students from underrepresented groups in rural Alabama
that participate in high-quality science fair projects; (3) develop a
sustainable relationship between Auburn University and local public schools for
continued growth beyond the scope of the project; and (4) increase positive
student attitudes towards STEM through exposure to higher education, career
options, and interactions with university research mentors. To accomplish these
goals, the project leadership engages middle and high school teachers and
administrators from vertically aligned schools (e.g., a middle school that feeds
into a specific high school) in professional development workshops that focus on
science and engineering fair project development and hosting local science fair
competitions. Teachers and students develop high-quality science fair projects
using university laboratories and faculty guidance. Trained teachers and
administrators become agents of expanding the network and establishing a STEM
culture in their schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The
project leverages Auburn University?s College of Sciences and Mathematics
Outreach Center activities to establish partnerships between Auburn University
science and engineering faculty and high-need public schools in southeast
Alabama. Over 720 students, 48 science teachers, and 12 administrators from 34
school districts are gaining access to Auburn University research facilities and
faculty expertise in developing high-quality science fair projects. The program
promotes a culture of project-based STEM learning and positive STEM identity
among students who might not consider STEM higher education as an option. The
model of university and local school system interaction to enhance URM interest
and engagement in STEM higher education can be scaled and replicated nationwide.