* 1348352
* Ecosystem Computing Challenge: Partnership Model to Build Access to Relevant Computing Education for Underrepresented High School Students
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2018
* Kevin Gardner, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Chinonye Nnakwe
* 09/30/2018
* USD 750,000.00

This project is built on the premise that computer science courses offered at
high schools should not be merely about computer literacy but must include
essential computing concepts and computational practices set in the context of
applications of interest to diverse learners. The project team plans to develop
a curriculum and program of teacher professional development designed to engage
high school teachers and students in rigorous computing methods. The program
targets students underrepresented in computing -- women, underrepresented
minorities (African Americans, Hispanics, and American Indians), and students in
underserved rural regions of New Hampshire (NH).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The program provides
professional development and teaching resources for high school teachers from
Career and Technology Education (CTE) centers and an out-of-school program for
high school students offered through Cooperative Extension at the University of
New Hampshire (UNH). The project team builds on the existing collaborations
among UNH Cooperative Extension, NH CTE centers, and NH Experimental Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR) Research Infrastructure Improvement
(RII) Track-1 project, UNH's Teacher Education and Computing Technology
Programs, and local industry partners. The program includes development of
applications for Android mobile devices and projects related to environmental
science and ecosystem research that involve large datasets. Course materials are
being adapted from the Exploring Computer Science curriculum which was piloted
in 2008-2009 in the Los Angeles Unified School District and later adopted by
other places. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The five-year
project will engage four Extension educators, twenty-two teachers from sixteen
CTE centers and four hundred and twenty students through programs offered
throughout the academic year and summer sessions. The CTE centers and summer
school sites selected for this project are in NH's urban and diverse, rural, and
low-income regions. An openly licensed repository of curriculum and teaching
resources will be created and disseminated to students, teachers, and project
collaborators including industry partners. The model of preparing the teachers
and working with the community partners to empower underrepresented minority
groups in computing is scalable, transferrable, and replicable at other
institutions nationwide.