* 1348614
* Embodied Physics Learning
* EDU,DUE
* 12/15/2013,11/30/2018
* Susan Fischer, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 11/30/2018
* USD 810,394.00

The goal of this EHR Core Research project, focused on the area of STEM
learning, is to use cognitive science theories of embodied cognition to enhance
student learning in physics. A central hypothesis being investigated is that
providing students with direct experience with physics quantities (e.g., feeling
the mass distribution in an extended object through balancing techniques
designed to locate an object's center of gravity (COG)), as opposed to reading
about the concepts in a textbook or using more traditional hands-on activities
(e.g., hanging weights from an extended object to visually determine an object's
COG), enhances learning. Laboratory experiences where students feel physics
quantities may lead to the recruitment of brain areas devoted to sensorimotor
processing when students later think and reason about the physics concepts they
experienced. When these sensorimotor areas are involved in thinking and
reasoning, people's understanding of the concepts in question may improve. In
the cognitive science laboratory, experiments 1-4 investigate whether and how
direct engagement with physical objects through balancing activities can promote
the conceptualization of extended objects as discrete components, thus enhancing
students' ability to locate a system's COG. Experiments 5, 6, 8, &amp; 9 move to
the physics classroom to explore how sensorimotor experience may relate to
understanding the COG topic and ameliorate common misconceptions, and to
determine the optimal time (relative to lecture) for sensorimotor experience.
Experiment 7 explores the cognitive and neural substrates driving the link
between experience and understanding using a functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI) paradigm. Overall, this work seeks to uncover how and why certain
laboratory experiences are effective, facilitating the design of easy-to-
implement guidelines that educators can use in their own courses to enhance
student learning.