* 1348920
* CSBR:  Natural History: Expansion of the New York Botanical Garden Herbarium to Incorporate Newly Acquired Specimens and Improve Curation
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2018
* Barbara Thiers, New York Botanical Garden
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 05/31/2018
* USD 479,475.00

This project will allow the expansion of The William and Lynda Steere Herbarium
of the New York Botanical Garden (NYBG) in order to accommodate an additional
160,000 specimens of algae, fungi and palms. The New York Botanical Garden
Herbarium is a National Systematics Research Resource Center containing
approximately 7.3 million reference specimens of plants and fungi. It is the
largest of the approximately 650 herbaria in the U.S. Herbarium specimens hold
data that researchers use to re-create past landscapes and predict how
vegetation will change over time. Specimens also contain nearly limitless
information about the genetic makeup of organisms, their reproductive patterns,
their adaptations for different types of habitats, and their relationships to
other organisms. All of these data are urgently needed to contribute to the
solutions to four key societal needs, namely sustainable food production,
ecosystem restoration, biofuel production and improvement in human health.
Solutions to these problems will require integration of as wide a range of
biodiversity data as possible, along with information from earth and social
sciences. The algae, bryophytes, fungi and palms are all under-studied groups
with demonstrated but incompletely documented ecological and economic
importance. Approximately 12 college students or recent graduates, hired as
interns, will make up the largest proportion of the paid work force for this
project, providing an important bridge activity between college and graduate
school or career for these young adults. Additionally, members of the public
will be invited to participate in this project by transcribing the labels of
digitized specimens using on-line crowd sourcing applications. Especially
targeted for this activity are formerly incarcerated citizens who are seeking
re-entry into the workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Throughout its 120 years of
existence the NYBG Herbarium has grown steadily through collections made by
staff members and collaborators, exchange, and incorporation of orphaned
herbaria. This is one of the most frequently consulted herbaria in the world.
During the past five years, more than 117,000 specimens have been sent on loan,
visitors have spent 12,616 days using the collection, and NYBG Herbarium
specimens have been cited in at least 1,200 publications. Eleven years after
moving into a new herbarium building that was designed for 20 years of growth,
the space allotted for collections of algae, bryophytes, fungi and palms is now
insufficient for proper storage of these resources due to unexpected growth
(algae, bryophytes and fungi) and inadequate shelving (palms). In order to
accomplish the goal of housing all specimens according to accepted best
practices and making the specimens and data derived from them available to the
scientific community, this project will create an additional 2,798 cubbyholes of
herbarium storage space by replacing 34 open shelving units with extra tall
herbarium cabinets on existing compactors on the first floor of the herbarium
building. This space will be sufficient to accommodate the specimens that cannot
currently be filed and allow for five years of future growth. As part of the
relocation of specimens into the new space, the curation of specimens will be
improved and 92,000 specimens will be digitized. More information about NYBG and
its outreach programs is available at: http://www.nybg.org.