* 1348150
* The time course of speech perception and production in individual language users
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2018
* Patrice Beddor, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 12/31/2018
* USD 389,320.00

Clarifying the highly complex dynamic processes that underlie the production and
perception of speech is critical both to our understanding of human language
processing and to improvements in technologies for computer-mediated
communication. Speakers must fluently coordinate the actions of multiple vocal
organs (such as the lips, tongue, and jaw) to produce the overlapping movements
necessary for smooth and rapid speech. In deriving meaning from the resulting
acoustic signal, listeners must attend to the changing acoustic properties as
they evolve over time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the support of the National
Science Foundation, Dr. Beddor and Dr. Coetzee are studying the relation between
the dynamics of spoken language production and perception. Previous research has
found that speakers differ from each other in their precise patterns of
articulatory coordination, and that listeners differ in their sensitivity to
those variable coarticulated patterns in deciding what a speaker has said. This
project investigates whether there is a link between a listener's use of
coarticulatory information in perception and that language user's own
coarticulated productions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Guided by the hypothesis that
the relation between a language user's perception and production is mediated by
social, cognitive, and other factors, a series of experiments tests both
socially neutral and socially indexed patterns of articulatory coordination.
These experiments also test language users' perceptual awareness of, and
articulatory accommodation to, new patterns of coordination. Listeners' real-
time processing of the acoustic signal is monitored using eye-tracking methods;
the time course of production is assessed via airflow, ultrasound imaging, and
acoustic analysis. The project will gather data on the production and perception
of America English and Afrikaans. The Afrikaans work will broaden empirical
coverage of a phonetically understudied language and will extend collaboration
with South African researchers. An overarching goal of studying the production-
perception relation in individual language users is to understand how linguistic
structures are represented in the human mind. Elucidating this relation in its
social context should also contribute to an understanding of how individual
differences in these structures might serve as a source of new sound patterns
that spread through a speech community.