* 1348903
* Collaborative Research: Cyberlearning at Community Colleges (C3): Faculty Scholarship, E-science, and Open Curriculum
* EHR,DUE
* 08/31/2012,10/31/2013
* John Jungck, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 10/31/2013
* USD 25,650.00

Biological Sciences (61)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is
to provide structured professional development opportunities that engage
undergraduate biology faculty in exploring contemporary teaching practices.
Biology, microbiology, anatomy and physiology faculty participate in twelve
workshops emphasizing collaborative curriculum development and in project-based
online group work. Professional development activities are built around the
effective use of existing and publicly accessible digital library materials;
networked computing and communications technologies; and E-science
resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project, conducted jointly by the
University of Pittsburg and Beloit College, engages biology faculty in
cyberlearning experiences and prepares them to help their students take
advantage of cyberlearning opportunities. This work provides insights into the
ways that science educators take advantage of new knowledge-sharing tools to
make their own learning accessible, and how enhancing the collective
understanding in professional teaching communities informs the use of these same
tools in classrooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses challenges
faced by community college science educators by helping biology faculty enhance
science teaching and learning by effectively using publicly available materials
and tools. By partnering with teaching societies and digital libraries that
actively reach out to two-year faculty the project has access to workshop
attendees and large numbers of teachers who participate in online faculty
development projects.