* 1348883
* EAGER: High Performance Silicon based Terahertz Front End Circuits for Chip-to-Chip Interconnect
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Omeed Momeni, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 08/31/2017
* USD 299,272.00

EAGER: High Performance Silicon based Terahertz Front End Circuits for Chip-to-
Chip Interconnect &lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The
objective of this EAGER proposal is to investigate silicon based terahertz front
end circuit design techniques, which will eventually lead to THz interconnects
and solve the long-standing interconnect issue. The Chip-to-chip interconnect
gap, which is between the ever-increasing bandwidth requirement and the limited
number of I/O pins, has been a bottleneck for computer and embedded systems over
decades and is getting more and more challenging with the increase of processing
speed in advanced technologies. The THz spectrum holds great promise in the
chip-to-chip interconnect area due to its ultra-wide bandwidth to support
aggregate data rates orders of magnitude higher than existing interconnect
capabilities. As the mainstream technologies for computer and embedded systems,
silicon processes are the right technologies. However, the disadvantages of
silicon processes, such as low supply voltages, large losses, and low cut-off
frequencies, demand new design ideas to overcome these shortages. Therefore,
this project will investigate two enabling techniques: (1) LO injected Schottky
barrier diode (SBD) based mixing with high efficiency regenerative amplification
receiving front end design, successfully demonstrated regenerative receiving
structure; and (2) high power THz transmitter front end circuits, based on the
proven high power generation scheme based on optimum signal conditions and low
loss varactor-based modulation method. The circuit design techniques and
methodologies are transformative, which can also apply to other high frequency
circuits and systems in different processes.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The
success of silicon based THz front end circuits will eventually lead to THz
interconnects, providing orders-of-magnitude better interconnect bandwidth
density to address the bottleneck problem from interconnects. Therefore, it will
support new computer architecture to meet the fast increasing data rate
requirement in BIG DATA era. Furthermore, the successful technology developments
will also open tremendous opportunities for a wide variety of important other
THz applications by advancing THz technologies with high power, low noise and
small form factors. For instance, it can enable portable THz devices for THz
medical diagnosis for early disease detection; it can advance pharmaceutical and
drug development through THz monitoring devices. These applications will not
only advance scientific research, but also greatly benefit our daily lives and
societies. The research results will be widely disseminated through
international conferences and high impact journals. Both PIs are committed to
engaging and retaining students from under-represented groups into engineering
areas and will further extend outreach to local K-12 school students.