* 1348468
* Collaborative Research: Studying the Malleability and Impact of Science Learning Activation
* EDU,DRL
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2019
* Christian Schunn, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 03/31/2019
* USD 729,585.00

This project, conducted by the University of Pittsburgh and the University of
California, Berkeley, seeks to discover what makes middle school students
engaged in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM). The
researchers have developed a concept known as science learning activation,
including dispositions, practices, and knowledge leading to successful STEM
learning and engagement. The project is intended to develop and validate a
method of measuring science learning activation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first
stage of the project involves developing the questions to measure science
activation, with up to 300 8th graders participating. The second stage is a
16-month longitudinal study of approximately 500 6th and 8th graders, examining
how science learning activation changes over time. The key question is what are
the influencers on science activation, e.g., student background, classroom
activities, and outside activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses
important past research showing that middle school interest in STEM is
predictive of actually completing a STEM degree, suggesting that experiences in
middle school and even earlier may be crucial to developing interest in STEM.
This research goes beyond past work to find out what are the factors leading to
STEM interest in middle school.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work helps the
Education and Human Resources directorate, and the Division of Research on
Learning, pursue the mission of supporting STEM education research. In
particular, this project focuses on improving STEM learning, as well as
broadening participation in STEM education and ultimately the STEM workforce.