* 1348958
* Meeting: Keystone Symposia on "Plant Signaling: Dynamic Properties" to be held in Breckenridge, CO from February 5-10, 2014
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2014,02/28/2015
* David Woodland, Keystone Symposia on Molecular and Cellular Biology
* Standard Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 02/28/2015
* USD 10,800.00

The Keystone Symposia Conference on "Plant Signaling: Dynamic Properties" will
focus on the relationship between signaling events at the molecular level and
their higher order behavior, e.g. the integrated response of the cell or
organism. The properties of signaling systems will be compared in diverse
organisms, including non-plant examples, emphasizing interdisciplinary
approaches that include mathematics, computation and synthetic biology. This
conference has the goals of 1) fostering a community of researchers interested
in elucidating the emergent properties of plant signaling behaviors 2) helping
develop the vocabulary and concepts necessary to understand emergent signaling
behaviors 3) providing a forum for discussion of the future directions of this
field, particularly with respect to its predictive power and translational
potential and 4) generating an interactive forum that engages new investigators
and provides opportunities to highlight their research. Broader Impacts. This
conference will acquaint new trainees and investigators with recent developments
in the field, and provide opportunities to present their research and interact
with leading investigators. The conference will broaden participation (including
by members of underrepresented groups) in this emerging field of research. This
award is supported jointly by the Divisions of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences (Cellular Dynamics and Function Cluster) and Integrative Organismal
Systems (Symbiosis, Defense and Self-Recognition Program)