* 1348413
* The Modern Blanket Toss: Engaging Underserved Students in STEM Fields through Unmanned Aerial Vehicles
* O/D,OIA
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2017
* John Monahan, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Chinonye Nnakwe
* 12/31/2017
* USD 750,000.00

The project, "The Modern Blanket Toss," refers to a Native American blanket
toss, in which an Eskimo Indian is bounced upward from a blanket held tautly by
a group of other Eskimos in order to allow the central Eskimo to scout the
environment. The blanket serves as a trampoline to allow the scout to gain
greater knowledge of the environment. Implemented as a metaphor in this project,
the Modern Blanket Toss is the use of an unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) as a tool
to help young Alaskan Natives gain an understanding of their environment and to
further their knowledge of science, technology, engineering and mathematics
(STEM). The project serves rural populations and Alaskan Natives through the use
of technology that can directly improve Alaskans? awareness of their environment
and its changes: UAVs and geographic information systems (GIS) technology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The project aims is to
demonstrate a three-part program of science education built around cutting-edge
STEM technologies, science communication and leadership skills, and community
involvement. Its goal is to better expose rural and Alaskan Native students to
STEM careers, prepare them for higher education, and enable them to contribute
to their communities. The project is based on current educational research
demonstrating the need to integrate traditional classroom instruction with
activities designed to turn knowledge into action. The program combines
cybertechnology, small-group and hands-on instruction, and innovative concepts
of community engagement. The project partners with Upward Bound, a US Department
of Education program with the proven ability to propel high school students into
college, and leverages that success to focus on the specific goal of increasing
student interest in STEM majors and careers. The project also includes teacher
professional development for rural high school teachers. A thorough evaluation
ensures that results from the program are tracked with scientific rigor. Given
Alaska?s pressing need for mapping and environmental monitoring, engaging high
school students in UAV projects significantly increased the state?s GIS datasets
as the students themselves move into STEM careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The Modern Blanket Toss project is designed to directly
improve the 60 participating students' interest in STEM fields, expanding their
horizons like the ancient Inuit practice from which the project draws its name.
It is also transferable and scalable for broad application in Upward Bound
programs across the US. A key product is a curriculum and video series detailing
the program's strategies to increase STEM engagement in underserved populations.
Though these products address programs that focus on UAVs, they can potentially
encompass a much broader educational strategy in which any number of science
activities could substitute for UAV education. Results are to be widely
disseminated through both Alaska's Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (EPSCoR) network and Upward Bound media and events, including a
national workshop held at the conclusion of the award period.