* 1348152
* EAGER: Hierarchical Topic Modeling by Nonnegative Matrix Factorization for Interactive Multi-scale Analysis of Text Data
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2017
* Haesun Park, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2017
* USD 175,000.00

EAGER: Hierarchical Topic Modeling by Nonnegative Matrix Factorization for
Interactive Multi-scale Analysis of Text Data

Nonnegative matrix factorization (NMF) has proven to be an important tool of
choice for numerous data analytic problems in text, imaging, and computer
vision. It provides advanced mathematical methods for improvements in
dimensionality reduction, clustering, etc. A distinguishing feature of the NMF
is the requirement of non-negativity in the factors that represent the matrix in
a lower rank. This property greatly enhances the interpretability and modeling
capability for many applications, where preserving non-negativity is important.
This project is studying foundational properties of the NMF, producing new
algorithmic methods using the framework of NMF for efficient and effective
hierarchical clustering and topic modeling of large scale text data for multi-
scale analysis, generating labels for the topics, and interactive analysis. In
addition, an interactive visual analytic system for the proposed methods is
being developed to make these theoretical and algorithmic discoveries readily
available to the research and applications communities. New multi-scale
hierarchical methods for generating clusters and discovering topics in the
documents and detection of topic changes over time are being explored to enable
computationally efficient and perceptually effective ways of exploring text data
and discovering latent group structure. Visual analytic systems are also being
developed based on this foundational work to enable more effective and informed
discovery of topics in a large-scale document collection.

This project will have a significant impact on the analysis and development of
NMF algorithms and new modeling of problems for applications utilizing the NMF
(e.g., 'Big Data'). The project is yielding effective computational methods with
solid analysis that will enhance the analysis of high-dimensional data in broad
areas of science, engineering, medicine, and business disciplines beyond the
application areas being considered within this project.