* 1348451
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: When is Phonetic Variation Helpful for Word Learning?
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2014,03/31/2016
* LouAnn Gerken, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 03/31/2016
* USD 2,305.00

When we listen to someone speaking sentences in our language, each word seems as
clearly identifiable as a familiar face in a crowd. But in fact, each time we
hear a particular word spoken, it is acoustically different from the last time
we heard it spoken. Different talkers, different rates of speech, and different
emotional states all affect the specific acoustic form that a word takes.
Experienced language users have no trouble overcoming this variability in the
acoustic manifestation of words, but people who are still learning the language
- young children and second language learners - struggle. Thus, uniquely
identifying particular words from a highly variable acoustic signal is a skill
that must be mastered through experience for each language learned. The main
goal of this research is to explore one factor that might contribute to that
mastery. A secondary question is how words are represented in the mind so as to
allow both rapid identification from the acoustic signal and rapid production.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding when input from multiple talkers is helpful
for learning new words will address the broader question of how people learn to
perceive and produce words, a crucial task in learning a first or second
language. Additionally, the way that speech perception and production are
related has been a long-standing issue in phonetics as well as in language
development. There is usually agreement that the knowledge about how to perceive
a word influences knowledge about how to produce that word. However, there is
much disagreement as to whether there is a single representation that is used
for both perceiving a word and producing a word, or whether there are two
different, but related representations. If there is a difference between
perception and production in terms of benefit from multiple talkers, we will
have evidence for different representations for perception and production, at
least when a word is newly learned. A more nuanced understanding of the benefit
of multiple talkers may inform methods for second language learning. More
broadly, it may also shed light on how language is represented in the human
mind.