* 1348003
* What Causes UHT Metamorphism: Lengthscales and Timescales
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2014,02/28/2019
* Andrew Kylander-Clark, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 02/28/2019
* USD 304,644.00

Crustal rocks that have undergone regional metamorphism at temperatures greater
than 900°C are thought provoking; explaining how such high temperatures are
attained in the crust is challenging. Central to developing a cogent explanation
is quantifying the spatial and temporal scales over which such high temperature
prevailed: short spatial and temporal scales imply localized plutonism or fluid
flow, whereas long scales indicate larger scale processes. Southern Madagascar
represents a key place for studying ultrahigh-temperature metamorphism. There
are, however, two key pieces of information missing from our understanding of
this otherwise excellent study area: a quantification of how peak temperature
varied with depth and with position at a specific depth, and a quantification of
how temperature evolved with time. Three endmember hypotheses for the cause of
ultrahigh-temperature metamorphism--subduction beneath an arc, collisional
thickening and plutonism, and extreme collisional thickening--will be tested
using relatively new techniques: titanium-in-zircon, titanium-in-quartz, and
zirconium-in-rutile thermometry and pseudosection modeling, in conjunction with
laser-ablation split-stream uranium/thorium-lead dates and trace elements of
monazite and zircon.

Because Southern Madagascar is an archetypal example of exceptionally hot crust,
ideas developed there can be applied globally. This proposal is targeted toward
understanding how exceptionally hot crust develops, but it will also impact the
following questions: What processes are active today beneath hot collision
orogens such as Tibet? How do the rheology, topographic, density, and
composition of Earth?s crust evolve during collisions? What role did Madagascar
play in the evolution of the East African-Antarctica Orogen? These topics are of
cross-disciplinary interest in tectonics, petrology, geochronology, geodynamics,
geodesy and geophysics.

This project brings together scientists from the U.S., Madagascar, Australia,
and France. The PIs will interact closely and serve as mentors to each other's
students. This provides cross-cultural experiences that ensure that the
collaborative impact of this project will be long lasting. This project will
provide training and research opportunities for an NSF Graduate Fellow, several
undergraduates, and enable us to will continue visiting local elementary schools
to expose potential future scientists to Earth science. Continued development of
our laser-ablation split-stream technique will benefit the broad range of
visitors to our laboratory, the development of laser-ablation systems, and the
development of inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometers.