* 1348564
* Scaffolding Mastery Motivation: Testing a Theoretical Model of Teacher Practice and Preschoolers' Mathematics Learning
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2014,02/28/2019
* Kristen Reed, Education Development Center
* Standard Grant
* Ferdinand Rivera
* 02/28/2019
* USD 1,627,772.00

This project testing a theoretical model of child development that examines the
relation of a preschool teacher intervention to children's mathematics learning.
Specifically, the project investigates a two-step causal model that examines one
aspect of children's school readiness skills "mastery motivation" as a mediating
variable of teacher practice to children's mathematics learning. Mastery
motivation is a child's independent persistence to accomplish moderately
challenging tasks, which has been found to be both a key individual difference
variable and a malleable factor. The project's central hypothesis is that a
teacher professional development intervention that (1) shows teachers how to
pose challenging mathematics activities; (2) supports teachers in scaffolding
mastery motivation (persistence); and (3) changes teachers' beliefs about
learning will influence children's mastery motivation and mathematics learning.
The sample includes approximately 60 preschool teachers and 600 low-income
children in Head Start centers. The study contributes to knowledge about the
malleable classroom factors that influence at-risk preschool children's
readiness to engage successfully in elementary mathematics as articulated in the
Common Core State Standards for Mathematics (CCSSM).&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
CCSSM define a challenging set of expectations for elementary students. The
Content Standards delineate for each grade the mathematical content students are
expected to know and understand. The Standards for Mathematical Practice (SMP)
are quite different, addressing the mathematical thinking and habits of mind
that children should develop across content areas and across grade levels. SMP1
directly relates to mastery motivation: to make sense of problems and to
persevere in solving them. However, meeting the increased expectations of the
CCSSM will be particularly difficult for children who enter kindergarten
underprepared. Research has shown that early mathematics understanding
significantly predicts school achievement, and children from low-income
backgrounds achieve at a much lower level than others. Understanding that
mastery motivation, or the ability to persist at challenging tasks, is a habit
of mind emphasized by CCSSM and a key school readiness skill may encourage
teachers to adapt their instructional practices to promote this aspect of
children's development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Typically, preschool teachers do
not teach mathematics and often feel uncomfortable with how to do so in a
developmentally appropriate way. By showing teachers how to play challenging
mathematics games with children and giving teachers skills to scaffold
persistence, this project provides support for teaching mathematics in a fun,
appropriate, and challenging way. The games are adapted from the kindergarten
activities in the Think Math!Â©2008 elementary mathematics curriculum developed
at EDC and engage children in problem-solving, puzzling, and discussing
strategies as they play. This work expands the research foundation in STEM
learning, integrating two theoretical frameworks from developmental psychology:
mastery motivation and beliefs about learning into mathematics education
research. Understanding the malleable factors that influence children's learning
is important for practitioners and policymakers who are considering ways to help
at-risk preschoolers' mathematics development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While this
study investigates mastery motivation as a foundation for mathematics learning,
mastery motivation is also related to general academic and school success
indicators; therefore, the results are of even broader interest in the field.
Moreover, the results may suggest that interventions that enhance instructional
practices in preschool would be an important line of investigation, could be of
particular value in closing the school readiness gap for low-income children,
and better prepare all children to meet the increased expectations of the CCSSM.