* 1348899
* RUI: Disclosing concealable stigmatized identities: An analysis of intraindividual and sociocultural factors predicting stress reactivity and well-being
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2014,12/31/2017
* Stephenie Chaudoir, College of the Holy Cross
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 12/31/2017
* USD 181,831.00

Stigmatized individuals experience some of the most formidable health
disparities in American society, and prevailing views suggest that these
disparities are attributable in part to discrimination. However, growing
evidence suggests that individuals living with stigmas that are largely
concealable - and who are largely shielded from direct discrimination - also
experience similar disparities. The current project examines the possibility
that the stress of interpersonal disclosure, a recurrent and unique stressor
among people living with concealable stigmatized identities (i.e., socially
devalued attributes that cannot readily be seen) may be a primary pathway by
which concealable stigmas affect psychological and physical health.
Specifically, this research tests whether interpersonal disclosure is stressful
and whether individuals' chronic fears of stigmatization and the surrounding
community's prejudice exacerbate these stress effects and downstream
psychological and physical health.

The proposed research will significantly advance the study of individuals living
with concealable stigmatized identities, which, as a whole, constitute an
understudied population of Americans. This knowledge has the potential to inform
intervention and programmatic efforts designed to help individuals living with
concealable stigmatized identities to buffer themselves against the effects of
social devaluation; policy makers and community stakeholders in their efforts to
reduce prejudice; and public health practitioners in their goals to reduce
health disparities. As such, the proposed research has the potential to aid in
reaching the NSF and U.S. Department of Health and Human Services' goal of
identifying and ameliorating the psychosocial factors that contribute to health
disparities. Research activities outlined in this proposal will also
substantially transform the training environment for many of the country's
future medical providers and social scientists by providing experiential
research and learning opportunities that demonstrates the complex
biopsychosocial processes that could affect downstream health disparities.