* 1348964
* Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement Grant: Morphosyntactic Development in a Second Language: An eye tracking study of the role of attention
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2014,08/31/2015
* Kara Short, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 08/31/2015
* USD 7,045.00

Understanding the factors that influence language acquisition--not only in the
case of a learner's first (or native) language, but also in the case of second
language acquisition--is an important goal of research on human language and
communication. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Learning a second language is arguably one
of the most complex learning tasks for the adult mind and results in great
variability in attainment of the second language, particularly for grammar. One
cognitive factor that may account for this variability is attention. It has been
widely assumed, under both theoretical and applied perspectives on second
language learning, that attention to grammatical forms leads to acquisition of
those forms. However, there is scant direct empirical evidence to support this
claim in the field. In contrast, research in the field of cognitive science has
produced ample evidence that suggests that attention is crucial for various
types of cognitive operations, including learning. Thus, our understanding of
attention in second language learning may be further elucidated by adopting
theoretical perspectives, such as the distinction between external attention
(cued by properties of the object itself) and internal attention (cued by task
manipulations related to the object), and by the use of experimental methods
from cognitive science, such as eye tracking, to examine this distinction.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under the direction of Dr. Kara Short, Bernard Issa's
dissertation project implements such an innovative approach to address the
following questions: (i) Does increased attention to particular second language
grammatical forms lead to increased learning of those forms? (ii) Are there
differential effects of external and internal attention on second language
learning? To answer these questions, the eye-movements of novice learners of
Spanish will be recorded as an index of attention while learning a new
grammatical form under either external or internal manipulations of attention.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results from this interdisciplinary project are
expected to provide novel, direct evidence for the role of attention in second
language learning, lead to a greater understanding of attention in learning more
generally, and have direct implications for pedagogy. Finally, this project will
further opportunities for involvement, training, and interdisciplinary
collaborations in research for a graduate student and for undergraduate
researcher assistants, who are likely to come from underrepresented groups in
cognitive science.