* 1348622
* Identifying Linguistic Factors Associated with  Differential Student Performance on Middle School Science Assessments
* EDU,DRL
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2019
* George DeBoer, American Association for the Advancement of Science
* Continuing Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 05/31/2019
* USD 1,102,618.00

This project, conducted by the American Association for the Advancement of
Science (AAAS), seeks to improve assessment of science understanding in K-12
students. The project will cover a wide range of 16 topics within science
education. When a student takes a science test, performance will depend on
cognitive factors, what the student knows, and linguistic factors, related to
language. This project aims to distinguish cognitive and linguistic factors,
with a focus on English language learners. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first stage
of the project involves data analysis, using more than 800 assessment items
previously developed by AAAS to align with middle and high school science
standards, and tested on more than 100,000 students. This stage involves
extensive analyses of the test questions (e.g.,, the language used) as well as
student performance. After it is determined what are the factors that affect
differential performance based on English language learner status, the second
stage of the project involves developing and testing new versions of the science
assessments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the important issue
highlighted by the 2012 National Research Council report, A Framework for K-12
Science Education, that assessment developers must remove barriers to science
participation due to English language learner status. In other words, this
project aims to produce science tests that accurately assess science knowledge
for both English language learners and non-English language learners.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work helps the Education and Human Resources
directorate, and the Division of Research on Learning, pursue the mission of
supporting science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) education
research. In particular, this project focuses on improving understanding of STEM
learning and STEM assessment, as well as broadening participation in STEM
education and ultimately the STEM workforce.