* 1348333
* Collaborative Research: ARI-LA: Low-Dose Inspection for Nuclear Threats Using Monochromatic Gamma-Rays
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2015
* Zoubeida Ounaies, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Hicks
* 12/31/2015
* USD 342,155.00

Low-dose inspection for nuclear threats using monochromatic gamma-rays is a
novel method to detect shielded nuclear material (SNM) with a potential to
significantly outperform currently employed methods. The key advantage of the
method we are pursuing is in low dose (&lt;20 mrad), ability for high-speed
screening, accuracy in identification of nuclear materials, and relatively low
cost and simplicity in design and operation. The advantages are achievable
through use of ultra-compact superconducting accelerator technology applied to
sources development, which can be tailored to produce multiple monoenergetic
gamma rays and/or neutrons. Furthermore, monoenergetic sources coupled with the
development of advanced radiation detectors and a new information science-driven
approach for system design and data analysis have a potential to create
unprecedented performance of the system in view of safety, efficiency and
accuracy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The unique and innovative approach to the design
is the enabling factor for future SNM detection technologies. Integration of the
novel method of monoenergetic source generation through use of a new generation
of ultra-compact accelerators with advanced imaging detectors has a potential
for a paradigm shift in the ability to rapidly and accurately clear objects from
nuclear threats. Moreover, this interdisciplinary work requires a broad combined
expertize in the areas of compact hadron accelerators, monochromatic gamma-ray
sources, detectors, and algorithms making our team particularly well-suited for
the task. This research combines several new and high-risk ideas and, if
successful, could bring about revolutionary advances in the methods to detect
shielded SNM, with broad impacts and benefits to the welfare and security of the
nation and society and promote the diversity and public understanding of science
and engineering.