* 1348765
* Connections:  STEM Educational Research Communities and Knowledge Transfer
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* Jan Youtie, Search Technology Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 07/31/2018
* USD 564,921.00

This project, conducted by Search Technology, Inc., and Georgia Institute of
Technology, will seek to better understand how research ideas are communicated
in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) education. The
project will use bibliometric analysis to study patterns in how research
publications cite each other, mapping the flow of ideas within STEM education
research as well as cognitive science research. This project will help show what
are the key influences on STEM education research, and what makes STEM education
research influential. This project will aim to help the STEM education research
community develop and make better use of its research base, and work effectively
with researchers from other fields. The Division of Research on Learning in the
Education and Human Resources directorate supports this work as part of its
mission to advance STEM education research, including research on STEM learning.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first stage of the project will involve analyzing data
bases covering a broad range of published research, examining patterns of
citation. The second stage will focus on the influential report, How People
Learn, published by the National Research Council, and include textual analysis
of content. The third stage will involve outreach to the research community.