* 1348045
* Fibrous Diamonds Through Time - Insight to Mantle Fluid and Mantle Metasomatism
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2017
* Yaakov Weiss, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 12/31/2017
* USD 149,596.00

Carbon plays a major role in many fundamental aspects of our planet, for
example, it is the basis of life, and regulates climate. The surface carbon
cycle is intimately linked to the carbon cycle of the Earth's deep interior,
where ~90% of global carbon is stored. Our knowledge about deep carbon is
limited, mainly relying on mantle xenoliths and xenocrysts sampled by magmas
ascending from the Earths' deep interior. Diamonds, the high-pressure polymorph
of elemental carbon, are brought to the surface from 150-200 km or even deeper
and are formed from carbon-bearing fluids or melts; they hold key information of
how carbon is transported and stored in the deep mantle. Fibrous diamonds are a
fast growing form containing micrometer-scale inclusions of the medium from
which diamond grew. Due to the diamond's physical and chemical strength, they
remain pristine from the time of their encapsulation deep in the mantle until
they are released in the laboratory. Micro-analytical and ultraclean laboratory
techniques make it now possible to determine the chemical nature of these
trapped fluids/melts. This study will measure major and trace element and
isotopic compositions in the fluids in order to determine the origin of deep
carbon-bearing mantle fluids and characterize the deep carbon cycle in our
planet through time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The high-density fluids (HDFs) trapped
by fibrous diamonds vary in composition between silicic, saline and high- and
low-Mg carbonatitic end-members, and display two principle trace-element
patterns, irrespective of the provenance of their host diamonds. Data on the Sr
and Nd isotopic compositions of HDFs are currently very sparse, but indicate
that Archean diamonds sample depleted mantle, whereas late Phanerozoic diamonds
sample enriched mantle and continental crust. In this study, the characteristics
of the trapped fluids from previously unstudied locations, with emplacement ages
from Cenozoic to Paleo-Proterozoic, will be explored through comprehensive
chemical and isotopic characterizations of the diamond-forming fluids. Nd-Sr
isotopic signatures of HDFs "fingerprint" the fluid's sources, and systematic
relationships with major and trace element compositions can distinguish between
different possible mantle sources of carbon-bearing fluids/melts, such as
oceanic-type mantle, lithospheric mantle, or subduction-modified sources. The
study will provide new insights on fluids in the deep earth through time, and
their role in transporting volatiles and trace elements between the mantle and
crust. Since diamonds represent the deepest direct samples of the Earths
interior, the study will provide new perspectives on the Earth's deep carbon
cycle through time.