* 1348911
* INDP: Collaborative Research: Coding for All: Interest-Driven Trajectories to Computational Fluency
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2017
* Mitchel Resnick, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* John Cherniavsky
* 04/30/2017
* USD 832,580.00

This Cyberlearning Integration and Deployment (INDP) project brings together an
interdisciplinary research team from the MIT Media Lab, the Digital Media and
Learning Hub at University of California Irvine, and Harvard University's
Berkman Center for Internet and Society to explore development and use of new
types of online tools, activities, and gatherings to engage more young people in
developing computational fluency, particularly youth from groups currently
underrepresented in computing. The project builds on the success of the NSF-
funded Scratch programming language and online community
(http://scratch.mit.edu), where more than 1.5 million young people have created
interactive stories, games, animations, and simulations based on their
interests. The Coding for All project aims to provide new pathways into Scratch
for youth from populations that are not currently drawn in easily to
technological and scientific discourse and activities. The PIs are designing and
refining a variety of interest-based microworlds -- introductory programming
environments that are customized to particular interests of youngsters in those
populations -- to provide easier and more inviting entry points for getting
started with coding, and they aim to develop guidelines for designing
microworlds that are simple enough not to be overwhelming, engaging enough to
draw youngsters in, rich enough to allow creative expression, and tuned well
enough to the interests and prior knowledge of new participants to foster
curiosity and learning. In addition, the team is exploring how to use personnel
in libraries and other spaces where low-income youth congregate to support
initial introduction to and engagement with these microworlds and developing and
refining tools to support interest-based on-line hangouts and unconferences,
where young people who become engaged through these microworlds can meet peers
and mentors to share ideas, form collaborations, and increase their programming
and expressive capabilities. The PIs are collecting much data about the
engagement and participation of youngsters, the development of their skills and
understanding, and the development of their interests, and their analysis will
contribute to deeper understanding of needed supports, pathways, and outcomes
related to computational fluency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses
the need to draw in and promote learning among those in populations not served
well by current educational practices and important national priorities in
workforce development, equity, and the need for a technologically fluent public.
The project's tools and activities will provide alternative pathways into
coding, increasing opportunities for young people in non-dominant communities to
develop computational fluency. The focus on public libraries explores how to use
public educational institutions most geared towards serving the technology needs
and diverse interests of non-dominant communities in taking advantage of new
online learning opportunities. The findings from this research will inform
researchers and practitioners concerned with STEM-related learning, online
educational resources, equity in education, and cyberlaw.