* 1348389
* Bridging the Divide: A Program to Broaden Participation in STEM PhD
* O/D,OIA
* 02/15/2014,08/31/2020
* Anne Grippo, Arkansas State University Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Chinonye Nnakwe
* 08/31/2020
* USD 749,964.00

This project aims to increase the participation of underrepresented minority
(URM) students in STEM graduate programs by providing academic, financial, and
social support to foster sustained interest leading to success. Modeled after
the successful Fisk-Vanderbilt Bridge Program (FVBP), the Arkansas program
focuses on developing a strong academic foundation, research skills, and one-on-
one mentoring relationships to foster the successful transition pathway from
undergraduate to Masters-level and doctoral studies. The participating faculty
and peer student mentors receive training and guidance from the FVBP team. In
this program, Arkansas State University-Jonesboro (ASUJ) partners with
University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff (UAPB) and Philander Smith College (PSC),
both Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs). The project offers a
testing ground to show whether the FVBP model, which worked between two urban,
proximal institutions in Nashville, Tennessee can be successful, with suitable
modifications, among rural, distal institutions with modest resources in
Arkansas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The program focuses
on increasing the enrollment, retention, and graduation rates of URM, low-
income, first-generation college students in interdisciplinary Masters-level
programs in Environmental Sciences (EVS) and Molecular Biosciences (MBS) at
ASUJ, and the Aquaculture and Fisheries (A&amp;F) program at UAPB. Program
activities include: (1) engaging faculty and students at partnering institutions
in training workshops offered at ASUJ by a FVBP team, and diversity training by
the Director of the Office of Diversity at ASUJ; (2) conducting an eight-week
summer research program for URM junior and senior undergraduates at ASUJ and
UAPB; (3) recruiting and supporting URM students in the EVS, MBS, and A&amp;F
Masters programs; and (4) recruiting and supporting URM students enrolled in the
Masters programs to pursue Ph.D. programs at ASUJ and UAPB through financial,
academic, and social mentoring support. These activities provide undergraduates
with research experiences, build strong relationships between undergraduate
peers and their faculty mentors, and inform students about the academic and
financial aspects of graduate schools. Through these activities, the program
aims to reduce barriers to URM participation at the graduate level of STEM
education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;Over the five years
of the project, twenty URM undergraduate students are being engaged in STEM
research projects, eight students are being mentored to succeed in the Masters-
level degree programs in EVS, MBS, and A&amp;F at ASUJ and UAPB, and six of them
are being fostered to pursue the respective Ph.D. programs. Students and faculty
at partnering institutions are immersed in multicultural learning environments
to increase URM participation in graduate-level STEM programs. This Arkansas
bridge program can be a model for adaptation at other institutions nationwide.
Progress and performance goals of the project are evaluated annually and used to
refine the program. Results of the project are being disseminated through social
media such as Facebook, Twitter, and Blogosphere as well as in conferences
including Arkansas EPSCoR Annual meetings.