* 1348463
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Virtual Organization Resources and Toolkits Exchange (VORTEX)
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* James Howison, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* William Miller
* 08/31/2017
* USD 94,996.00

Although many virtual organizations (VO) are quite effective, not all VO
practitioners are effective in each area, and there is no organized body of
knowledge or set of ?best practices? among VOs to draw upon for key issues.
Therefore centers are likely not as effective as they could be. This proposal
involves the creation of an online knowledge exchange. This Virtual Organization
Resources and Toolkits Exchange (VORTEX) would provide leaders of virtual
organizations with resources about running virtual organizations and access to
relevant organizational scientists. VORTEX is intended to aid in building a
community among virtual organization leaders so that they can collaborate,
share, and learn with and from each other. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific
Objectives of the work include development, evaluation, and improvement of an
online Virtual Organization Resources and Toolkits Exchange (VORTEX) environment
to aid scientists and engineers to more effectively lead virtual organizations.
This type of environment is necessary in order to: &lt;br/&gt;(1) Connect
leaders of virtual organizations with appropriate organization scientists;
&lt;br/&gt;(2) Provide online educational and reference materials for issues
associated with managing virtual organizations; and&lt;br/&gt;(3) Establish a
center for leaders of virtual organization to share and collaborate with each
other.