* 1348238
* Laboratory Study of the Influence of Nucleation and Chemistry on Ice Particle Habit and Growth Rates
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2013,01/31/2017
* Brian Swanson, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Edward L. Bensman
* 01/31/2017
* USD 138,840.00

Despite past efforts, a number of fundamental aspects of initial ice crystal
formation (termed "nucleation") in clouds remain uncertain. Previous experiments
have produced scattered results partly because the nucleation mode was not well
controlled and the methods used introduced artifacts. These investigators plan
to eliminate such problems by developing a new two-capillary instrument in which
a single crystal nucleates and grows at the tip of an ultra-thin pure-silica
glass capillary within a small growth chamber that can be isolated from the
vapor source. The presence of two well-separated crystals held under identical
isothermal conditions will allow precise observation of the deposition and
sublimation processes. Advantages of this approach over previous methods (e.g.,
diffusion chambers, substrate chambers, and electrodynamic balances) include
greater control over the thermodynamic conditions and the ability to
characterize potential crystal-crystal and crystal-substrate interactions.
Experiments in the new twin-capillary chamber will be made for a range of air
pressures and temperatures, including conditions relevant to cirrus formation,
as well as for multiple nucleation modes. By nucleating the initial crystal in
different ways, these investigators expect to determine how much of the
previously observed scatter in crystal habits arose from variations in
nucleation mode.

The intellectual merit of this research rests on development of more precise,
artifact-free data describing crystal shape ("habit") development and deposition
coefficient functions as a function of environmental conditions. These results
will allow improved evaluation of current crystal growth models. Broader impacts
will accrue through training of a graduate student in techniques of new-
instrument design and data analysis and through dissemination of results via
multidisciplinary conferences and scientific journals. Ultimately these findings
will contribute to improved representation of cirrus clouds in the earth's
climate system. Additional outreach will include web-based distribution of high-
quality video microscopy depicting crystal growth and sublimation.