* 1348007
* Collaborative Research:  The Age of Grand Canyon: Applying New Tests to Resolve the 150-year-old Debate
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2017
* Laura Crossey, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* David Fountain
* 04/30/2017
* USD 154,081.00

Questions about the age of Grand Canyon, framed by John Wesley Powell in the
late 1800s, address the tectonic and landscape evolution of the Grand Canyon
region and the tectonic events that have shaped it. Recent papers reinvigorate
the debate, and support models for both "old" (70-17 million years) and "young"
(5-6 million years) carving of Grand Canyon, with corresponding tectonic models
for "old" versus "young" uplift of the Colorado Plateau. Studies supporting the
"old" canyon model suggest that an 80-70 million year old east-flowing river,
then a 55-30 million year old west-flowing river, incised a canyon in the same
location and to nearly the same depth as modern Grand Canyon. In this model, the
Colorado River did not play a significant role in excavating Grand Canyon, and
the preponderance of tectonic uplift of the Colorado Plateau took place about 70
million years ago. In contrast, "young" canyon models suggest that most of the
Grand Canyon has been carved in the last 6 million years once the Colorado River
became integrated from the Rocky Mountains to the Gulf of California and that
uplift of the Colorado Plateau region has taken place in multiple episodes and
may be ongoing due to regional mantle upwelling. This project tests a
"paleocanyon resolution" for the Grand Canyon debate in which there are 3
"young" segments, 1 "old" segment, and 1 "intermediate" age segment that
collectively provide a record of a complex multi-stage tectonic uplift history
for the southwestern U.S. Two complementary methods are used to test this
hypothesis. First, apatite triple dating (fission track, (U-Th)/He dating, and
4He/3He analyses) are applied to new samples from each segment to reconstruct
cooling paths for rocks and decipher past (now-eroded) landscapes and fault
displacements. Second, detrital zircon and sanidine dating of key preserved
paleoriver remnants provide essential ground truth to calibrate the
thermochronological investigations.

The project?s broader significance and importance are enhanced by intense
national and international public interest in the Grand Canyon region as one of
Earth?s iconic geologic features. The results of this project may change the
current paradigm for the incision age of the Grand Canyon. Discussion and
resolution of the century-long Grand Canyon debate illustrates the scientific
method and progress of science. The project will have significant impacts on
student training, increased diversity of the geoscience workforce, outreach to
Native American tribes in the region, public informal science education, and
increased collaborative progress among diverse geosciences communities.