* 1348480
* EAGER: Understanding fundamental mechanisms involved in turbulence, current and wave interactions for offshore wind-turbines
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2015
* Kiran Bhaganagar, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Rorrer
* 09/30/2015
* USD 45,139.00

PI: Bhaganagar, Kiran Proposal Number: 1348480 Institution: University of Texas
at San Antonio Title: EAGER: Understanding fundamental mechanisms involved in
turbulence, current and wave interactions for offshore wind-turbines

The wake-wake interactions are quite substantial in an offshore wind turbines
(WT) compared to onshore WT due to additional loading that arises due to sea
current and wave-induced forcing. The effect of wave forcing on the wakes has
been one of the important bottlenecks in the design of offshore WT. Though wind
energy has matured to a technology, still offshore WT has not been realized in
United States yet. To address this concern, there is a strong impetus to advance
fundamental understanding of key external factors limiting the wind farms
performance. Towards this direction, this project will address the challenges
involved in the wake-current-air interactions by using large eddy simulation
(LES) as a tool to systematically understand the effect of wave/current
amplitude forcing and wind speed on the wake-wake interactions. The objectives
of the current study are to determine the hydrodynamic forces due to the wave-
current interaction on wind turbines. The PI will develop scaling laws of the
mean and turbulence flow in the wake region in terms of dynamic forcing
parameters. The scaling laws developed will be compared with the existing
wakemodels.

The intellectual merit of this study is that it is fundamental in nature as by
understanding the interplay of key hydrodynamic and aerodynamic processes
affecting the WT, we will be able to lay down the scaling laws of the loss of
wind velocity and enhancement of turbulence intensity in terms of the dynamic
parameters of wave/current/wind in the wake region. The research is
transformative as these scaling laws in the near-wake region of offshore WT will
provide, for the first time, accurate parameterization for the existing wake
models. The present study will advance the fundamental understanding of the
following 3 fundamental aspects in the wake region of offshore WT: (1) Scaling
of modified surface roughness, mean velocity deficit and turbulence in the wake
region (2) Understanding resonance due to the nonlinear response of the wave
energy (3) Isolating the wave-generated turbulence, WT-generated turbulence and
turbulence due to wind.

The broader impacts of this project are its direct relevance to energy crisis in
United States, where there is an urgent need to make wind energy more
accessible, and a major source of sustainable form of energy. The results of
this study will provide more realistic predictive tools, which will serve as
important guidelines for future of offshore wind-farm installations. Specific
efforts are being targeted as a part of this proposal to encourage more women to
pursue education and careers in engineering.