* 1348282
* NSF Workshop on Life Performance of Polymer Based Engineering Materials: The Interaction Between Mechanics and Chemistry; Washington, DC; Fall 2013
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2015
* Kumbakonam Rajagopal, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 08/31/2015
* USD 34,964.00

A workshop will be convened on Life Performance of Polymer based Engineering
Materials (LPPEM): The Interaction between Mechanics and Chemistry. Polymers are
currently used in a large number of engineering applications, where failure of
the polymer based materials can have significant consequences. The time
dependent properties of the polymer is typically the critical aspect in these
advanced engineering applications. The interplay between chemistry and mechanics
is a key challenge in predicting the life performance of these materials. The
objective of the LPPEM workshop is bringing together researchers from the
mechanics and chemistry communities to identify the needs and knowledge gaps
required to advance the methodologies in both experimental and computational
fronts. Bringing these often disparate disciplines together will be
intellectually challenging and should stimulate the development of new research
ideas and approaches at the domain interfaces: ideas and approaches that may
also have value inside the individual research domains.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of improved, rational and robust methods
for predicting the life performance of polymers and polymers composites will
have important benefits for the US technical infrastructure, including both (i)
improved utilization of existing materials in new applications and (ii)
effective design and more rapid deployment of new materials. By elucidating
research challenges and opportunities, the LPPEM workshop will begin the process
of identifying potential approaches for the more rapid development, deployment
and validation of the life performance of polymeric materials that are
increasingly important for advanced engineering applications in the 21st
century.