* 1348800
* FUSE Studios: An Alternative Infrastructure for STEM Learning and Interest Development
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Reed Stevens, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 08/31/2017
* USD 1,499,474.00

The FUSE Studios project designs a series of learning challenges for youth,
derived from principles of game design, to: (1) develop and refine a design-
based and iterative research and development cycle that will develop new
challenges and new sequences, and revise current challenges; 2) conduct
original, multi-faceted research on these new informal learning environments and
the learning experiences of participants. The project responds to the failure of
formal STEM education practices to engage youth in ways that are meaningful and
that fail to engage youth on sustained pathways towards STEM-related careers and
involvement in science in later life. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the proposed
three year project, building upon pilot work and related evaluation findings
from the library-based setting of the youth program, the project investigates
research questions that address persistence, the capacity to learn from failure,
creative flexibility in problem solving, and choice as powerful indicators of
developing interest in and skills related to STEM. The project challenges,
called FUSE Studios, are designed to be an alternative structure for STEM
learning and interest development. FUSE Studios are organized around sequences
of interest-driven challenges, that involve both digital and hands-on
activities) that are linked together in a progression modeled after video-game
sequences. Participants select a challenge sequence (e.g., robot mini-golf, MP3
amplifier, mobile app development jewelry design using 3D/cad).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research studies patterns of how participants engage
with challenge sequences and what they learn when doing so. Participants freely
choose resources for meeting the challenges, which provides a unique opportunity
to study how participants assemble resources for challenges from the variety of
human, web-based and material resources available in the FUSE studios. The
project also researches how knowledge and practices circulate among
participants. Finally, research will look at whether the project?s approach to
iterative, design-based research processes progressively engages a broader
representation of youth in STEM. Research uses ethnographic and longitudinal
studies, RFID/video capture data, surveys of connected learning and other
dimensions, and website-generated activity maps.