* 1348562
* Indo-US International Workshop on Novel Combustion for Sustainable Energy Development, Kanpur, India, January 2-4, 2014
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Suresh Aggarwal, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Song-Charng Kong
* 08/31/2016
* USD 21,000.00

1348562&lt;br/&gt;Aggarwal&lt;br/&gt;The workshop is expected to have impact on
not only the research direction, but also the awareness that knowledge exists
and is being developed to sustain our energy use, particularly related to the
combustion processes. The location for the workshop has been chosen to be in
India with two chief goals in mind. First, to foster the international
collaboration in solving the world?s energy needs and concerns, which falls
within NSF?s mission. Secondly, India is a fast developing economy, where the
need and consumption is expected to grow rapidly. While more than 70% of the
world?s energy is delivered by combustion process and while US and India are
major, populous countries in the world , both countries face and should combat
the issues and needs for the sustainability of future energy use.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The planned workshop will provide a forum for
the dissemination of knowledge and exchanges of ideas, challenges and
opportunities in the new emerging technologies for distributed combustion (high
temperature air combustion, homogeneous charged compression ignition (HCCI)
engine combustion, mathematical modeling, micro-combustion, thermal management,
advanced&lt;br/&gt;laser diagnostics and combustion control. The challenges
posed by the new low grade fuels and advances in renewable energy and clean
combustion technologies can bring together sound contribution from collective
interaction amongst researchers from academia, industries, research institutions
and government labs. The goal is to develop some guidelines and priorities for
near and far term goals in the above areas with identified future research
activities that can benefit the broader combustion community.