* 1348013
* Documentation and acquisition of Light Warlpiri and Warlpiri
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2014,09/30/2020
* Carmel O'Shannessy, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 09/30/2020
* USD 267,467.00

In most endangered language situations, speakers transition from speaking an
endangered language to an existing majority language. In very rare situations,
children learning both an endangered language and a majority language may create
a new mixed linguistic variety with features of both languages. These unusual
situations provide clues to social, psychological and linguistic mechanisms
involved in the emergence of such novel communicative
forms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Linguist Carmel O'Shannessy of the University of
Michigan will document a newly emerging language, Light Warlpiri, in a small
indigenous community in northern Australia, focusing on the role of children and
young adults in the development of the language. Light Warlpiri is a mixed
language using Warlpiri, English, and Northern Territory Kriol (a local English-
based creole). Although Light Warlpiri has recently emerged and is still
stabilizing, it is also highly endangered.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three striking
features of Light Warlpiri make its documentation at this point in time
especially important. First, the oldest speakers of Light Warlpiri are only
about 35 years old, so relative to how long languages can exist, Light Warlpiri
is young and can be observed as it grows. Second, the structure of Light
Warlpiri is unusual - the verb structure is from varieties of English and Kriol,
but with some radical innovations, and the noun structure - word endings - are
from the traditional language, Warlpiri. Third, children learn both Light
Warlpiri and the traditional language, Warlpiri, which is an uncommon language
learning situation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through audio and video recordings of
staged and spontaneous language contexts, the project will track children's
acquisition of Warlpiri and Light Warlpiri, providing insights into bilingual
acquisition in a complex linguistic context, as well as insights into the
interaction of language endangerment and language emergence. The project will
add audio and video time-aligned data to an existing longitudinal corpus which
was started in 2002, forming an open-access audio-visual corpus of children's
and adults' language spanning approximately 15 years. The corpus will be used to
produce a sketch grammar of Light Warlpiri, tracing the sources of grammatical
features. The project will also create online activities in Warlpiri which
Warlpiri youth and young adults can access from their cell phones, promoting
Warlpiri maintenance and engagement with technology.