* 1348139
* Collaborative Research: ARI-MA: Realizing high performance inorganic scintillators at low cost
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2015
* Arnold Burger, Fisk University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 09/30/2015
* USD 130,000.00

1348361 (Williams), 1348139 (Burger), and 1348341 (Biswas). The Global Nuclear
Detection Architecture (GNDA) is intended to detect illicit and unregulated
nuclear and radiological materials worldwide. Wide deployment calls for quick
and accurate detection technology with sensitivity and resolution close to
current state-of-the-art scintillators but at much lower cost. The basic premise
of this approach is that there are already inorganic scintillators with light
yield and proportionality close to the limits that can be achieved in their ~5
eV band gap range; and that this group haswe developed a predictive model that
describes why there is a sweet spot of material parameters defining the current
group of highest performance scintillators. This is used to narrow the scope of
theoretical, crystal-growth, and evaluative searches in this project so that
they can be targeted farther into ternary and quaternary compositions and at the
same time deeper into parameters that affect cost and performance. Some of the
best new scintillator hosts are in fact composed of abundant (cheap) elements.
The reason for their current high cost is not materials, but low yield of
growing large single crystals. This project will pursue four research avenues to
solve or side-step the crystal growth problems on the way to realizing an
economical detector from materials in the sweet spot of structures,
compositions, and physical parameters identified from the design rules developed
by Wake Forest, Fisk, LBNL, and others since about 2010. One of the approaches
to reduce cost examines how to improve the proportionality of segmented index-
matched assemblies of smaller crystal blocks that are difficult to grow in large
sizes. Such segmented detectors combined with wavelength shifting also provide
flexibility to deal with self-absorption (photon diffusion) that currently
limits the size of SrI2:Eu detectors. The group will measure and model how the
peripheries of blocks in segmented scintillators contribute to
nonproportionality, and what can be done to improve it. One ultra-lowcost but
high-risk possibility involves index-matched granular scintillators using pre-
doped SrI2:Eu beads supplied in bulk by chemical manufacturers. Starting with an
excellent scintillator like SrI2:Eu, guided by experience with the segmented
scintillators and their modeling, and applying thermal and chemical processing
to the beaded material, the group will investigate the physics of what limits
the resolution of granular detectors and how to advance performance beyond prior
index-matched granular scintillators. A third approach to cost reduction will
raise the yield of crystal growth by hardening and toughening existing excellent
scintillators while taking care that the hardening measures do not degrade
proportionality and light yield. A fourth targets theoretical and experimental
searches toward new ternary and quaternary crystals with cubic structures and
other properties favoring large crystal growth as well as slow electron
thermalization, poor hot electron mobility, good thermalized electron mobility,
and low Auger rates leading to best proportionality and light yield. Three
university teams bring to this quest their complementary expertise and
facilities in (1) crystal growth and characterization, (2) ultrafast laser
probes of scintillation and associated numerical modeling of transport,
trapping, and nonlinear quenching, and (3) electronic structure calculations on
candidate crystals, defects, and dopants. The intellectual merit lies in
applying this complementary three university array of experimental and
theoretical techniques guided by predictive physical models to attack the cost
problem treated in terms of physical parameters alongside those determining
proportionality and light yield in both gamma and neutron detectors. The
results, positive or negative, will inform the whole field on the models and
methods employed. The broader impacts will be to increase national and global
security by making possible improved, affordable deployment of nuclear
monitoring; increasing the pool of U.S. university graduates trained in the
materials technologies necessary to build and deploy such systems widely; and
instituting a 3- university bridge system of interacting undergraduate, M.S.,
and Ph.D. programs and opportunities among the participating universities in
three southeastern states to provide a path into the nuclear detection workforce
for under-represented and economically disadvantaged students.