* 1348609
* RAPID:  Lateral Load Resistance of Residential Housing Exposed to Extreme Wind Event
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2014
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Kishor Mehta
* 09/30/2014
* USD 7,000.00

It is proposed to collect residential building damage data that is caused by the
EF5 tornado in the city of Moore, Oklahoma on May 20, 2013. The damage path of
this tornado overlaps the damage paths of two previous tornadoes of 1999 and
2003. It would be interesting to see how the houses reconstructed after the
previous tornadoes perform in this tornado. Even though there are close to 1,000
tornadoes recorded each year, less than 10 tornadoes are rated EF 4 and EF 5.
When an EF5 tornado impacts a city there is a unique opportunity to document
building damage and learn from the damage. This tornado damaged two schools,
several commercial buildings and more than 1200 residential structures. This
project team will focus on documentation of residential structures. RAPID
funding provides an opportunity to document the damage before damaged buildings
are cleared and the debris is moved.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team will
work with other RAPID grantee teams in the field to improve coverage of the
damage area and avoid duplication. The team of faculty members and students will
document failure modes, materials of construction, location of structures with
respect to the center of the path, and debris impacts for documented structures.
The institution is located within 20 miles of the damage area; this proximity of
the documentation effort gives advantage of familiarity of the area. The RAPID
team will develop contour maps of EF ratings and wind speeds based on observed
Degrees of Damage. These maps will be compared with past tornado studies to
evaluate the similarities and differences. This comparison will contribute to
the understanding of the spatial characteristics of tornado wind forces on
structures. Building failure progression will be determined in different wind
speed zones. The benefits and challenges of using social media (twitters) to
improve disaster assessment will be determined.