* 1348921
* How Proportional Reasoning Relates to Whole Number Operations and Numerical Estimation in Elementary School Children
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2017
* Ty Boyer, Georgia Southern University Research and Service Foundation, Inc
* Standard Grant
* david moore
* 06/30/2017
* USD 113,218.00

Number information is frequently presented using proportions. Research has
shown, however, that elementary school-aged children have great difficulty
reasoning proportionally and struggle with fractions and decimals, which are
crucial concepts for success in the Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics (STEM) disciplines. The source of much of this difficulty is because
proportions are composed of relative quantities that do not follow the same
principles as more familiar absolute quantities (e.g., 3/4 is greater than 6/10,
though neither 3 nor 4 is greater than either 6 or 10). Indeed, recent research
has found that some of children's difficulties with proportions are attributable
to an over-application of well-practiced mathematical problem solving using
whole number. The focus of this project will be to examine individual
differences and potential context effects on a range of quantitative tasks
throughout children's development. &lt;br/&gt;In a first study, elementary
school students will complete a battery of computerized tasks that will measure
proportional equivalence, whole number operations, and numerical estimation
abilities. The investigators predict that in younger children, those who perform
well on whole number operations problems will perform poorly on the proportional
equivalence problems, but in older children there will be a positive correlation
between problem types. In a second study, children will complete a series of
relative or absolute quantity problems followed by the proportional reasoning
task. The investigators predict that those who solve relative quantity problems
first will perform better on the proportional reasoning task than those who
initially solve absolute quantity problems. This project will inform the
developmental progression that underlies much of mathematical thinking. The
results will contribute to an understanding of how best to instruct children in
mathematical concepts, with direct implications for STEM educational practices.
If there is an inverse relationship between early understanding of proportional
reasoning concepts and whole number operations, and if proportional reasoning
abilities vary with the immediate problem-solving context as predicted, then
this would suggest extra care must be used in introducing these concepts to
children. This work will also suggest techniques that might be adopted to
introduce these concepts most effectively.