* 1348410
* Indigenous Program for Stem Research and a Regional Native Network of Graduate Education: A National Research and Educational Model
* O/D,OIA
* 03/15/2014,02/28/2019
* Ronald Hardy, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* Chinonye Nnakwe
* 02/28/2019
* USD 749,755.00

The underrepresentation of American Indian people in graduate level science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) research and education is an
issue that must be addressed in order to safeguard the future of Native American
communities and Nations, and to ensure a viable, healthy, national STEM
workforce. This project creates a national program for Indigenous STEM Research
and Graduate Education (ISTEM) that has a focus of a Regional Native Network
(RN2) of nine institutions of higher education. Led by the University of Idaho,
ISTEM aims to increase the number of Native American students obtaining Masters
and PhD degrees in STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ISTEM program is a
unique national program that provides comprehensive STEM graduate training to
address the needs and desires of Native American peoples. In consultation with
tribal communities and a Native American national advisory board, ISTEM
addresses the specific needs of both Native American graduate students and their
tribes through a collaborative approach (RN2) to recruitment, research design,
and retention of STEM graduate students. During the project period, ISTEM is
partially experimental with ongoing program modifications based on
assessment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;Many components of
the ISTEM curriculum and programmatic structure are drawn from existing models
that have been effective in the training of graduate students from
underrepresented minority populations. The program will incorporate both
accepted and experimental components, including: (1) new modalities of teaching
and learning that have American Indian input; (2) collaborative,
interdisciplinary research based on a cohort model of students interacting with
stakeholders; and (3) situating STEM into social and cultural contexts so that
the theory of knowledge is woven into good teaching and learning. The results of
the program will inform future program design in graduate STEM education, and
encourage research into delivering more effective graduate education to
underrepresented segments of the population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The ISTEM program is focused on the creation of a core of STEM
professionals from an underrepresented group, namely American Indian peoples of
the United States. The program directly benefits society by providing American
Indian scholars access to research facilities and methodologies for exploring
ongoing issues of concern to tribal and Native American lands and peoples.
Additionally, ISTEM is advancing STEM discovery and understanding through RN2,
its collaborative, stakeholder-centric approach to research and education
design. The ISTEM concept is scalable and adaptable to other regions of the
country, and will be sustained by partner campuses once the project ends.