* 1348050
* Collaborative Research: A Self-consistent Model for Bubble Nucleation During Plinian Volcanic Eruptions
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2014,02/28/2018
* James Gardner, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 02/28/2018
* USD 223,981.00

One of the large-impact natural hazards to affect humans on a decadal time scale
are highly explosive Plinian volcanic eruptions, whose dynamics are thought to
be intimately linked to the manner by which magmatic gases, such as water and
carbon dioxide, escape from the erupting magma. Magma degassing begins with the
nucleation of bubbles, which are preserved as vesicles in the erupted volcanic
rock fragments. It is thought that the number and size of bubbles in a given
volume of volcanic rock provide records of the forces that drive bubble
nucleation and, by inference, the dynamics of the eruption. Specifically, the
speed at which magma rises to the surface, thereby undergoing decompression, and
the rate at which bubbles nucleate are thought to be correlated and affect the
explosive intensity of an eruption. About one million bubbles may nucleate
within a cubic millimeter of magma over fractions of a second to a few seconds.
This transformation from dissolved gases to gaseous bubbles under high pressure
is a key mechanism for explosive eruptions. Current models for the rate of
bubble nucleation during explosive eruptions are based on Classical Nucleation
Theory. A preliminary analysis of laboratory experiments of bubble nucleation in
magmas, where conditions (pressure, rate of decompression, composition, content
of dissolved gases, temperature) are well known and controlled, has shown that
this classical theory fails to predict the rate at which bubbles nucleate across
a wide range of conditions. A fundamental issue in this regard is the
requirement for decompression rates that may be higher than physically
attainable during an eruption, thus over-predicting rates of magma
ascent.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to obtain a new
formulation for the rate bubble nucleation, which will be applicable across a
wide range of conditions of relevance to explosive volcanic eruptions. This will
be accomplished through an integrated study that is comprised of laboratory
experiments of bubble nucleation in silicate melts and detailed numerical
modeling of these experiments. The result of this study, that is a new
formulation for bubble nucleation in silicate melts, will be incorporated into
numerical models of explosive volcanic eruptions, thereby enhancing their
predictive capabilities. These models, in turn, will be used to resolve the
question of what the precise relationship between magma decompression rate and
the number of bubbles that nucleate within a given volume of magma is, thereby
allowing a more robust integration of observationally based studies with
quantitative predictions through numerical modeling and hazard assessment.
Moreover, nucleation theory is of importance in a wide range of disciplines,
such as for example chemical engineering and material science. Because this
project will integrate recent advances in other fields where Classical
Nucleation Theory has been found inadequate, it will advance the state-of-the-
art and also have the potential to impact other disciplines.