* 1348701
* Collaborative Research: STEM Workforce Training: A Quasi-Experimental Approach Using the Effects of Research Funding
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2015
* julia lane, American Institutes for Research in the Behavioral Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Earnestine P. Easter
* 08/31/2015
* USD 515,902.00

EHR Core Research &lt;br/&gt;Workforce Development &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is
a collaborative project involving Ohio State University (lead institution),
Pennsylvania State University, American Institutes for Research, University of
Illinois-Urbana, and the University of Iowa. The project examines the impact of
different research funding structures on the training of graduate students and
postdoctoral fellows and the impact of their subsequent outcomes. The rationale
for the study is the recognition that research teams are organized differently
in composition, size, and reliance of graduate students versus postdoctoral
fellows. In addition, funding agencies change the structure of science training
by creating programs that ?encourage? interdisciplinary groups, multi-university
collaborations, or large research centers that focus on specific research
questions. However, little research has been done about how these factors shape
the career preparation of STEM professionals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs will
begin by examining the different contexts of research funding and training and
then (1) relate measures of team structure to the structure of funding to
determine the extent to which funding agency policies shape research teams and
(2) capture the trajectories of the students and postdoctoral fellows during and
after their contact with the teams to quantify how the structure of teams
affects training. They will use longitudinal administrative data that to capture
information about sources of funding for the training and support of Ph.D.s and
Postdocs from 13 major research institutions that participate in the Committee
on Institutional Cooperation. They will then identify the nature of the research
training through a text analysis of pertinent documents and use a quasi-
experimental design to estimate the causal impact of the structure of research
and length of training on trainee outcomes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will have broad implications for the entire field of STEM education policy and
research. The underlying algorithms and tools will be made available to the
academic research community and can be leveraged to link internal human
resources data sets to external data sets. This new data infrastructure also
will facilitate the assessment of the effects of research investments on
research productivity as well as undergraduate and graduate curriculum
development.