* 1348417
* 2014 Biology REU Workshop: Using Evidence-Based Approaches to Enhance and Strengthen the REU Experience, April 10-12, 2014-Arlington, VA
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2015
* Janet Branchaw, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 08/31/2015
* USD 49,999.00

The University of Wisconsin-Madison proposes to organize a workshop for NSF BIO
REU Sites that will bring Principal Investigators (PIs) together to discus
evidence-based approaches in REU program development and implementation. The
overarching theme of the meeting will be to use Evidence-Based Approaches to
Enhance and Strengthen the REU Experience. The structure of the workshop will
align with the goals of the NSF REU program and will be designed to develop
community among the PIs through presentations, discussions, networking panels
and poster sessions about strategies for delivering high quality meaningful
research experiences to undergraduate students in the biological sciences. A
pre-workshop on-line survey will be sent to the PIs to assess their needs and
expectations for the workshop and to gather information that will inform
workshop planning. PIs will be asked to identify their interests regarding
networking opportunities in the pre-survey and this information will be used to
define topics for discussion. Informal mechanisms will be used to collect
feedback during the workshop which will then be used to make mid- point
adjustments to the workshop agenda. Members of the Bio REU LC (Leadership
Council) will meet at the end of the first full day to check-in, review the
comments box feedback, share their informal feedback from participating in the
activities and, if necessary, make adjustments to the final day's agenda. A
post-workshop on-line evaluation survey will be administered immediately
following the workshop to assess the effectiveness of the workshop logistics,
the workshop activities and to gather suggestions for future workshops. The
results of this evaluation will be included in the final report submitted to
NSF. More information is available by contacting the PI, Dr. Janet Branchaw at
branchaw@wisc.edu.