* 1348722
* Collaborative Research: Crossing the Threshold of Problem Solving: Electrical Engineering vs. Chemistry
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Hannah Sevian, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Standard Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 08/31/2017
* USD 390,321.00

PARTICIPATING INSTITUTIONS: &lt;br/&gt;University of Massachusetts Boston
(Lead)&lt;br/&gt;University of Nebraska-Lincoln&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CORE
AREA(s):&lt;br/&gt;STEM Learning/STEM Learning Environments - Undergraduate
Education&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PROJECT DESCRIPTION &lt;br/&gt;The
project is studying the abstraction capacity in problem solving among
undergraduate students in two STEM disciplines. The three-year project involves
faculty and students in electrical engineering at University of Nebraska-Lincoln
and in chemistry at University of Massachusetts Boston. The study is examining
two courses in each discipline (that typically occur in the sophomore and junior
years) for evidence of an abstraction threshold - the gap in reasoning ability
that can be crossed by students. The project is seeking to characterize
reasoning applied to problem solving using a cognitive processing model,
Representation Mapping.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study tests two hypotheses:
&lt;br/&gt;1) Many students do not have fully mature processes for abstraction,
i.e., cognitive supply, and it is possible to measure what their processes are
and the degree to which they are capable of reasoning using abstraction.
&lt;br/&gt;2) Somewhere in each undergraduate STEM curriculum, cognitive demand
increases to the point where a typical students current capacity for abstraction
is not matched to the complexity of problems posed, and this impacts student
performance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research questions being studied are:
&lt;br/&gt;RQ1: How can students problem solving processes and degree of
abstraction in two different STEM disciplines - electrical engineering and
chemistry - be characterized using Representation Mapping? &lt;br/&gt;RQ2: What
evidence is there that abstraction thresholds exist in undergraduate electrical
engineering and chemistry curricula? &lt;br/&gt;RQ3: What are discipline-
specific nuances of abstraction in electrical engineering and chemistry
education?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This theory-driven project involves a rigorous
interdisciplinary study that has the potential to significantly advance the
understanding of how students reason when solving problems associated with deep
concepts in STEM disciplines. The effort is in direct alignment the report from
the National Academies on Discipline-Based Education Research (DBER), which
includes "Interdisciplinary studies of cross-cutting concepts and cognitive
processes" as one of its four overall recommendations for promising directions
in studying undergraduate STEM education. The project is making significant
contributions to the knowledge base on how to increase students' problem solving
approaches and is helping to uncover how domain-general and discipline-dependent
cognitive processing interact in two STEM
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER SIGNIFICANCE &lt;br/&gt;As
manifest by its strong alignment with the DBER report, the project is an area of
national interest. The project is uncovering commonalities of abstraction in two
STEM disciplines and clarifying differences in abstraction between the
disciplines. This effort is providing fundamental insights to support how
instructors can capitalize on commonalities and deliberately provide avenues for
students to practice discipline-dependent reasoning strategies in problem
solving. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Situating the data collection in two very
different universities - a traditional research university in the Midwest and a
majority minority non-traditional university in the Northeast - lends greater
potential relevance to the findings, which is being widely disseminated at high
profile conferences in both science and engineering education. An
interdisciplinary study is producing results that are more readily transferred
to other STEM disciplines, thus enhancing their potential for broad adoption.