* 1348028
* RUI:   Collaborative Research:  Mantle Heterogeneities and Crustal Processes of the Cascade Arc: Small Scale Variations with Broad Implications
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2021
* Jennifer Wenner, University of Wisconsin-Oshkosh
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 06/30/2021
* USD 188,960.00

Subduction zones are important sites of volcanism, continental crustal growth,
and mass transfer from the mantle, through the crust, to the surface. The
Cascade Arc in western North America is located above a subduction zone and
encompasses some of the most active volcanic sites in the contiguous US.
Previous investigations of the evolution of magmas in the Cascades focused on
large-scale complexities in geochemistry, using individual primitive (or mantle-
derived) basalts that erupt there to characterize the mantle. However, the
geochemical array of primitive basalts erupted in close proximity to one another
suggests that heterogeneous mantle domains may exist on a much smaller scale
than previously recognized. Furthermore, many basalts that fit the definition of
'primitive' also have geochemical characteristics typical of some crustal or
magmatic processing. The project will be conducted at two PUIs (University of
Wisconsin Oshkosh and California State University, Chico) and will train 3-5
undergraduate students per year. The wide range of compositions and small area
of the PLC will provide numerous small-scale research questions that can be
answered with geochemical techniques, thus preparing undergraduate students for
graduate study and careers in STEM. This work is transformative for its
important implications for future work in the Cascades and other complex arcs
where large-scale variations of a single volcanic center, across arc segments,
and along entire arc systems are investigated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
this project is to identify and characterize small-scale heterogeneities in the
sub-Cascadian mantle using compositional variations in a suite of basalts in the
Poison Lake chain (PLC) near the Lassen Volcanic Center (LVC) in California.
Detailed study of the geochemical variations in the PLC will shed light on the
nature of mantle diversity beneath the LVC, the Cascades and other complex
subduction zone systems. Given the restricted time and space represented by PLC
primitive basalts (~110-100 ka and 50km2), this work is unique because it
concentrates solely on the variable of composition. Proposed work focuses on two
working hypotheses: 1) Small-scale heterogeneities exist in the mantle and are
represented by those PLC basalts that have not been processed; and 2) a variety
of post mantle processes can be recognized in other PLC basalts, which do not
represent direct mantle melt compositions. Geochemical and petrologic
compositions of the most primitive PLC basalts will be used to characterize
heterogeneous mantle domains and the scale of chemical variation there
(Hypothesis 1). Compositions of modified (less primitive) samples from the PLC
will provide insight into crustal processes that may modify mantle melts on
their traverse from mantle to surface (Hypothesis 2). In this way, the project
will result in models that reflect the scale and composition of mantle
heterogeneity and subsequent intracrustal modification processes based on a very
isolated section of the LVC.