* 1348454
* Collaborative Research:    A community seismic experiment targeting the pre-, syn-, and post-rift evolution of the Mid Atlantic US margin
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Gail Christeson, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Candace Major
* 08/31/2016
* USD 159,403.00

The structure and evolution of the Eastern North America margin are the focus of
this GeoPRISMS community seismic experiment. The data obtained will form a
fundamental framework to address several aspects of the Program's Rift
Initiation and Evolution initiative: how tectonic, magmatic, erosional and
depositional processes interact; the role of mantle dynamics in ongoing
deformation along this passive margin; the impact of ancient regional structure
on long-term evolution that shapes present-day distribution of geologic
activity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A year-long ocean bottom seismometer array
(OBSIP- 30 instruments) will extend onshore station coverage (EarthScope
Transportable Array, ~30 sites relevant) across Cape Hatteras. Additional
transects of densely-spaced seismometers will record seismic waves that travel
across the coastline, documenting more detailed structure from the continental
slope through the coastal plain. Multi-channel seismic reflection data will be
openly available upon completion of a training workshop that will conduct basic
processing. Similarly, seismic refraction data will be distributed for a second
training workshop. Data for investigations using natural seismic events will
also be openly available via the IRIS Data Management Center. Station spacing
and array aperture target crust and upper mantle imaging. The experiment design
builds on existing data to address current scientific questions, emphasizing
both deeper structure, which will illuminate driving forces for ongoing
evolution, and modernizing shallow structural constraints, to better document
surface response records and their relationship to the history of glacial, sea
level, depositional, and magmatic loading.