* 1348121
* EarthScope SAFOD Management Office for Physical Samples
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2020
* Judith Chester, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 09/30/2020
* USD 532,412.00

The funding award supports the San Andreas Fault Observatory at Depth (SAFOD)
Office for Management of Physical Samples at Texas A&amp;M University in College
Station, Texas, from October 2013 to September 2016. The functions of the office
include managing the curation and long-term storage of the SAFOD physical
samples at the IODP Gulf Coast Repository (GCR) of Texas A&amp;M University,
cutting and distributing sub-samples awarded to scientists, maintaining a
digital archive of sampling history and publications resulting from study of the
physical samples, working to increase the diversity of researchers participating
in sample characterizations, and fostering integration of SAFOD results with
those of the broader scientific community studying earthquake mechanics. The
management office works with three committees charged with reviewing policies
and maintaining effective operations necessary to meet commitments to the
Principal Investigator (PI) user community, specifically the SAFOD Advisory
Committee (SAC), the SAFOD Core Sample Working Group (CoSWoG), and the SAFOD
Sample Committee (SSC). The primary objectives of the management office are to
preserve the SAFOD samples in cold storage lockers and to facilitate continuing
use of the samples for independent PI-driven geoscience research. As part of the
management office activities, a Web-based mapping and sample request tool, the
Core Viewer, is maintained and updated annually for communicating sample request
and sample award information to the scientific community. This is the primary
tool for recording, reviewing, and executing sample distributions to
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The San Andreas Fault Observatory at Depth
(SAFOD) is one of the major research facilities of EarthScope and provides for
the study and direct monitoring of the physical and chemical processes that
control fault creep and earthquake rupture in an active plate-boundary fault
zone. The most significant achievements of SAFOD to date are the successful
scientific drilling across the San Andreas Fault at ~3 km depth, initiating an
in situ geological and geophysical characterization of the fault zone, and the
successful collection of valuable core and other physical samples from across
the active components of the fault. The samples form the basis of ongoing
laboratory investigations using a variety of technologies and approaches to
address fundamental questions of earthquake mechanics. These studies are
transforming our understanding of faulting processes and ultimately will advance
modeling and monitoring of seismogenic faults, and earthquake hazard
mitigation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The physical sample collection of SAFOD is
truly exceptional and of great scientific value. The collection is the direct
result of over 15 years of careful planning and completion of a multi-phase,
complex drilling project. The samples provide a window to the active processes
operating in a major active plate-boundary fault at seismogenic depths. The data
and interpretations that result from the scientific analysis of these unique
samples establish an important baseline for comparison with other drilled fault
zones and with geological observations of exhumed faults. Because of their
unique characteristics, the SAFOD samples are in high demand by researchers
worldwide; no other active seismogenic fault zone drilling program is set up to
provide samples to a large number of researchers for continued scientific
discovery. In addition to sample curation and distribution, the SAFOD sample
facility provides valuable materials for education and outreach, and promotes
the sharing of scientific data internationally. Efficient and thoughtful
management of this resource is facilitiating scientific investigations. The
research projects from this project ultimately will benefit society through
improved earthquake hazard mitigation.