* 1348314
* STEM-Discovery
* O/D,OIA
* 02/01/2014,01/31/2020
* Michael Khonsari, Louisiana Board of Regents
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 01/31/2020
* USD 749,000.00

This Research Infrastructure Improvement (RII) Track-3 award seeks to engage
teachers and students from high schools with high enrollment of underrepresented
minority (URM) students in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
(STEM)-based, project driven experiences. The project aims to develop curricular
materials on the engineering design process for adaptation in high schools, and
increase the STEM success of African-American and female students by engaging
them in competitive hands-on activities. The overall goal of this project is to
increase Louisiana's capacity and innovation in STEM fields and develop a
sustainable program that can be adopted broadly across the nation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The STEM-Discovery program
establishes university-high school partnerships and facilitates project-based
STEM learning in the engineering design process. The project offers summer camps
and team competitions that are designed to motivate high school students to
understand the fundamentals of engineering design challenges. The program also
exposes the students to key enabling technologies and helps them develop
teamwork and communication skills. The program is based on the premise that
competition drives excellence and provides connections to real-world
applications such as designing a fuel-cell car. The project also offers
workshops for high school teachers that provide professional development and
networking opportunities. The program is structured to test a small scale pilot,
refine the program by incorporating participant feedback, and expand to engage
more high schools and universities in STEM
partnerships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;Building on
established connections between Louisiana Tech University and high schools, the
STEM-Discovery project has identified twelve partnering high schools with high
URM student enrollments. Over the five years of the project, at least 84
teachers and 252 students from these high schools will be engaged directly in
the workshops and design competitions. Teacher professional development and
interaction among students at these schools have the potential to attract non-
participating students and stimulate their interest in higher education and
careers in STEM-related areas. Broad dissemination of the project content to a
larger audience is provided through virtual learning venues and workshops at
national professional conferences. The model of empowering underrepresented
minority students and teachers in high schools through project-based learning by
immersion in content focused camps and design project competitions is
potentially scalable and adaptable across the nation.