* 1348046
* Lightning Initiation and Propagation with an Advanced Computer Model and Code
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/2014,02/28/2017
* Hamid Rassoul, Florida Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 02/28/2017
* USD 566,732.00

This award will allow for the investigation of the initiation and propagation of
lightning through developing an advanced computer model and code, performing
numerical simulations, and conducting theoretical analysis. How lightning
originates inside thunderclouds and propagates through air is a longstanding
fundamental problem in the field of atmospheric electricity. It has been
suggested that there are three critical steps in lightning initiation and
propagation: initiation and propagation of streamers that are relatively cold
plasma channels, transition from streamers to bright, hot, highly conductive
leaders, and propagation of leaders. Recent studies have firmly established that
streamers can be initiated from thundercloud hydrometeors subject to the maximum
thundercloud electric field measured so far. However, the other two steps of
lightning initiation and propagation remain poorly understood. It is unknown
whether the streamers originating from thundercloud hydrometeors will be able to
generate the first leader at their stem, and if they can, how the streamer-to-
leader transition occurs and how this transition depends on thundercloud
conditions such as thundercloud charge and field. In addition, experiments and
observations have indicated that the most common type of lightning leaders
called negative leaders develops in a stepping manner. Perhaps being one of the
most "mysterious" phenomena in atmospheric electricity, luminous blob structures
known as "space stems" are found to appear in front of the negative leader tip
and they develop into bidirectional "space leaders" to support the stepping
propagation of negative leaders. There is currently no theory that offers an
explanation for the formation of space stems and space
leaders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the project is to develop an
advanced computer model and code to study lightning initiation and propagation.
A three-dimensional computer code, that includes all required plasma kinetic and
gas dynamic components to self-consistently model streamer propagation, leader
initiation, and formation of space stems and space leaders, will be developed.
With the developed model and code, the following research activities will be
conducted: (1) investigating the characteristics of long (&gt;10 cm) streamers
propagating in electric fields near or greater than the streamer propagation
threshold fields, (2) studying the initiation of streamers from the trail of an
expanding, accelerating streamer of opposite polarity and its implications for
the formation of space stems and space leaders, and (3) investigating air
heating in the channels of streamers originating from hydrometeors, the
possibility of the formation of the first leader channel at their stem, and the
formation of space stems and space leaders in front of a negative
leader.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit :&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit
of these activities is defined by the direct attack on one of the most
challenging problems in lightning research and by the investigation of the
least-understood processes of lightning. With the recent development of
lightning experiments, observations and theories, great progress has been made
in lightning research. The work will fill a gap in the knowledge of electrical
breakdown processes of lightning to further advance the current understanding of
lightning, and it will also result in development of an advanced computer model
and code that will be used for lightning research for years to
come.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts :&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of these
activities include: (1) advancement of scientific knowledge in a subject that
may contribute to improving the current practice and/or developing new
techniques to better forecast severe weather, especially under the increasing
pressure of adapting to climate change, (2) improvement of science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) education, (3) development of STEM
workforce, (4) participation of women and underrepresented minorities in
scientific research, (5) development of simulation software and approaches that
will benefit research work in other areas such as laboratory plasma discharges
and high-altitude sprites and jets, and (6) broad dissemination of the results
in the forms of refereed publications, conference presentations, public lectures
and press releases.