* 1348416
* ARI-MA: Dissuading Adversaries and their RN Pathways: Integrating Deterrence Theory and Analytics in the GNDA
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/15/2013,09/30/2015
* Brandon Behlendorf, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2015
* USD 376,981.00

The proposed multidisciplinary project will analyze the deterrent and deflective
effects of a range of potential defensive investments in the Global Nuclear
detection Architecture (GNDA) on adversary behaviors. Using a Stackelberg game-
theoretical model in which the defender and adversaries are embedded in a
geospatial network where segments and points exert influence on both sets of
actors cost-benefit analyses, the project will identify optimal investment and
communication strategy equilibria that&lt;br/&gt;simultaneously minimize the
non-state adversary radiological or nuclear threat (risk, vulnerability and
consequence) and implementation costs. The existing models variously assess: a)
adversaries? likely interest in, means of acquiring and weaponizing materials,
and the success thereof; b) targeting preferences; c) weapon command and control
preferences; and d) smuggling route preferences. Additional models under
development expressly take into account the impact of future technological and
geopolitical developments on adversary RN behavior and will also be integrated
into the proposed project. In addition to the likely practical value of this
project, it will significantly advance the study of non-state adversary
deterrence by exploring the effects and interactions between different types of
deterrent strategies. The integration of interdisciplinary theories, game-
theoretical insights, and robust real-world empiricism will greatly enhance the
fundamental understanding of the dynamic interactions between non-state
adversaries and the GNDA. As a result, the project will advance the
understanding of deterrence within a geospatial context, the distinctions
between deterrence and deflection, the second order effects of deterrent efforts
on non-targeted actors, and the potential effects and effectiveness of strategic
communication with non-state adversaries. Most importantly, the proposed project
will involve undergraduate students and a post-doctoral researcher, working on a
multi-university, multi-disciplinary project which integrates rigorous
theoretical development with practitioner-oriented outcomes.