* 1348401
* Cyber-Learning Activities to Scaffold STEM Practices (CLASSP)
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* P.G. Schrader, Nevada System of Higher Education
* Standard Grant
* chinonye nnakwe
* 09/30/2017
* USD 749,700.00

This project adopts a design-based research approach to advance the theoretical
agenda associated with cyber-learning activities and STEM educational practices.
It addresses the overarching question: how can innovative, cyber-enabled
instructional methods transform STEM education and increase opportunities for
underrepresented middle school student populations? A cyber-learning methodology
is being developed, implemented, and tested with respect to elevating STEM
learning opportunities and success for underrepresented minority and rural
middle school students in NV.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed approach combines a proven system for
online inquiry with a feedback system that is informed by research on
videogames. As a way to promote STEM practices (e.g., justifying claims, citing
evidence), strategic rewards based on learning achievements and desired
behaviors are incorporated into the existing pedagogical framework. In this way,
cyber-learning activities are enhanced through just-in-time feedback as it
relates directly to practices associated with success in STEM. This system is
being developed in concert with a community of practitioners within the existing
Nevada Gaining Early Awareness and Readiness Undergraduate Program (GEAR UP)
network, a project that addresses the college preparation of underrepresented
populations. The primary target audience of the project is a subset of middle
school students identified through GEAR UP partnerships, specifically those from
ethnically and racially diverse and economically disadvantaged communities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed approach
employs Cyber-Learning Activities to Scaffold STEM Practices (CLASSP) in
partnership with NV GEAR UP. Through this partnership, the impact of the
projects' cyber-learning methodology is piloted in hybrid formats (online and
face-to-face interactions) with students in the urban settings of Reno and Las
Vegas. The final phase of the project expands this methodology to meet the
interests and needs of rural educators and students in remote areas of Nevada.
Although the cyber-learning method is experimental, the technology requirements
are low. As a result, CLASSP is capable of being integrated into the most
rudimentary technology infrastructures. The lessons learned will inform teacher
training and STEM education of diverse students (i.e., ethnic, racial, and
economic diversity), locally and across vast geographic distances. Further, the
transition from a local to a regional implementation of CLASSP's cyber-learning
methodology will directly inform the potential to disseminate CLASSP on a
national scale.