* 1348916
* Embodied Social Cognition and the Decision to Act
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Jessica Witt, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 06/30/2018
* USD 300,000.00

How do we determine if someone poses a threat? To make this assessment, not only
do we draw on external cues (e.g., the individual and surrounding environment),
but we also use our own internal cues (e.g., our personalities, situations, and
contexts) to guide these perceptions and judgments. Theories of embodied social
cognition posit that the state of one's body (e.g., clothing or accessories) and
behavioral repertoire (e.g., skills and abilities) influence our perceptions and
thoughts about other people in our environment. Therefore, simple cues such as
what we are wearing or holding can shape how we interpret and understand our
social world. The present investigation will examine how holding objects with
different meanings can change how we perceive the intentions of others. For
example, do we perceive others differently if we are holding a gun versus
holding a phone? This research will examine the role of individual differences
and situation-specific factors that affect the likelihood that holding a gun
will produce false perceptions about the actions of others; for example, whether
they incorrectly believe another person is holding a gun instead of another
object. If this type of misperception occurs in real life situations, it could
be costly. Falsely perceiving that someone else is holding a gun could lead to
negative consequences, including instigating violence towards unarmed
individuals who do not pose a significant threat. This research could be
relevant for the law and judicial system when violence or other crime results
from misunderstandings of threat. Additionally, the findings could be used to
educate those who might carry a gun as part of their occupation on how this
could shift their observations and judgments, which could mitigate
misperceptions. Overall, the proposed work will contribute to our understanding
on the importance of individual differences and situational contexts for how we
perceive and understand our social surroundings. This is particularly important
when the context in question has implications for misperceiving malicious intent
of others.