* 1348078
* Collaborative Research: A Detrital Zircon Record of California Arc Magmatism
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Diane Clemens Knott, CSU Fullerton Auxiliary Services Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 08/31/2017
* USD 30,302.00

Magmatic activity associated with the convergence and subduction of tectonic
plates typically results in an array of volcanic complexes in the overriding
plate and their subterranean plumbing systems. Given that volcanic systems and
related intrusive igneous rocks form over tens of millions of years and commonly
result in large volcanic edifices that are constantly subjected to erosion and
burial, reconstructing the complete timing and geochemical evolution of volcanic
systems can be difficult due to large gaps in the geologic record. In this
study, the principal investigators are using a trace mineral commonly found in
sedimentary rocks to help fill in gaps in our understanding of the geologic
evolution of the volcanic and intrusive rocks of the Sierra Nevada volcanic arc
of California. The object of this study is zircon, a mineral that commonly forms
when igneous crystallize and its chemical structure contains radioactive
elements that can be precisely dated by isotopic methods. In addition, other
chemical elements provide a means by which the chemical evolution of the
magmatic system may be revealed. Zircon is an unusually resistant mineral to
chemical and mechanical breakdown in fluvial systems and it is commonly
preserved in sedimentary rocks. Its abundance in many sedimentary rocks ensures
that it can provide a record of volcanic and igneous rocks that have long since
been eroded away by analyzing their chemistry and dating them. Analysis of such
zircons thus provides a means by which the history of missing parts of volcanic
arcs may be reconstructed, and this information can be used to unravel details
of the tectonic and geodynamic evolution of the region in which the volcanic
rocks were formed. In addition to the scientific objectives of the research, the
project is contributing to important societal outcomes, including the training
and mentoring of undergraduate students in a STEM discipline, as well as
broadening of participation of underrepresented groups in science. The project
represents a four-part collaboration between academic institutions of diverse
type and educational mission.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this study is to
combine age and trace element geochemistry of detrital zircons as proxy records
for the evolution of the Mesozoic Cordilleran magmatic arc system. Zircon is an
accessory mineral in a wide variety of igneous rocks, and is resistant to
recrystallization during hydrothermal alteration and sedimentation. Detrital
zircon can yield time-integrated records of magmatic systems. Zircon from in
situ igneous rocks and detrital zircons derived from them together have the
capability of recording both precise ages and variations in melt compositions in
a long-lived magmatic environment, and when paired with studies of in situ
igneous rock suites, detrital zircon records may provide a relatively more
complete and detailed understanding of vertical and secular variations in
partially eroded and incompletely exhumed magmatic systems. The principal
investigators in this study will analyze populations of arc-derived detrital
zircons in order to develop detrital proxy records of (1) the age and petrologic
asymmetry of this arc that was constructed across a variable basement and (2)
the geochemical variability of magmas through pulses and lulls in arc magmatism.
Based on observations from an initial data set derived from a retroarc foreland
basin, the principal investigators hypothesize that arc-derived detrital zircons
can provide a temporally-controlled record of the evolution of average melt
compositions over the full life span of the Cordilleran arc. They will study
detrital zircon from a series of stratigraphic sections from within the forearc,
intra-arc, and retroarc regions of the Cordilleran arc. Uranium-Lead (U-Pb)
isotopic dates and trace element geochemistry of detrital zircons from these
sections will allow them to evaluate the latitudinal and longitudinal variations
in arc magmatism, and secular variations in zircon geochemistry will in turn
help them test hypotheses regarding average melt compositions during magmatic
pulses and lulls. These zircon age and geochemical records will also allow us to
link magmatic pulses to tectonic events, such as episodes of crustal thickening
within and beneath the arc. Thus these zircon geochemical data will constitute a
useful new tool, both by describing the petrotectonic evolution of this long-
lived arc system and by adding new geochemical constraints to detrital zircon
provenance interpretations.