* 1348200
* Conference on Conformal Geometry and Riemann Surfaces
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2014
* Yunping Jiang, CUNY Queens College
* Standard Grant
* Edward Taylor
* 09/30/2014
* USD 15,500.00

The conference "Conformal Geometry and Riemann Surfaces -- A conference in Honor
of Professor Ravi S. Kulkarni" will be held at Queens College of the City
University of New York, 65-30 Kiseena Blvd, Flushing, NY 11367, on October 25,
26, and 27, 2013. The subject of Riemann surfaces is one of the most fundamental
areas in mathematics. Mathematicians in the 19th century extensively worked on
Riemann surfaces from the point of view of algebraic curves, often by concretely
representing them as a branched covering of the Riemann sphere, using a
meromorphic function. The idea of analytic continuation of germs of holomorphic
functions had also led to the study of Riemann surfaces. Riemann's famous 1851
dissertation inaugurated the study of geometrical methods in function theory.
Here, one finds the idea of a Riemann surface as a covering surface with a
system of local uniformizing parameters. The publication of Weyl's 1913 classic
began the formal study of Riemann surfaces, where a Riemann surface was
understood to be a connected complex manifold of one complex dimension. At
present, the subject of Riemann surfaces is at the heart of many important
branches of modern mathematics. It intersects with a broad range of fields, like
geometric function theory, hyperbolic manifolds, discontinuous groups, complex
dynamics, and more recently, string theory in particle physics.

The main goal of our conference is to bring together leading researchers in
conformal geometry, Riemann surfaces, and related fields, who will talk on the
present state of research in their specialized areas, and also give a broad
overview of how their research is related with other areas of mathematics. An
important purpose of this conference is to honor the many fundamental
contributions of Ravi Kulkarni to a wide range of mathematical areas closely
related to discontinuous groups, conformal geometry, and Riemann surfaces. The
aim is to explore some of the key developments in the areas related to, or
directly influenced by Kulkarni's broad research contributions. We expect this
to be a very stimulating conference, with ample scope for mathematical
interactions. All invited speakers are outstanding experts in their fields of
expertise. They will give an excellent overview of the many areas that interact
with conformal geometry and Riemann surfaces. There will be about 70
participants, who will immensely benefit from the wide range of talks. The City
University of New York has a lively and very active group of researchers working
in Riemann surfaces and various aspects of conformal geometry. We are especially
interested in inviting graduate students and postdoctoral fellows from CUNY
Graduate Center, New York University, Columbia University, SUNY at StonyBrook,
Rutgers (Newark), and Yale University. In particular, we want to invite recent
Ph.Ds and young assistant professors from all CUNY Colleges (Senior and
Community Colleges). Many of them are seriously interested to continue research.
This conference will give them a very good opportunity to interact with other
mathematicians, and get an exposure to some important research problems. We
expect this conference to be of great help for young mathematicians who are
interested in Riemann surfaces and related topics, and who also aspire to be
future specialists.