* 1348797
* EAGER: Fundamental Study on Decrystalization of Cellulose for High-Yield Saccharification of Biomass
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2015
* Y. Lee, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Rorrer
* 09/30/2015
* USD 75,843.00

Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;PI: Lee, Y. Y&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
1348797&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Auburn University&lt;br/&gt;Title: Fundamental
Study on Decrystalization of Cellulose for High-Yield Saccharification of
Biomass&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a high-yield acid-
catalyzed hydrolysis of biomass where the hydrolysis reaction is carried out
under the conditions where decrystallization occurs prior to or concurrently
with hydrolysis. This investigation will focus on the fundamental aspects of the
decrystallization process using a stopped-flow micro reactor system designed to
measure the extent of decrystallization by instantaneous detection of
temperature change. With proper choice of reaction conditions extending to the
region previously unexplored, this process can attain high sugar yield, with
acid input much lower than that of the conventional ?concentrated sulfuric acid
process?. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main resistance of acid hydrolysis of
cellulose exists in the rigid crystalline structure which is held by tightly
arranged hydrogen bonds. A method will be established to detect sulfuric acid
induced decrystallization by instantaneous tracing of the temperature change
caused by cleavage of hydrogen bonds. This method relies on using a modified
?Stopped-Flow? micro-reactor assembly capable of accurately tracing the
temperature change in a fast reacting system. Using&lt;br/&gt;this method, the
following hypotheses regarding decrystallization of cellulose will be proven or
reaffirmed: (1) Decrystallization of cellulose behaves as a phase-change in that
it occurs at a precise point in temperature (critical temperature) for a given
acid concentration; (2) There are infinitely many decrystallization points,
forming a unique correlation curve in the temperature vs. acid concentration
plane; (3) Within the zone above the curve, decrystallization of cellulose
occurs prior to hydrolysis, promoting rapid hydrolysis and high yield, whereas
within the zone below the curve, decrystallization does not occur resulting poor
sugar yields. This unique relationship curve will be determined for Avicel
(micro-crystalline cellulose) and for pretreated hemicellulose-free corn stover.
The results of this work will provide scientific and technical information
needed for improvement of the current thermo-chemical biomass processing
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A number of companies are developing
commercial-scale processes on the basis of acid catalyzed biomass hydrolysis.
The need for cheap sugars is ever increasing as the number of useful products
derived from the sugar is fast growing. This investigation will provide better
understanding on recalcitrance of cellulosic biomass induced by the crystalline
structure, how it affects the hydrolysis, more importantly how the crystallinity
can be reduced or removed. The fundamental knowledge to be gained by this work
will find broad applications in production of fuels and other useful chemicals
from renewable resources. The information along these lines can also be used as
a tool to refine the process to make low-crystalline or nano-crystalline
cellulose, which may be intermediates on the way to fully decrystallized
cellulose.