* 1348098
* EAGER: Magnetically Assembling and Soldering of Nanoscale Metal Network into Phase Change Material
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2015
* Hongwei Sun, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 09/30/2015
* USD 98,542.00

This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) grant provides funding
to study the feasibility of a manufacturing process to synthesize and embed a
metallic nanowire network into phase change materials to enhance thermal
performance of phase-change energy storage systems. In general, the low thermal
conductivity of phase change materials is still a critical limiting factor that
needs to be addressed to achieve large scale and robust energy storage systems
to maximize the efficiency of renewable energy sources. The hypothesis is that
the metal nanowire network will facilitate the pass for heat flow and yield
significant enhancement in thermal conductivity of phase change material. The
processing steps will consist of manipulating magnetic nanowires under an
applied magnetic field followed by a thermal soldering process. First, multi-
segmented magnetic nanowires with a magnetic core (Nickel or Cobalt) and two
soldering heads will be fabricated using a template based electrodeposition
method. Second, the magnetic nanowires will be assembled under a static magnetic
field to form nanowire columns in the direction of the applied field. Finally,
the entire phase change material will be heated to a temperature above the
melting point of the solders to permanently bond nanowires into a network. The
structural morphology of the nanowire network will be characterized by scanning
electron microscopy. The bonded network will be subjected to
melting/solidification cycles to determine the stability and mechanical
integrity of the nanostructure. The heat transport capability of the nanowire
network will be evaluated through electric conductance measurements. The
relationships between network structure and processing parameters such as
magnetic field strength, nanowire loading, heating and soldering temperatures,
and material thermophysical properties will be investigated through a combined
experimental and analytical approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the
present research will enable a new kind of phase change material, which will
impact the renewable energy storage industry and a number of diverse
applications such as compact heat exchangers, electronic cooling, and smart
textiles for thermal protection. The outcome of this research will contribute to
a fundamental understanding of phase change and thermal transport processes in
nanostructured composite materials. In addition, the understanding of the
interactions of nanowires and formation of structural networks under a magnetic
field will contribute to the nanomanufacturing of composite materials that could
potentially be used in industries such as medical, automobile, food processing
and semiconductor packaging.