* 1348031
* Rapid Miocene Thrust Propagation and Wholesale Basin Partitioning along the Central and Southern Andes, Argentina
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2018
* Neil 'Ryan' McKenzie, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 05/31/2018
* USD 298,480.00

Integrated analyses of sedimentary basin evolution, structural timing, and
geochronology of bedrock and basin fill will better define the history of
erosional exhumation, thrust-fault propagation, tectonic subsidence, and
structural partitioning of the Andean fold-thrust belt and proximal foreland
basin in west-central Argentina. The project focuses on the delineation of
north-south variations among three key regional transects along the transition
from the central to southern Andes at 31-35 degrees south. Although available
evidence suggests periods of rapid eastward advance of Cenozoic fold-thrust
deformation toward the craton, the temporal and spatial relationships are not
well resolved. Further unclear is the degree to which the structural and
sedimentary processes have been influenced by major north-south contrasts in the
geometry of the subducted Nazca slab, the magmatic history of the Andean
volcanic arc, and the configuration of inherited pre-Cenozoic structures. This
field-based investigation will generate sedimentary, structural, and
chronological datasets to compare and contrast the detailed evolution of the
distinct frontal tectonic zones in the eastern retro-arc region of the Andes
Mountains in order to evaluate the advance of shortening and erosional recycling
of foreland basin fill.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The transition from the central to
southern Andes includes the best-understood example of modern flat-slab
subduction and a key example of inversion tectonics by reactivation of
preexisting rift structures. This active continental margin provides an
excellent opportunity to examine the potential controls on rapid advance of
crustal shortening and wholesale partitioning of adjacent foreland basins, a
process suggested for other convergent orogenic systems. A detailed
investigation of basin development and bedrock exhumation in the eastern retro-
arc zones will allow us to explore the potential importance of structural
inversion and magmatic pulses in the advance of the deformation front, as well
as the dynamic upper lithospheric response and surface expression, or lack
thereof, resulting from flat-slab subduction. This will further understanding of
Andean tectonics and provide valuable insights that can be extrapolated to
regions of current and past flat-slab subduction in other convergent
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will support field and laboratory
investigations by a faculty member, a postdoctoral scholar, and graduate and
undergraduate students from the University of Texas at Austin. These efforts
will be integrated with those of regional experts from academic institutions and
the hydrocarbon industry in Argentina. This project will promote new
international academic-industry collaborations and establish the framework for
academic exchange visits, in order to providing reciprocal international
learning experiences and facilitating longer term research collaborations. The
project will also support public outreach and education through existing
programs in the Jackson School of Geosciences at UT-Austin, including the
GEOFORCE program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funds to support the international
activities associated with this project are being provided by the NSF Office of
International Science and Engineering.