* 1348990
* Modeling Scientific Practice in High School Biology: A Next Generation Instructional Resource
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/2013,12/31/2017
* Richard Grosberg, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* David B. Campbell
* 12/31/2017
* USD 1,963,466.00

This project addresses an immediate challenge facing high school science
education: the need for a curricular resource package to support a high school
biology course fully aligned to the core ideas, crosscutting concepts, and
scientific practices of College and Career Readiness standards. The project will
develop a suite of resources including educative curricular materials,
pedagogical tools, intensive teacher professional development, and video
documentation of exemplary implementation and investigate the impact of the
instructional resource on teacher and student learning. The full curricular
resource package will be coupled with an innovative online lesson builder to
foster a cycle of continuous improvement, as teachers document their adaptations
to the curricular resources over time.

The project has four phases. During the design phase a team of university
faculty and science education experts work with two high school biology teachers
to modify existing exemplary curriculum materials and instructional supports and
align them to the College and Career Readiness science standards. These newly
created materials and supports are piloted by the two collaborating teachers and
data from the pilot are used to refine the materials. Once the package is
complete and refined it will be implemented by an additional ten high school
biology teachers. Data from the implementation will allow research into how
teachers use the materials to plan their lessons, how the materials are enacted
in classrooms and the effects the materials have on student learning. The final
phase of the project will be to disseminate the resulting curriculum package and
research findings to the public.

The project leverages, aligns and amplifies the NSF-developed resources of
previously successful researchers and their tools, methodologies and supports.
The need for truly aligned curricula and supports will be pressing as new core
standards are implemented across the nation. There is a need for re-tooling the
skills and pedagogical approaches of many teachers in the face of the current
reforms. The project will meet these needs and provide a substantive
contribution to the emerging national vision of quality science education.