* 1348857
* Research on the Use of Visual Cueing and Feedback to Facilitate Problem Solving
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2018
* Brett DePaola, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 12/31/2018
* USD 1,233,906.00

The Research on the Use of Visual Cueing and Feedback to Facilitate Problem
Solving project uses a rigorous experimental design to expand understanding of
the role of visual cues and correctness feedback on undergraduate problem
solving, specifically mathematics and physics, as well as the interaction
between cues and feedback. The project combines theoretical perspectives on
problem solving (representational change theory) with theoretical perspectives
on multimedia learning (cognitive theory of multimedia learning) as well as
empirical research on visual cueing and feedback to develop and refine a
conceptual model for STEM problem solving.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Representational change theory, used in this project,
purports three mechanisms to break an impasse: (i) adding information to the
problem to enrich the existing representation (i.e. elaboration); (ii) replacing
the existing representation with a different, more productive representation
(i.e. re-encoding); or (iii) removing unnecessary constraints often self-imposed
by the problem solver (i.e. constraint relaxation). This project explores the
use of visual cueing and feedback to harness two (elaboration and re-coding) of
these three factors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cognitive theory of multimedia
learning identifies three distinct stages involved in learning from multimodal
information. Selection is attending to relevant pieces of sensory information
from each modality. Organization is using the selected information to create a
coherent internal representation. Integration is combining internal
representations with activated prior knowledge. All three stages of multimedia
learning are influenced by the learner's prior knowledge. They are all explored
in this study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The foundational questions addressed by this
project are: What are the malleable factors (i.e. factors that we can control)
that affect learners' use of visual information while solving STEM problems? How
can we alter these factors to positively influence students' problem solving in
STEM? What moderating factors influence the outcome?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
explore these questions, the researchers conduct two studies in introductory
college mathematics and physics courses to investigate the effects of a) cueing,
b) feedback, and c) their interaction, on 1) problem solving performance, and 2)
eye movements of problem solving involving graphics. Furthermore, the study
investigates these effects both i) during training and ii) at transfer. These
studies control for students' prior domain knowledge, initial problem solving
skills, and initial eye movements on the problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader significance of this project, which engages researchers in STEM
education and visual cognitive psychology, is that it has the potential to
impact the use of diagrams in STEM problem solving, initially in mathematics and
physics, with implications for broader STEM disciplines. A benefit of the
research emanating from this project is the infusion of approaches from
cognitive psychology regarding visual cueing into STEM education instruction and
research. Ultimately, the findings of this project have tangible applications to
online instruction which is becoming increasingly ubiquitous in STEM education.