* 1348519
* EAGER: Hybrid Analog-Digital Automata in Microbial Cells
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2015
* Rahul Sarpeshkar, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 08/31/2015
* USD 300,000.00

Molecular computation by cells helps them process signals in their environment
to make important decisions. Such computation in cells is both analog, which
uses signals with shades of grey and operations that are probabilistic or
graded, and also digital, which uses "on" and "off" signals and operations that
are logical. The hybrid analog-digital computation in the cell is an extremely
important reason for why it is highly efficient in its use of energy and
molecular parts (proteins, RNA, and DNA molecules), which are severely limited
in number compared with artificial computational systems. For example, current
digital microprocessors have nearly a billion electronic parts and a relatively
plentiful supply of energy. The cell is several orders of magnitude more energy
and part-count efficient than even the best digital computers of the far future
are ever expected to be. For advancing the foundations of computer science
beyond its boundaries, and for the future of biotechnology and medicine, it is
important to understand and to artificially engineer hybrid analog-digital
computation in living cells. The proposal focuses on how to engineer a hybrid
analog-digital computational automaton in microbial cells that can enable it to
sense, amplify, and process analog input molecular signals into pulsatile
digital output molecular signals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
&lt;br/&gt;This work combines innovations and knowledge from several disciplines
to potentially create a paradigm-changing capability in the fields of synthetic
biology, systems biology, molecular programming, biotechnology, computer
science, and medicine: 1) Hybrid analog-digital automata can perform complex
computations with very few parts and little energy, and the research here can
help advance fundamental work in computer science in this area; 2) The highly
efficient instantiation of a spiking-neuron-like automaton with only four genes
in a microbe creates a fundamental new computational motif that can be ported to
a wide range of molecular implementations including in-vitro molecular systems,
in-vivo microbial, yeast, and mammalian cells; 3) The microbial fuel cell
automaton enables sensitive and continuous molecular sensing to be built in a
wide range of hosts without the need for bulky, expensive, non-continuous and
toxic photo-bleaching optical systems; 4) By creating molecular cellular
automata that serve to implement sophisticated molecular sensing, pattern
recognition, and collective computation, the proposal could enable very large
scale molecular computational systems to become
practical.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: &lt;br/&gt;The hybrid analog-
digital automata is a computational motif that could be widely applied to
synthetic cell-based treatments in medicine. Microbial sensing and computational
systems that are capable of sensing, amplifying, digitizing and classifying
minute concentrations of input molecules could have wide application in the
food, biotechnology, pharmaceutical, environmental, and security industries. PI
participates in the Society of Women Engineers, MIT Summer Research Program,
Saturday Engineering Enrichment Discovery Program, and computational and systems
biology recruitment programs at MIT, which actively target women and
underrepresented minorities.