* 1348696
* CCF:AF:EAGER Algorithmic Paradigms for Computation on MapReduce
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2015
* Kameshwar Munagala, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Rahul Shah
* 08/31/2015
* USD 100,000.00

Rapid advances in sensing technologies, as well as the ubiquity of online social
and information networks, have led to unprecedented increase in the size and
quantity of data sets that need to be stored and processed. Researchers are only
beginning to grapple with the scale of data that modern systems generate. This
provides a unique opportunity to design and implement algorithms at a scale that
wasn't witnessed before, leading to unique challenges. The focus of this project
is on designing algorithms for (arguably) the dominant computing paradigm for
big data, MapReduce, and its variants. Despite its broad adoption across
industries, there is very little work on developing theoretical models for these
systems, or developing algorithms for natural optimization problems that arise
in big-data applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to develop a
strong theoretical understanding of large-scale data processing and a principled
approach to algorithm design in these settings. The key challenge with
MapReduce-type platforms is that they incorporate and modify aspects from
several computing paradigms, such as streaming and parallel computing, which
leads to significant challenges in modeling such systems and in developing
algorithm design principles that apply across platforms. The principal
investigator (PI) first seeks to define complexity measures for MapReduce
algorithms. The PI next aims to find connections to and differentiate from more
classical and widely studied models such as the Parallel Random Access Machine
(PRAM), streaming computation, and I/O-efficient computation models, seeking to
discover common algorithm design principles and computational limitations in
this process. Via this process, the PI will develop efficient algorithms for
classes of graph theoretic and statistical optimization problems that arise in
big-data settings, and will also develop a suite of practical implementations
for these. The problems considered in this proposal are of fundamental nature,
as evinced by their long and historic roots in theoretical computer science,
parallel computation, and databases. Computational science will benefit from
this research. Other broader impacts include graduate and undergraduate training
in research and education.