* 1348530
* Collaborative Research: Large-Scale Research on Engineering Design Based on Big Learner Data Logged by a CAD Tool
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2018
* Charles Xie, Concord Consortium
* Standard Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 12/31/2018
* USD 999,921.00

PARTICIPATING INSTITUTIONS: &lt;br/&gt;Concord Consortium
(Lead)&lt;br/&gt;Purdue University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CORE AREA(s):
&lt;br/&gt;STEM Learning/STEM Learning Environments&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PROJECT
DESCRIPTION &lt;br/&gt;Practicing science is one of the most important goals of
K-12 engineering education, which is now part of the Next Generation Science
Standards. Although previous research suggests that engineering design is an
effective pedagogical approach to promoting science learning, there are concerns
about the "design-science gap" that fails science learning in design projects.
This project is delving into large quantities of process data to systematically
identify bottlenecks in design processes that pose difficulties for students to
apply science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Large learner datasets are being collected
from over 3,000 students in Indiana and Massachusetts through automatic,
unobtrusive logging of student design processes enabled by a unique CAD tool
that supports the design of energy-efficient buildings using thermodynamics and
heat transfer concepts. Large data sets - consisting of fine-grained information
of student actions, experimentation results, electronic notes, and design
artifacts - are used to reconstruct the entire learning trajectory of each
individual student. Powerful process analytics (e.g., time series analysis and
association rule mining) are being developed and applied to reveal patterns and
trends across student groups and knowledge domains. Through a combination of
these large data sets with pre/post-tests and demographic data, this project is
answering the following research questions: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;RQ1: What are
the common patterns of student design behaviors and how are they associated with
prior knowledge, project duration, design performance, learning outcomes, and
demographic factors? &lt;br/&gt;RQ2: How do students deepen their understanding
of science concepts involved in engineering design projects? &lt;br/&gt;RQ3: How
often and deeply do students use scientific experimentation to make a design
choice? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This five-year project is starting with six small-
scale studies in years 1&amp;2 to calibrate the process analytics by comparing
with classroom observations, expert evaluations, and student interviews. The
process analytics will then validate the research methodology by using the
Informed Design Teaching and Learning Matrix, based on a meta-analysis of
literature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER SIGNIFICANCE &lt;br/&gt;The
scale of the project will allow for greater representation of student diversity
that is not readily attainable in small-scale studies. The project is
contributing to the emerging fields of educational data mining and learning
analytics through researching one of the most complex STEM practices --
engineering design. Computer Aided Design data possess all four characteristics
of big data defined by IBM. The big data have the potential to yield direct,
measurable evidence of learning at a statistically significant scale. Automation
is making this research approach highly scalable and automatic process analytics
is paving the road for building adaptive and predictive software for teaching
engineering design. As a by-product of this project, the redacted datasets will
be freely available to any researcher who is interested in mining them.