* 1348070
* RAPID: Technological versus Natural Disasters: Consequences for Early Recovery Planning and Decision-Making at the Community and Household Level
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2015
* Walter Peacock, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 07/31/2015
* USD 43,893.00

The purpose of this Rapid Response Research (RAPID) grant is to explore
community and resident post-disaster recovery in two small US towns. Both towns
experienced disasters in the spring of 2013, but one town experienced a natural
disaster while the other town had a technological disaster. To understand how
disaster recovery differs based on the type of disaster, we are comparing the
immediate recovery periods in each town. Often researchers compare disaster
effects across very different communities or across different time periods. Our
research takes advantage of a rare opportunity to compare disaster recovery in
communities that are similar in size, location, and cultural traits but faced
different disasters at about the same time. We are gathering data from community
leaders and residents in both towns to address topics important to disaster
recovery, including post-disaster community planning, community-based recovery
activities, and residents' rebuilding or relocating decisions and efforts.

Although previous research has improved what people know about disasters, how
communities recover from them, and what makes communities resilient, there is
still a lot to learn. The results of our research will help other communities as
they plan for the disasters they face. This research responds directly to
efforts by US Federal and state governments to increase the disaster resilience
of local communities. Communities across the country face the risk of both types
of disaster. Man-made disasters, such as industrial accidents, explosions, or
chemical leaks, are a risk for any community that has hazardous facilities
located near homes and businesses. Natural disasters, such as tornadoes, floods,
hurricanes, and earthquakes, regularly occur across the country. Based on what
is learned in this project, recommendations will be made about how other local
communities can increase their resilience and be better able to recover from
disasters when they do occur.