* 1348269
* ARI-MA: Fabrication of Solid-State Large Area Thermal Neutron Detectors at a Low Cost
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2015
* Yaron Danon, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 09/30/2015
* USD 291,000.00

1348269 (Danon). Detection of nuclear materials such as U and Pu is often
accomplished by utilizing their natural or induced neutron emission. Such
systems typically use thermal neutron detectors inside a plastic moderator. In
order to achieve high detection efficiency He-3 or BF-3 filled thermal neutron
detectors are utilized; these detectors require high voltage bias for operation,
which complicates the system when many detectors are used in one system. In
addition He-3 detectors are bulky and do not fit well for portable applications.
A better type of detector would be an inexpensive solid-state detector that can
be massively produced like any other computer chips. If such a detector does not
require a bias for operation, could be produced with small or large surface
area, and has a low gamma sensitivity and fast response, it will be the ideal
low-cost detector for future neutron detection systems. Such detector was
developed at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute with demonstrated area of 8 cm2
(with single commercial preamplifier) and measured efficiency of 30% for 0.0253
eV neutrons. This project focuses on improvements of the fabrication process to
utilize wet etching of Si (110), electrophoretic deposition of boron
nanoparticles, and a design of compact integrated electronic readout. These
improvements will reduce the production cost significantly, while improving the
performance due to deeper silicon etching. The end result is targeted to be a
low cost solid-state thermal neutron detector that is suitable and ready for use
in many DNDO related applications. Intellectual merit includes development of
new low-cost boron nanoparticle deposition methods to replace the LPCVD process.
It also includes wet etching method with large aspect ratio; a low cost
alternative to currently used Bosch process. In order to significantly improve
the overall efficiency further, multiple device wafers are stacked together
before interfacing with the compact integrated electronic readout. Additional
contribution is education of students in the area of nuclear detector
development that includes radiation interaction with matter and solid- state
detector fabrication. The broader impact of this proposal is the development of
a novel type of high efficiency self-powered solid-state neutron detector with a
low production cost. The development in device fabrication will result in a new
type of charged particle detectors based on solar-cell technology. In addition
to homeland security applications, these technologies have applications in
neutron dosimetry and monitoring used in the nuclear industry and research.