* 1348022
* Active Lava Lakes as a Window into Magma and Volcano Dynamics
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2014,02/28/2018
* Philipp Ruprecht, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 02/28/2018
* USD 309,999.00

The main objective of this project is to advance our understanding of
circulation in magmatic conduits and the interaction and mass exchange between
the subsurface magmatic system, the surface and the atmosphere. Of particular
interest is the exchange of gasses such as CO2 and SO2. The investigators will
address this target by examining lava lakes, the surface expression of magmatic
conduits at open-vent volcanoes. Open-vent volcanoes are a primary locale for
the exchange of materials between the Earth's interior and the surface. Conduits
are complex systems, where degassing, cooling and crystallization take place.
These processes lead to strong variability in buoyancy, thus causing convection,
and in material properties, making flow behavior complicated. Lava lakes are
rare, yet they are represented at all tectonic environments, as well as on other
planets. Observations at lava lakes have already confirmed the existence of
internal circulation in magmatic conduits, and this project aims to put better
constraints on this dynamic phenomenon. Better understanding of the dynamics of
lava lakes and open-vent conduits is key to constraining time and length scales
for mass exchange rates between the Earth's interior, lava lake and atmosphere.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will address the connection between
surface observations at lava lakes and models of degassing and convection at
open-vent volcanic conduits, by analyzing large collections of visual and
thermal data accumulated at three active lava lakes -Hawaii's Halemaumau crater,
Mount Erebus (Antarctica), and Erta Ale(Africa). They will also employ video
velocimetry on visible and thermal footage, extract detailed surface velocity
fields of the convecting lakes, and quantify the time-dependent crustal plate
configuration. Subsequently, they will search for correlations between the
surface motions and other data sets collected simultaneously, including
microseismicity and gas emission, to investigate the internal processes of
degassing and overturns. A product of this work will be a high-quality set of
observations of convection in a geologic system, against which numerical models
could be benchmarked and tested. The measured velocity fields will be used as
constraints for numerical forward models of the lakes. They plan to develop a
numerical modeling framework capable of capturing the complex multi-phase
systems, which lava and magma conduits are. The investigators will then use the
computational fluid dynamics package OpenFOAM, an open-source, modular and
flexible package, and allows for the integration of a wide range of physical
processes. Specifically, they aim to develop a modeling framework that will
build upon existing components of OpenFOAM: thermal convection with temperature-
dependent rheology, gas-liquid two-phase flow, and solidification/melting. At
every stage of the framework development, the investigators will examine the
influence of internal parameters such as recharge events, conduit configuration
and volatile content on their expression at the surface (plate motion and gas
emission).