* 1348891
* Student Travel Support for the 21st IEEE International Conference on Network Protocols (ICNP)
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2014
* Jun Li, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 08/31/2014
* USD 15,750.00

The goal of this travel grant is to broaden the audience attending the premier
network protocol conference, the IEEE International Conference on Network
Protocols (ICNP), and as a result, raise the level of interaction and the
potential for new collaborations, new investigations, and higher quality
research. Support from the National Science Foundation is requested on behalf of
graduate students attending institutions in the United States.

Intellectual Merit: By supporting graduate students to attend ICNP 2013, this
grant will increase the dissemination of the conference research results to a
larger and a more diverse audience, which otherwise would not have been able to
attend. In so doing, this proposal will contribute to the strength and
inclusiveness of the research community, and will lead to the long-term health
and vitalization of ICNP. In addition, preference in grant awards to women and
under-represented students will hopefully increase the participation among these
groups. By advertising to a wide range of colleges and universities,
participants from a more diverse set of institutions should be able to attend
and benefit from the conference. A broad, as well as diverse population is key
to the health of the research community and the discipline.

Broader Impacts: Conference attendance is a crucial part of the life of a
researcher. By creating new opportunities for students, especially those from
under-represented groups to attend a high-quality conference, this project will
benefit the research community in several ways. The students themselves benefit
from the opportunity to meet and interact with many other researchers in a
favorable setting, and from seeing research presented that may be related to
what they are working on, or may inspire them to try a new direction. The
research community benefits from the improvement of the students in the
pipeline, and the introduction of new researcher perspectives. Additionally,
everybody benefits from increased diversity of participants attending the
conference.