* 1348185
* International Continental Scientific Drilling Program, ICDP
* GEO,EAR
* 12/01/2013,11/30/2018
* Ulrich Harms, HELMHOLTZ-ZENTRUM POTSDAM - DEUTSCHES GEOFORSCHUNGSZENTRUM GFZ
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 11/30/2018
* USD 5,700,000.00

ICDP is an internationally managed and operated Earth Science research program.
It addresses&lt;br/&gt;fundamental geoscientific problems of global significance
and is undertaken by international&lt;br/&gt;teams of scientists at carefully
selected sites around the world. ICDP serves the entire Earth&lt;br/&gt;Science
community and is peer-reviewed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Significant progress has
been made in recent years in the conceptual understanding of
the&lt;br/&gt;highly complex 'System Earth' with its numerous subsystems. As a
result, it has become clear&lt;br/&gt;that scientific drilling is an
indispensible tool in our understanding of Earth processes&lt;br/&gt;and
properties. Drilling provides the only means of obtaining direct information on
processes&lt;br/&gt;operating at depth. It allows for determination of in situ-
properties of solid materials and&lt;br/&gt;fluids and permits testing of
hypotheses and models derived from surface observations,
remote&lt;br/&gt;sensing data and laboratory experiments. In addition, drill
holes may be used as a natural laboratory for experiments and as an observatory
for long term monitoring of ongoing active processes. Earth drilling, therefore,
plays a critical&lt;br/&gt;role both in scientific research directed towards
improved understanding of the workings of our planet and in solving urgent
societal problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ICDP support is based on the 'comingled
funding' principle and international costsharing. Each drilling project is
independently organized in the form of a Joint Research Venture(JRV)between the
ICDP and the Principle Investigator(s). This award provides continued support
for the U.S. participation in ICDP.