* 1348262
* Ecological effects of clonal interference in a changing environment
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Joanna Masel, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 07/31/2018
* USD 250,000.00

This research will advance our understanding of how evolution proceeds and what
the maximum rate of evolutionary change might be, which is relevant to
understanding whether populations will be able to adapt fast enough to avoid
extinction in today's rapidly and globally changing environment. Recent evidence
suggests that the fact that many genes reside on the same stretches of DNA makes
it difficult for natural selection to act effectively on each one, in a
phenomenon known as clonal interference. This limits the maximum speed of
evolution, and in a changing environment, populations that evolve too slowly go
extinct. This study will address these questions through mathematical models
that will calculate the impact of clonal interference on extinction and analyze
the nature of competition. This research project also will provide training for
undergraduate students, including individuals from groups underrepresented in
the sciences, and education for the general public through public lectures, a
popular science book, and Wikipedia articles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent
evidence suggests that high levels of linkage disequilibrium imply that
recombination is slow to bring adaptive mutations together on the same genetic
background. Different adaptive genotypes compete, causing many adaptations to be
lost instead of fixed. To address this topic of slow adaptation due to clonal
interference leading to extinction in a changing environment, the researcher
will develop mathematical models of evolutionary rescue (adaptive escape from
extinction). The researcher proposes a new three dimensional fitness scheme:
r-selection for absolute growth speed at low population density, K-selection for
absolute efficiency of resource use, and c-selection for relative competitive
ability at high population density. This 3D scheme has significant advantages
over past 2D schemes, e.g., r vs. K, relative vs. absolute, hard vs. soft,
groups vs. individuals. This novel 3D (and extensible) model will be developed
and applied to existing model systems and data. Each adaptive mutation affects
one or more fitness dimensions, with both tradeoffs and synergies possible.
Common combinations indicate natural axes of mutation and adaptation.
Preliminary data suggest a natural axis of density-independent fitness, along
which environmental change lowers both r and K in equal proportions, while
subsequent adaptation (evolutionary rescue) increases both. Adaptation in the
presence of clonal interference will be modeled in this dimension alone, and
also in the presence of a second dimension. The latter will show how mutations
fuelling the relative arms race of c-selection might contribute to extinction
via clonal interference with evolutionary rescue along an absolute fitness axis.