* 1348528
* States as STEM Learning Environments: Building an Indicator System to Guide Instructional Improvement at Scale
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2013,03/31/2019
* Mary Kay Stein, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 03/31/2019
* USD 1,793,060.00

Investigators are designing a state-wide, empirically based indicator system
that aligns with Tennessee's (TN) vision of instructional improvement and is
built from data gathered through in-depth study of teaching and learning in a
sample of 4th through 8th grade mathematics classrooms. Investigators begin with
a set of constructs and measures that are known to predict student learning on
high-level mathematics assessments (high-cognitive-demand instruction) and that
are associated with teachers' capacity to enact ambitious instruction (teacher
social capital). The objective is to distill the measurement of these constructs
to a core set of survey indicators that are predictive of student outcomes, can
be administered efficiently at scale, and are consequential for state policy
makers' decision making. Using a 3-tiered approach - in-depth data collection
from an intensive sample of teachers (n=50), less comprehensive data from an
intermediate sample (n=100), and survey-based data from a scale sample, a group
that will increase in number each year, ending in year 3 with 1000 teachers or
approximately 10% of TN's grades 4-8 mathematics teachers - the analyses
leverage in-depth qualitative examination of mathematics instruction and teacher
social capital in dialogue with survey-based approaches to construct a validity
argument (Kane, 2006) that 1) teachers vary on proxy measures of central
constructs, 2) measures of these proxies are correlated with other theoretically
relevant measures, and 3) these proxies are predictive of student learning and
high-quality teaching, respectively, in the scale sample.&lt;br/&gt;Previous
research on cognitive demand has provided both theoretical and empirical
warrants for the connection between teaching and student learning. This project
extends that work by establishing proxies for high-cognitive-demand instruction
and observing their relationship to student learning across hundreds of
classrooms. Previous work on teacher social capital has consisted primarily of
theory-building, qualitative studies that have shown relationships between
specific features of teacher social capital and level of instruction. This study
tests that relationship in larger numbers of classroom and extends it to student
learning. Additionally, investigators build a practical theory of how states can
support large-scale instructional improvement. While most theorizing and
research in this regard has focused on the challenges that states confront in
providing professional development for large numbers of teachers, less attention
has been paid to the challenge of monitoring the effectiveness and impact of
those efforts. This project is based on the idea that just doing more - without
systematically learning from what one is doing - is a failing proposition. In
the era of current reforms, increasing numbers of states will be devoting
substantial resources to improving instruction across their states. By
conceptualizing an entire state as a learning environment, this work calls
attention to systematic and organized ways to learn from that activity, thereby
getting smarter about efficient ways to support large-scale improvement in
mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;The development of indicators that can be deployed across
an entire state is, in and of itself, a sign of broad impact. In addition, the
indicator system is portable and, because it is aligned with college and career
ready standards adopted by the majority of states, could be taken up by other
states, especially those who have committed to common assessments. Furthermore,
if leaders in TN and other states use the indicator system to identify where
instruction is flagging and where teacher supports are needed, they will be
positioned to make better decisions regarding where and how to assist educators
across their states. This, in turn, will support the achievement of the societal
goal of improved STEM education that will produce more globally competitive high
school graduates. Finally, if this study is successful we will have established
a longer chain of evidence than heretofore has been assembled. We will show
linkages among (a) teachers' access to social resources; (b) teachers'
instructional practice; and (c) student performance.