* 1348549
* Mechanisms of predictability in reference production: Effects of semantic role, utterance planning, and audience design
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2014,09/30/2017
* Jennifer Arnold, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 09/30/2017
* USD 287,497.00

Among the core cognitive abilities that facilitates human communication is the
ability to exploit various types of referring expressions--names, descriptions,
and pronouns--to identify the objects, entities, and concepts that serve as
predicate arguments in sentences. Communicative success depends heavily on how
speakers choose among the full range of potential referring expressions to
single out a specific predicate argument. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;People are good
at tracking the predictability of events in the world. Such predictability has
strong effects on language use. For example, speakers tend to use shorter and
simpler linguistic forms when information is predictable, such as pronouns
(he/she) instead of longer expressions (Sue, the woman), and more acoustically
reduced pronunciations instead of longer/emphatic ones. This study examines one
domain where this effect is debated: semantic role predictability. If a speaker
reports an event like "Ann passed Sue the ball," some events are relatively more
likely continuations, e.g. "... and Sue shot a basket." This stems from the
semantic role of Sue: she was the recipient of the ball, and therefore might be
expected to do something with it. Yet researchers disagree whether this type of
predictability matters for pronoun production. And despite extensive evidence
that acoustic reduction is influenced by predictability in general, no one has
looked at how acoustic reduction is affected by semantic role
predictability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this NSF-funded project, Dr. Jennifer
Arnold and her students aim to solve the puzzle of semantic role predictability
effects on reference form. They use new experimental methods that aim to mimic
the characteristics of natural language production, and corpus analysis to
measure semantic role predictability from real language use. They take a
comprehensive approach, examining both pronoun use and acoustic reduction.
Semantic-role predictability will be examined against the backdrop of other
well-known effects, like syntactic predictability. Eye-tracking and timing
analyses will provide evidence about the cognitive mechanisms of reference
production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will shed light on fundamental
questions about how people track information in the world and incorporate it
into daily behaviors like language. It will provide a framework for training
both graduate and undergraduate students, and will provide information necessary
for developing a mechanistic model of reference production