* 1348259
* RAPID: Salvage Recovery of Miocene Fossil Primates and Other Vertebrates from Localities Threatened by Hydroelectric Dam Projects along the Rio Santa Cruz, Argentina
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2014
* Richard Kay, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2014
* USD 16,632.00

The research to be conducted is the along the Río Santa Cruz in far southern
Argentina (Santa Cruz Province). The project is critical and time sensitive
because construction is beginning on two hydroelectric dams that will inundate
the fossil localities to be studied. Dam site preparation and infrastructure
improvement were begun along the river in 2012. Recovery of specimens from this
region therefore salvages information that will otherwise soon be lost to
science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Santa Cruz Province is world-famous for its Early
Miocene vertebrate fossils, which range in age from about 19 to 15 million years
ago, and for its unique capacity to document the evolution and adaptations of
South American (SA) anthropoid primates, also called platyrrhines or New World
monkeys, that make up a significant fraction of the modern biodiversity of
tropical South America (17 genera and &gt;130 species). The fossil sites occur
in the Santa Cruz Formation and document the onset of a period of climate
warming called the mid-Miocene Climate Optimum (MMCO), which accounts for their
occurrence 20° of latitude south of their current distributional limits. The
sites contain the most complete fossil platyrrhines from their first known
appearance on the continent at about 26 Ma until the Holocene. The information
that has been revealed by such complete fossils has given scientists
unparalleled insights into early platyrrhine biology, ecology, and phylogeny.
The scientific questions to be addressed are of broad paleoanthropological and
paleontological significance, and include the core specific aims of 1) the
illumination of ongoing debates about the antiquity of the living zoological
families of New World monkeys and an understanding of the mammalian community
structure and environments in which they lived; and 2) the analysis of the
responses of vertebrates to the climatic changes of the MMCO.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conduct of the research will continue a longstanding
collaboration between US and Argentinian scientists from disparate fields of
primatology, stratigraphy, invertebrate and vertebrate paleontology, and
geochemistry. It fosters the continued training of students and professionals
including, especially, the field training of a US graduate student and several
Argentinian students in paleoprimatology and vertebrate paleontology.