* 1348627
* The Development of Information Biases for Face Recognition
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2014,02/28/2018
* Benjamin Balas, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Chalandra Bryant
* 02/28/2018
* USD 317,124.00

Face recognition is critically important for social interaction, and adults are
experts at quickly and accurately detecting faces and recognizing the people
around them. This involves special strategies for processing visual information
about faces that are not used to recognize other objects. For example,
horizontal edges are more useful for recognizing faces than vertical edges.
Children are still developing expertise for face recognition, and therefore may
not use the same strategies or information as adults. To date, most descriptions
of how children process faces are underspecified. The goal of this research is
to determine how children learn to use specific types of visual information by
investigating how particular features contribute to face recognition at
different ages between 4 and 10 years. Dr. Balas will compare face recognition
in children and adults by asking participants from both groups to discriminate
faces from other objects when specific visual information has been removed or
disrupted. In some tasks, participants will arrange facial features (eyes, nose
and mouth) inside a face pattern so Dr. Balas can assess how children's
understanding of facial geometry develops. Other participants will complete
tasks that require them to quickly label images as faces or non-faces, in some
cases while Dr. Balas records the electrical activity of their brains using
electroencephalography (EEG). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will help us
understand how the machinery for visual recognition develops during childhood,
and will improve our ability to characterize deficits in visual social
perception. As part of the educational and outreach goals of this proposal, Dr.
Balas will mentor high school students through North Dakota's Governor's School
program and will also participate in the NSF-funded NATURE program at NDSU. This
program is designed to introduce Native American students to research, and
involves working closely with local students and faculty from the Tribal College
system. Dr. Balas will also share the goals and results of his research with
educators and children at local day-care centers and schools.