* 1349326
* CSBR: Natural History: Uncrowding, rehousing, and digitization of the non-federal fossil vertebrate collection at the Denver Museum of Nature & Science
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2018
* Richard Stucky, Denver Museum of Nature and Science
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 05/31/2018
* USD 449,999.00

This project proposes to secure and digitize a collection of fossils at the
Denver Museum of Nature & Science (DMNS), accommodating their use as part of the
strong suite research and outreach activities at that institution. The fossil
vertebrate collection will continue to enhance DMNS exhibits, visitor
programming, and educational outreach activities. This project will utilize the
Museum's large volunteer program, which unites the public with museum
collections to assist with project-related tasks. The collections and their
importance will be highlighted in a series of 'Scientists in Action' satellite
broadcasts directly from the Museum, connecting scientists with grades 4-12
students. Additionally, underrepresented high school students interested in
science careers will work on collections-based research projects through the
Museum's successful 'Teen Science Scholars Program', contributing to their
success in STEM fields.

The Denver Museum of Nature & Science (DMNS) is the largest public natural
history museum in the Rocky Mountain region. The Museum houses a rapidly
expanding fossil vertebrate collection spanning more than 330 million years of
evolution in the Rocky Mountain region and beyond. Over the past 20 years, the
collection has experienced the greatest period of growth in its history, with
acquisitions outpacing the institution's ability to store, curate, and digitize
fossils. Coupled with the completion of a new state-of-the-art collections
facility, this project provides support for the digitization of over 56,000
significant vertebrate fossils, increasing accessibility and facilitating
research and education. Additional information about the Museum's scientific and
outreach missions, as they relate to this project, is publicly available at:
www.dmns.org/science/collections/.