* 1349223
* Workshop:  Planetary Geomorphology -- the 45th Annual Binghamton Geomorphology Symposium
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Alan Howard, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 05/31/2015
* USD 34,508.00

The purpose of this work is to support the 45th Binghamton Geomorphology
Symposium on planetary geomorphology. The systematic exploration of our Solar
System provides for substantive and insightful comparison among its various
geologic bodies, including Earth. This symposium will lead to significant
integration of the closely related fields of terrestrial and planetary
geomorphology. Inclusion of the terrestrial geomorphology community in analyzing
and understanding extraterrestrial data leverages NASA investment in planetary
exploration for the benefit of terrestrial geomorphology. Terrestrial
geomorphologists will be exposed to both an historical overview of and cutting-
edge research within the planetary community and will form contacts with their
planetary colleagues, who will benefit from terrestrial geomorphologists
expertise in 'ground-truth.' The invited scholars represent the full range of
academic ranks, from graduate students to senior professors. Live streaming of
the oral presentations and public access to the digital archive will greatly
enhance participation and accessibility for foreign professionals and students,
including undergraduates. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Spacecraft missions to other
planetary bodies are now providing surface data at resolutions equal to or
better than those of terrestrial data, presenting an opportunity for new
discoveries in geomorphology. This symposium will convene geomorphologists from
both the terrestrial and extraterrestrial communities across a range of
subdisciplines (impact, tectonics, volcanic, aeolian, fluvial, glacial and
periglacial, lacustrine, flood) relevant to the discipline of planetary
geomorphology. The goals and scope of the work to be accomplished are the
communication and synthesis of ideas between terrestrial and planetary
geomorphologists from the relevant academic subdisciplines. The methods and
approaches to be used are the presentation and discussion of analyses of these
terrestrial and extraterrestrial data and their geomorphologic implications.
Publication of invited papers in Geomorphology will also provide broad access to
ideas presented at the symposium.