* 1349111
* CSBR: Natural History Collections: Cataloging and imaging the Yale Peabody Museum Invertebrate Zoology microscope slide collection
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Leo Buss, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 06/30/2018
* USD 498,966.00

The Yale Peabody Museum Invertebrate Zoology Division houses a collection of
more than 50,000 microscope slides, created as a result of research by
scientists affiliated with the museum over the last 150 years. These slides,
although well curated physically, have never been cataloged and this unique
resource is therefore virtually unknown and unavailable to all but a few
scientists and students. The goal of this project is to raise the level of
accessibility and visibility to the same standard that has been applied to the
rest of the Invertebrate Zoology collection, and make the specimens and
associated data available to scientists and students via the museum's searchable
web interfaces. This will include digital images, generated using available
microscope slide imaging technology. The resulting data and images will be used
as the basis for a virtual microscopy website that will be an invaluable
teaching resource for scientists, students and educators at all levels of
inquiry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The slide collection spans the full breadth of
invertebrate taxa. For some phyla, these are the richest histological
collections available anywhere in the world. This award will secure these
collections and, for the first time, make them publically available for
teaching, research, and public outreach. A variety of techniques (standard
photography, automated focus-enhanced microscope photography, slide scanning)
will be used to produce digital images of the slides, given the varied nature of
the material, which is composed of whole mounts of individual specimens, three
dimensional fragments of colonial forms, and histological sections. The
resulting images and associated data will be served to interested parties in
several ways. Searchable text data from the slides will be accessible through
the Peabody Museum website, and content providers including iDigBio, the Global
Biodiversity Information Facility, and the Discover Yale Digital Content portal.
Slide images will be available as: (1) moderate resolution images for all slides
available for zoomable browsing via the providers; and (2) a series of hi-
resolution images for selected slides with annotations by experts, made freely
available for students and educators through a virtual microscopy website to be
developed and hosted by the Peabody Museum. More information about the museum
and its collections are available at:
http://peabody.yale.edu/collections/invertebrate-zoology.