* 1349942
* CAREER:   Tree-Ring Based Reconstruction of Northern Hemisphere Jetstream Variability
* GEO,AGS
* 05/15/2014,09/30/2020
* Valerie Trouet, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 09/30/2020
* USD 635,268.00

The Northern Hemisphere Jet, a high altitude narrow path of strong winds that
meanders around the globe, is a key factor in the strength and perseverance of
mid-latitude extreme weather events. Some studies have suggested that the jet
may slow and change trajectory with ongoing and future climate change. Such
behavior has been exemplified by the California drought, the eastern US polar
vortex, and the winter storms in England in the winter of 2013-2014. Arctic
amplification (the stronger warming of high Northern Hemisphere latitudes
compared to lower latitudes) may drive jet stream variability in recent decades,
but the role of man-made climate change in jet stream variability is contested
and the instrumental period of measurement is too short to draw firm conclusions
about current and future jet stream trends.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
will reconstruct the latitudinal position of the jet over the last 500+ years
using tree-ring records. The project will generate a new tree-ring based summer
temperature reconstruction for the Balkans and combine it with proxy data from
northwestern Europe to reconstruct the summer North Atlantic Jet. For the winter
North Pacific Jet, the work will combine new winter climate-sensitive series
from the northern Rockies with chronologies from central California. These two
500+ year-long regional jet stream reconstructions will be used to put current
jet stream trends in a historical perspective.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
centerpiece of the education component of this CAREER award is the development
of a new Global Change Analysis course that would offer training in quantitative
methods to students across the broad, interdisciplinary global change research
community at the University of Arizona. The project also includes a multi-
faceted outreach approach that capitalizes on the contingency of women in
climate change science at the University of Arizona and is designed to excite
future generations about science careers. Finally, the project includes
international partnerships and field expeditions with researchers from Bulgaria,
Slovenia, and Switzerland, including technology knowledge transfer (in x-ray
densitometry) that will enable new capabilities in the
US.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly supported by the Paleoclimate
Program and NSF's office of International Science and Engineering.