* 1349414
* Collaborative Research: New Constraints on the Geodynamics of the Lake Bonneville Basin
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2019
* Kenneth Adams, Nevada System of Higher Education, Desert Research Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 09/30/2019
* USD 199,960.00

The significance of this project is based, in part, on the rarity of this type
of opportunity in geodynamic research. Lake Bonneville was one of the largest
pluvial lakes on the planet during the late Pleistocene, has one of the best
known lake-level histories, possesses multiple shorelines of known ages, and is
now covered by the best topographic data set for any pluvial lake basin of
comparable size. The convergence of these factors, as well as advances in
modeling and analysis, will facilitate greater understanding of the processes
and rates of isostatic rebound and accompanying crustal deformation. This study
will provide a template for what is possible for geodynamic studies in
lacustrine basins located in other regions and on other continents. In addition
to developing new insights on the geodynamics of the Bonneville basin that will
be used by geophysicists and others to better constrain viscosity models and
understand the earthquake cycle, the results of this research have implications
for other disciplines such as geochronology. Results from this work may also
assist in geothermal energy exploration by better constraining the dimensions of
high heat flow anomalies, which may be expressed by regions of super-elevated
shorelines not consistent with their loading history. This project will also
result in the interdisciplinary training of graduate students and be highlighted
and disseminated to a broad audience through the Great Basin Paleoenvironmental
Database website (www.dri.edu/gbped). In addition to adding to this database
with new publications resulting from the research, the project will develop an
online educational module highlighting the Bonneville basin's well documented
environmental and geodynamic history. This module will be part of a larger
effort to educate interested viewers on various aspects of the Quaternary
history of the Great Basin.

The Lake Bonneville basin has become one of the premier examples of geodynamic
research since the isostasy model of an elastic plate overlying a visco-elastic
substrate was introduced in 1890. Since that time, the basin has been the
subject of numerous studies elaborating on the timing, magnitude, and processes
of isostatic rebound and the response of the crust and upper mantle to the
enormous loads imposed by Lake Bonneville. The goal of this project is to employ
much higher density shoreline elevation measurements, a more refined loading
history, geographic information system spatial analysis of the rebound signal,
and a fully three-dimensional finite-element model for simulating the isostatic
response of the Earth. Since the last major publication on the rebound of the
basin, significant improvements have been made to the lake-level chronology
(loading history), modeling sophistication, three-dimensional analysis,
topographic data, and the ability to define the geometry of rebound recorded by
multiple, discrete shorelines. The combination of these improvements will lead
to a much better constrained three-dimensional Earth model documenting lateral
variations in lithospheric strength and viscosity structure. Geochronology
results from the work may provide constraints on rates of shoreline development
and also may lead to revision of calibrated production rates for cosmogenic
surface exposure dating.