* 1349067
* Collaborative Research: Learning from Near and Distant Other
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2018
* yaacov trope, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 05/31/2018
* USD 228,256.00

People constantly learn from those in their social worlds. Although these
teachers are often close to their students (similar to themselves, living
nearby, located in the same time period, etc.), they can also be far away:
socially distant, spatially distant, and even temporally distant. This research
tests the hypothesis that concrete knowledge is more easily learned from nearby
teachers, while abstract knowledge is more readily learned from distant
teachers. To accomplish this, the PIs will examine the role of proximity on the
conceptualization of knowledge and on the effectiveness of different types of
learning. The proposed research has practical implications for teaching in a
wide variety of contexts; from parents teaching children, to schools looking to
foster abstract thinking. A practical and policy implication of this work is
that there may be types of knowledge (e.g., abstract concepts) in which students
may actually learn better when an instructor is distant (e.g., distance learning
or online courses). Overall, the societal benefits of the proposed research will
provide clear guidance on future innovations in America's educational
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is based on Construal Level Theory
which posits that people's ability to conceptualize objects and events varies by
the psychological proximity of this information. The researchers will
investigate, in addition to proximity, whether the effectiveness of an
instructor will also vary by the types knowledge gained: 1) concrete knowledge
(i.e., "volunteering at the animal shelter"); or 2) abstract knowledge (i.e.,
"caring about the well-being of abandoned cats and dogs"). The researchers will
examine the role of proximity (social, spatial, or temporal distance) and the
level of abstraction of knowledge gained on two modes of instruction: 1)
learning through imitation or modeling; and 2) learning transfer. The results
will contribute to a broader understanding of how people learn from those around
them and how the effects of psychological distance on social learning depend on
the nature of what is learned and how it is learned.