* 1349784
* EAGER: Data Debugging
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2013,02/29/2016
* Emery Berger, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 02/29/2016
* USD 150,000.00

Today, systems rely as heavily on data as on the software that manipulates that
data. Unlike software, data cannot be easily tested or analyzed for correctness.
Part of the problem is that it is difficult to decide whether data is wrong.
Typographical errors can change data items by orders of magnitude. For example,
the number 1234 might be entered when the correct value is 12.34. Unfortunately,
finding this kind of mistake via manual data auditing is onerous, unscalable,
and error-prone. Data errors can be costly: Errors in spreadsheet data have led
to million dollar losses, and poor data quality has been estimated to cost the
US economy more than $600 billion per year.

Data debugging is a new approach for locating likely data errors by leveraging
the interaction between data and the programs that operate on it. Since it is
impossible to know a priori whether data is incorrect, data debugging aims to do
the next best thing: identifying data that has an unusual impact on the
computation. Intuitively, data with an inordinate impact on the result of a
computation is either very important, or it is wrong. By contrast, wrong data
whose presence has no particularly unusual effect on the final result does not
matter. By calling attention to data with inordinately high impact, data
debugging can provide insights into both the data and the computation and reveal
errors. Data debugging is especially well-suited for data-intensive programming
environments like databases and spreadsheets that intertwine data and programs.
Data debugging can dramatically reduce the risks of human data entry errors or
data corruption, increase the reliability of computations over data, and
potentially save the US economy millions of dollars.