* 1349984
* CAREER: Integrated Research and Education in Physical Design Automation for Nanotechnology and VLSI Technology Co-Design
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2014,02/28/2018
* Shiyan Hu, Michigan Technological University
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 02/28/2018
* USD 222,315.00

This CAREER proposal aims to develop innovative chip layout design and
optimization methodologies on nanotechnology interconnect and copper
interconnect co-design. As the copper interconnect technology is approaching its
fundamental physical limit, novel on-chip interconnect materials such as carbon
nanotubes and graphene nano-ribbons have emerged as promising replacement
materials due to properties such as superior conductivity and resilience to
electromigration that otherwise have plagued copper interconnects. On the other
hand, there could also be some issues for using nanotechnology interconnects
such as their inferior performance as local interconnect and defects in
fabrication. The PI will develop a novel co-design methodology which judiciously
integrates nanotechnology into the practical VLSI circuit design together with
various enabling techniques on co-design-aware buffering, layer assignment,
routing, placement and clocking. The PI also proposes defect-aware techniques
for mitigating the impacts due to defects, and improving robustness against
faults for nanotechnology interconnects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact
of the proposed research is to significantly improve the circuit performance of
nanoscale circuits. As the interconnect delay is the dominating factor of the
circuit delay, the proposed research has the potential to help achieve the
design closure for those difficult circuits whose timing cannot be closed even
if various traditional physical synthesis optimizations have been stretched to
the maximum extent. The proposed research can contribute integrated circuit
design methodologies which enable the utilization of nanotechnologies into
practical circuit design to defeat the fundamental limit on the prevailing VLSI
technology. The PI will also develop a seamless integration of research with
education such as developing the new graduate level course, developing lecture
series and seminars, recruiting under-represented students, and showcasing the
research results at conferences.