* 1349735
* CAREER: Direct Measurement of Intranuclear Strain and Gene Expression in Single Cells in Vivo
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2015
* Corey Neu, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 12/31/2015
* USD 400,000.00

This project will significantly advance the understanding of the physical
regulation of the cell nucleus in structurally complex and hierarchical
biological tissues. The nucleus is a central membrane-bound organelle in the
cell that functions to control fundamental cellular activities that are critical
to normal physiology. More broadly, the research activities may impact tissue
engineering, regenerative medicine, and related fields, by establishing the
ability to study mechanisms of nuclear strain and gene expression in single
cells, including studies of rare cell populations within tissues and
biomaterials. The education plan is designed to provide an interactive and
problem-solving approach toward learning. The education activities emphasize
undergraduate and graduate course development in mechanobiology, and broaden a
partnership between the awardee's institution and a children's museum to promote
learning in science and engineering from an early age.

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award
is to apply advanced microscopy, image registration, and molecular biology
methods to study the biomechanics of the cell nucleus and basic mechanisms that
determine the physical regulation of gene expression. Studies conducted under
this award will image the nucleus of single cells embedded in native tissue that
is perturbed by mechanical force, and determine the influence of cytoskeleton
proteins on intranuclear shape, deformation, and activity. A multiscale and
translational approach will also study the nucleus in normal and genetically
modified mice to investigate how mechanical force regulates gene expression in
vivo. The knowledge gained from the research activities will reveal how
subcellular strain is altered in disease and injury, and studies will establish
new analysis tools for the noninvasive, in vivo, and functional biomechanical
assessment of nuclei in model systems.