* 1349527
* HPC Education Through Formal On-line On-Demand Curriculum
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2015
* Thomas Sterling, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Sushil K Prasad
* 09/30/2015
* USD 199,995.00

Advances in science and engineering are increasingly dependent on effective use
of high performance computers for simulation of physical phenomena and analysis
of experimentation data. Yet experts in the US in the development and
application of supercomputing are relatively few; even as national demand and
international competition increasingly stress the nation's capabilities in this
area. Critical to satisfying the countryss needs in the field of high
performance computing is the ready access to quality education to train future
computational scientists, computer scientists, and design engineers as well as
systems' administrators in the application, development, and management of the
most powerful computers in the world. The field of HPC as a whole comprises many
areas of specialization. But they all share the same common interrelated
foundations. This project is developing a new college level course in High
Performance Computing to serve as an entry-level introduction for all who wish
to enter the field. The new syllabus presents the concepts, knowledge, and
skills required by everyone who will be engaged in activities associated with
high performance computing. In a closely synergistic manner, the separate topics
related to parallel programming interfaces, supercomputer architecture,
applications and parallel algorithms, and software environments and tools are
combined in a mutually supportive presentation across about two-dozen lectures.
Students become familiar with the material through hands-on programming examples
and independent exercises for experience with methods and tools, as well as to
be exposed to the sensitivity of system operational behavior to a range of
alternative approaches and use-cases. Cultural aspects of the field are also
shared including the extensive domain specific terminology, the rich history,
and key leadership institutions and people. Students who have completed this
intense first-year graduate (and advanced senior-level) college course will be
capable of proceeding on to advanced areas of specialization, accepting entry-
level positions in industry and national laboratories for which computation is
of critical importance in fulfilling their mission, or in preparation to guide
such courses in the future at home educational
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This course will achieve the widest possible
dissemination and impact by being recorded in high definition digital video and
made available on-line and on-demand to all who wish to view the lectures.
Organized as short segments of between 5 and 11 minutes each, the material is
easily viewed and reviewed for best educational experience. Detailed slides to
which the lectures are directed are edited into the video stream and made
available separately for study. This use of MOOC-like technology will extend the
reach of this discipline to many geographic regions and socio-economic groups
that do not have ready access to world-class experts and educators in the field
of high performance computing but who would greatly value to extend their
educational opportunities in these directions. This course material will provide
the foundation for a future Indiana University course giving transferable credit
for having taken this course.