* 1349677
* Collaborative Research: A behavioral and computational investigation of the generality and transferability of category representations
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2018
* Sébastien Hélie, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Gottlob
* 06/30/2018
* USD 380,326.00

How people acquire and use different types of knowledge is a fundamental issue
in cognitive science, applicable to problems in education, training, and the
development of expertise. For example, learning to categorize types of materials
(such as natural vs. synthetic, or polymers vs. ceramics) can be accomplished
using textbooks, but it can also be accomplished with hands on experience in the
field. Different types of training likely lead to different forms of knowledge,
and the form of knowledge may constrain how, and in what situations, the
knowledge can be used. Thus, the best way to train a person may differ depending
not only on the type of information being learned, but also on the situations in
which the knowledge will need to be used. The investigators will examine how to
promote the learning of different forms of knowledge in different situations.
They will also investigate the neural and computational bases of the differences
in forms of knowledge in order to develop a unifying theory of how knowledge
acquisition and application varies across situations in predictable ways. A
larger goal is to determine how knowledge, once learned, can be transferred to
new situations. This project will advance scientific understanding of human
knowledge acquisition and its use. The project also has the potential to foster
the development of new tools that may improve the training of students and
professionals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Categorization researchers have made an
enormous contribution to the understanding of the many ways in which knowledge
can be represented and used. A current challenge facing the field of
categorization, and cognitive science more generally, is how to best integrate
these findings with the broader goal of understanding the extent to which
different types of knowledge representations generalize to new situations. The
proposed research utilizes a combination of behavioral, neuroimaging, and
computational modeling techniques to address these challenges. Specifically, the
investigators will explore (1) the factors influencing the development of
different types of category representations, (2) the psychological functions and
brain networks supporting category representations, and (3) the utility of
different types of category representations for supporting performance in new
tasks and/or with new stimuli. In addition, this research will highlight
important relationships between machine learning techniques and methods used in
cognitive science. As a result, the research should be of broad interest to
psychologists, computer scientists, and the general cognitive science community.