* 1349668
* CAREER: Pulling the Mouth Open: Coordinating orofacial tissue growth and epithelial integrity to form the embryonic mouth
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/2014,02/28/2021
* Amanda Dickinson, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Klein
* 02/28/2021
* USD 700,000.00

The mouth connects the digestive system with the external environment. Without
this connection animals cannot eat. Remarkably, despite its obvious importance,
there have been few studies that address how this initial connection is
established. It is also not often considered in studies of orofacial evolution,
development and birth defects, and is rarely mentioned in developmental or
anatomical textbooks. In this project, a series of experiments will define how
the first connection to the digestive system is formed, and how its development
is intimately tied to the formation of surrounding facial structures.
Specifically, the hypothesis is that growth and tension within the face pulls
the mouth open. Molecular, cellular, embryological and biomechanical approaches
in Xenopus will be combined to test this hypothesis. Based on preliminary data
it is expected that novel connections between molecular signals, cellular
junctions, such as desmosomes, and mitosis will be uncovered. This work is
potentially high impact in that it is the first to study: 1) the role of tension
in orofacial development and 2) the molecular mechanisms governing how the
connection to the digestive system is established. Additionally, this work is
integrated into an innovative educational plan. Graduate and undergraduate level
laboratory courses will be created where students will perform experiments
contributing to the project. In addition, undergraduate independent study and
summer research projects are planned for VCU's minority programs. On the
opposite end of the educational spectrum is a preschool component where children
will be exposed to living frogs at various life stages combined with art, math
and reading activities. Together, this work will provide students at several
levels with the opportunity to contribute to a better understanding of
vertebrate mouth development.