* 1349579
* AGS/EAR-PRF:   Confronting Multi-scale Complexity in the Dynamics of Regional U.S. Land-atmosphere Coupling Energetics and Their Links to Climate Variability and Change
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2016
* Gabriel Kooperman, Kooperman               Gabriel        J
* Fellowship Award
* Nicholas Anderson
* 03/31/2016
* USD 174,000.00

Hosted by Professors Famiglietti and Pritchard at the University of California,
Irvine, the principal investigator (P.I.) will seek to clarify the role of land
surface coupling in the evolution of organized convection and rainfall in the
Central United States (US). The strategy will be to employ novel methodological
techniques to isolate and measure components of the energy exchange system
between the land and atmosphere, in a uniquely multi-scale virtual laboratory.
By deconstructing nonlinear complexities in land-atmosphere coupling feedbacks
using individual component amplification, and attributing responses, the author
will develop a holistic physical framework and apply it to the following
questions:

1. What is the role of land surface coupling in generating and sustaining
mesoscale convective systems and summer precipitation in the Central US? 2. How
critical is explicitly resolved land heterogeneity for realistically
representing mesoscale land-convection interactions in the context of regional
and global hydrology? 3. Are irrigation-driven hydro-climate feedbacks robust to
a realistic representation of the mechanisms that drive convective precipitation
in the Central US? 4. How will mesoscale convection and its interaction with the
natural and manmade water cycles change in future climate? Do land-surface
feedbacks play a role in mediating the response?

Intellectual Merit: Land-atmosphere coupling in the Central US plays an
especially critical role in mediating local weather and climate. How the
hydrological cycle will respond to the anthropogenic influences of irrigation
and climate change depends on a complex set of land-surface energy exchange
mechanisms whose coupled behavior is difficult to understand. Advancing
knowledge at this hydrologic interface requires insight into its nonlinear
sensitivities through controlled multi-scale numerical experiments, including
links to non-local and global feedbacks on column energetics. Focusing on
Central US hydro-climate and its response to irrigation and climate change, the
author seeks to make progress on this front. The research builds on the author's
doctoral experience applying fundamental principles of atmospheric physics to
investigate mesoscale convection, climate change, and aerosol-cloud interactions
in simulations from conventional and super-parameterized global climate models.
The co-mentoring strategy combines the diverse expertise of Professors
Famiglietti and Pritchard in atmospheric and hydrologic science to address
frontier scientific questions at the interface of their individual research
foci.

Broader Impacts: The broader impact activities and co-mentoring plan will
strengthen land-atmosphere coupling in research and graduate level education at
the University of California, Irvine, and with policy makers who have a stake in
the land-atmosphere interface in the Central US. The P.I. will help launch a
graduate seminar series focused on land-atmosphere interactions, bringing
together experts in hydrology and climate science to foster interdisciplinary
research and cross-pollination of frontier science ideas. The P.I. will expand
public partnerships with policy makers, researchers, and educators that have
been developed by the NSF Center for Multiscale Modeling of Atmospheric
Processes in the Central US to directly link the research to relevant
stakeholders through public outreach activities. These efforts will help spread
new research results and experience to both the scientific community and general
public, and guide the P.I.'s own professional development.