* 1349916
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Izapa Archaeology Project
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2015
* Robert Rosenswig, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2015
* USD 25,169.00

The fundamental goal of this project is to gain insight into how complex
societies such as state-level groupings emerge and develop from simpler forms of
social organization. Archaeological projects such as this one which can trace
change over a long time span help to explain social phenomena characteristic of
the present day.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under the guidance of Dr. Robert
Rosenswig, Rebecca Mendelsohn will conduct household excavations at the early
Mesoamerican city (800 B.C.- A.D. 100) of Izapa, located in the southern Pacific
coast region of Chiapas, Mexico. Izapa is among the largest Formative period
centers in Mesoamerica, containing mounds up to 21m high and over 250 associated
monuments. The site is famous for its art style and has been proposed by
archaeologists to be an important link between two of Mesoamerica's dominant
early cultural groups, the Olmec and the Maya. Despite the site's importance,
relatively few excavations have been conducted and very little is known about
the economy and environment at the site. This project represents the first
household excavations at Izapa using modern excavation techniques. The project
will also include the first excavation of new mounds discovered during the 2011
remapping of the site by Rosenswig's Izapa Regional Settlement Project. Data
collected from Izapa is intended to shed light on the fundamental transition
from chiefdoms to states and settlements to cities, and will be of interest to
researchers investigating the rise of complex societies around the
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Just as today, the urbanization of a town or
settlement has economic impacts at every level of society. This project looks to
the past and asks how social systems and human relationships are manipulated to
achieve urban expansion and sustain population growth. By documenting household
contents at different stages of occupation, the study aims to determine how the
urbanization and increasing development of socioeconomic hierarchy at Izapa
affected the material wellbeing of commoners. Artifacts collected from
excavations will be used to reconstruct the early economy and investigate how
emerging kings or king-like leaders gained enough social and economic capital to
organize monumental construction at the site. The project investigates how
strategies like the regulation of prestige items and long-distance trade
products, control over craft specialization, and manipulation of religious
symbols could be used to widen the social and economic gap between elites and
commoners. Are these strategies the same as those employed in other incipient
states in Mesoamerica and around the world?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Beyond the
research presented, this project also intends to have a broader impact. With
research conducted in Mexico, the project aims to foster international
collaboration between Mexico and the United States at various levels, from local
farmers to researchers at Mexican universities. At the local level, one of the
goals of the project is to deliver lectures at schools and community centers to
increase awareness in the contemporary Izapa community about the process of
archaeology and the value of preserving archaeological sites and materials.
Students and archaeologists from both the United States and Mexico will be
engaged in the excavation and subsequent analyses of materials. Results from
this project will be compiled in Ms. Mendelsohn's dissertation for the
Department of Anthropology at the University at Albany, SUNY, as well as
disseminated through conference presentations and peer-reviewed publications in
both the United States and Mexico.