* 1349430
* CSBR:  Natural History Collections: Protecting and Improving Orange County's (California) Palentological Collection (OCPC)
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* Jere Lipps, CSU Fullerton Auxiliary Services Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 07/31/2018
* USD 500,000.00

Orange County's Paleontological Collection (OCPC) contains fossils collected
over 50 years by mitigation at construction sites, as required by California
State and Orange County (OC) laws and regulations. Over six million fossils are
stored at OC's John D. Cooper Archaeological and Paleontological Center, and
managed by California State University, Fullerton (CSUF). This major collection
is important for understanding the rich history of life in western North America
and the north Pacific from ~180 million years ago to Recent. The collection is
diverse and contains many unique, undescribed and unrecorded species. These
microfossils inform our understanding of ancient environments and past climates.
Some are already being studied by international and national paleontologists,
used by K-16 educators, and used in the preparation of public exhibits. This
project proposes to archive images - and associated data - of these fossils into
the Center's database and make them publically available on-line. As a result,
the enormous potential of OCPC's holdings for research, training and outreach,
previously hindered by inaccessibility, will be realized. These activities will
be accomplished through improved security and preservation of OCPC through the
application of modern storage and curatorial standards.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will enable The John D. Cooper Center to
protect and preserve fossils recovered from OC by providing modern museum
storage, including new cabinets and supporting infrastructure for approximately
100,000 fossils. Specimens will be inspected, repaired, uniquely numbered, and
stored with a data card in museum trays placed in new cabinets arranged in
stratigraphic order from Jurassic to Recent. Four CSUF graduate students will be
employed, over the three years of the project, to assist with collection
reorganization and curation. For each specimen, supporting data and images will
be added to the Center's Specify 6 database by staff and volunteers. The proper
storage of these specimens will allow reorganization of the remaining fossils,
for which no funds are requested, and provide some room to decrease congestion.
The application of modern curatorial standards, databasing and reorganization of
OCPC will enable research by students, faculty and visiting scientists, and the
collection's use in public events, exhibits and K-16 education. CSUF has a large
undergraduate population, including a high percentage of under-represented
minorities, who can be potential recruits for participation in this project.
Additional information about OCPC's research and outreach programs is available
at www.jdcoopercenter.org.