* 1349023
* Endocrinology of human relationship initiation
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2014,03/31/2018
* James Roney, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 03/31/2018
* USD 374,235.00

How do individuals create strong, enduring interpersonal relationships? Given
that positive social ties predict health and longevity, it is critical to
understand how we initiate, form and maintain these vital interpersonal
connections. This research will test one important component of this question:
what psychological and biological factors predict whether one chooses to
initiate a friendship or romantic relationship with another? James Roney
(University of California, Santa Barbara) will examine the psychobiology of
relationship formation, testing whether changes in hormones during an initial
social encounter predict whether someone wants to begin a relationship with a
partner. The PI will experimentally manipulate feelings of closeness in initial
social encounters with others, and will measure hormone changes in response to
this interaction. He will also test their desire to initiate romantic or
friendship-based relationships with their partners. This will allow a test of
whether hormone responses when interacting with a potential relationship partner
act as a "chemical code" that predicts partner choice and relationship pursuit.
The studies will measure changes in testosterone and estrogen (sex hormones
implicated in human mating psychology), cortisol (a hormone that mobilizes
energy availability), and oxytocin (a hormone implicated in social bonding);
data analyses will also test the extent to which these hormone changes predict
desire for relationship initiation. Achievement of these objectives will advance
our basic understanding of the biological signals implicated in human social
encounters. In addition, enhanced understanding of the endocrine mechanisms
involved in human social interactions may help identify physiological signatures
of social disorders. For example, individuals with social anxiety or high
loneliness may have atypical hormone responses to social interactions, but
knowledge of the typical physiological responses found in people without such
conditions is necessary to test such possibilities. Thus, in addition to
advancing basic science, this research holds the potential to construct typical
baselines against which atypical responses could be detected.