* 1349865
* CAREER: Computational and visualization tools for translating climate change into ecological impacts
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2022
* Lauren Buckley, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 07/31/2022
* USD 1,181,738.00

The University of Washington is awarded a grant to develop computational and
visualization tools for translating climate change into ecological impacts. The
tools will answer the question: what impact will a given (for example, 3Â°C)
climate warming have on organisms and ecological communities? They will enhance
student and public understanding of the biological consequences of climate
change and improve the capacity of researchers and managers to predict these
biological consequences. The project will develop and disseminate an interactive
web application, Mapping Environmental Stress on Animals (MESA), for visualizing
the predicted body temperatures of insects and areas of thermal stress; the
incidence of extreme thermal stress events; indicators of development rate, and
population growth rate for our focal butterfly and grasshopper species. The core
of MESA will be a biophysical model that budgets heat exchange between insects
and the environment. This will address the current inaccessibility of
biophysical models, which leads most analyses to approximate body temperatures
as air temperatures despite numerous demonstrations that this assumption can
lead to incorrect conclusions. The predictions will be visualized in a Google
Earth interface along with photos and vignettes of observed climate impacts on
insects such as shifts in phenology. Users will chose to explore focal
grasshopper and butterfly species or choose the size, shape, and coloration of a
generic ectotherm to model. MESA will offer historic and real-time estimates and
predictions for future climate change scenarios. MESA will be prototyped for
Colorado and subsequently extended in scope to North America. This will involve
developing high spatial and temporal resolution environmental data for both
current and future climates to appropriately quantify how organisms respond to
both environmental means and variability. We will test MESA using historical
abundance and distribution data on focal butterfly and grasshopper species.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop educational and outreach
activities so that students and the public can use the web application to
understand how a given amount of warming translates into thermal stress on
organisms. The project will develop a variety of inquiry-based, hands-on
education resources to provide high school and undergraduate students with
experience visualizing and interpreting thermal stress. Project personnel will
partner with local education initiatives to develop the education modules and
will ultimately contribute the modules to national climate change education
initiatives. The modules will follow best practices for broadening participation
in science and project personnel will partner with initiatives aimed at
recruiting students from underrepresented groups. Students will receive cross
training in ecology and computational approaches. The project will broadly
disseminate MESA?s visualizations of thermal stress to agency scientists and
through public presentations. Interfacing with related initiatives such as a
phenology visualization tool will leverage the project?s benefits to predicting
and planning for the ecological impacts of climate change. For more information
about the project visit the PI's lab website at
http://faculty.washington.edu/lbuckley/. A website hosting the computational and
visualization tools and educational materials will be forthcoming.