* 1349462
* CAREER: Effective Analysis, Exploration and Visualization of Big Flow Data to Understand Dynamic Flows
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2014,09/30/2014
* Chaoli Wang, Michigan Technological University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2014
* USD 143,882.00

The ever-growing size and complexity of flow data produced from many scientific,
engineering and medical simulations pose significant challenges which are not
thoroughly addressed by existing visualization techniques. These challenges
include computation, interaction, visualization and user challenges. Addressing
the computation challenge is a central research focus and remains a prominent
direction in the field, while the other challenges are often overlooked. The
goal of this CAREER project is to address these less investigated challenges by
pioneering a comprehensive framework toward effective visual understanding of
flow fields. It contributes to the state of the art flow visualization by
promoting an innovative database approach to shape-based field line modeling and
classification, investigating new string-, sketch- and graph-based interfaces
and interactions for flow field exploration, and exploring occlusion and clutter
reduction through unconventional streamline repositioning and automatic tour
generation. The general approach developed in this research is expected to
substantially improve our ability to visually understand a wide spectrum of flow
fields, ranging from the traditional application of fluid flows to new
applications such as traffic flows, cash flows and message flows. This project
will provide training for graduate and undergraduate students in the area of
data visualization and scientific computing via capstone class projects. A
pedagogical toolbox will be designed along with web-based resources to support
teaching visualization classes through expressive demos, potentially benefiting
universities nationwide with a similar teaching need. The PI will continue to
attract underrepresented students through university and department outreach
programs and engage local middle and high school students through summer youth
programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research tackles the fundamental challenges
in visualizing large, complex three-dimensional steady and unsteady flow fields.
Underlying the proposed work is a novel database approach to field line shape
encoding, classification and interrogation. The PI will integrate and unify a
variety of concepts from geometric modeling, computer vision and data mining to
create robust visual characters and words from field lines for shape analysis
and organization. Novel interfaces and interactions will be introduced to enable
intuitive retrieval of partial field lines via textual and visual forms, and
examination of hierarchical field lines and their spatiotemporal relationships
in the transformed graph space. Innovative streamline repositioning for
focus+context viewing and automatic tour for examining hidden or occluded flow
features will be devised to move from clutter to clarity in the visualization.
The success of this research will benefit a wide variety of applications within
and beyond graphics and visualization, such as shape analysis, visual
perception, database organization, game development, and visualization in
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will collaborate with scientists and
researchers at university, industry and national labs, applying the proposed
solutions to solve real-world problems. Research results will be evaluated
through both domain expert reviews and formal user studies. Selected research
outcomes will be integrated into user-engaging educational applications that
will be run on tablet devices and delivered to the general public for wide
dissemination. This CAREER project will build a solid foundation for addressing
key challenges in flow visualization, and lead to multidisciplinary
collaborations spanning atmospheric cloud, combustion chemistry and
cardiovascular research. It will also produce fruitful deliverables, featuring
the first-ever benchmark field line shape database, tutorials and workshops at
premier visualization conferences, and pedagogical tools and game apps.