* 1349126
* A window on ancient systems: Understanding the environmental distributions of hopanoids using compound-specific multi-isotope analysis and metagenomics
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2017
* Ann Pearson, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 04/30/2017
* USD 348,604.00

Technical overview: A better understanding of the modern sources and
distributions of hopanoids is essential for interpreting ancient sedimentary
records. Here we will address questions of hopanoid provenance in marine
settings using interdisciplinary analytical approaches, namely compound-specific
multi-isotope (13C, D/H, and 14C) measurements combined with analysis of
functional genes involved in hopanoid biosynthesis. The project will make a
systematic survey of hopanoid isotope measurements and DNA metagenomes. The
samples will cover locations ranging from arctic to tropical, and three sets of
samples will span gradients of deltaic to pelagic depositional conditions,
forming mini-transects. The samples will permit use of the established
latitudinal patterns in 14C residence times and source water D/H to distinguish
land-based from marine sources. Known patterns of 13C and D/H isotopic
fractionation associated with different types of microbial metabolism will be
used to determine the metabolic sources of individual compounds, because
autotrophic or heterotrophic metabolism is reflected in isotopic variability.
The diversity of hopanoid biosynthesis genes (sqhC, hpnP, hpnR, hpnG, hpnH) will
be related to hopanoid compound distributions in an independent approach to test
if local production is or is not related to local deposition of lipid
assemblages.

General importance: Organic molecules preserved in sedimentary rocks provide a
record of Earth?s early biosphere. They help us understand ancient Earth
environments and the expansion, diversification, and maintenance of microbial
communities. Such compounds are called 'molecular fossils', and among the
earliest and most abundant examples are compounds called hopanoids. Derived
primarily from bacteria, hopanoids are detectable over timescales of billions of
years and have been proposed to be among the most abundantly preserved molecules
on Earth. However, to date we lack an overall picture of their environmental,
physiological, and/or species origins. This project aims to answer basic
questions about the hopanoids preserved in marine sedimentary environments. Are
they primarily of marine origin, or do they come primarily from land? Are they
likely to reflect particular sub-groups of microbial taxa, or are they broadly
distributed among diverse species, habitats, and lifestyles? In this project we
will use the natural distribution of the isotopes of carbon and hydrogen to help
answer these questions.