* 1349728
* Collaborative Research: The Frequency and Patterns of Crime Against Religious Congregations
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2014,03/31/2018
* Jeffery Ulmer, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Mark Hurwitz
* 03/31/2018
* USD 262,525.00

Places of worship are among the most prevalent and visible institutions in
communities across the United States. This visibility, though, means that
churches, synagogues, mosques, temples, and other religious congregations are
often targets for street crime and ethnic- or even religiously-motivated hate
crime. Indeed, it is easy to find hundreds of news reports each year about a
religious congregation being victimized by vandalism, theft, arson, or some
other crime. Yet, the victimization of religious congregations has received
little attention by social scientists. Our research will contribute to the
testing and extension of theories of crime and its relationship to community
contexts, as well as theories of ethnic conflict and religious persecution.

This project will gather nationally representative survey data on the
prevalence, pattern, and predictors of victimization of religious congregations
along with in-depth interview data with congregational leaders and their
experiences with crime. We will compare and contrast the factors that predict
street crime victimization with those that predict religiously-motivated hate
crime victimization. These data will not only allow social scientists to test
theories of crime, ethnic conflict, and religious persecution, but they will
also provide the foundation for law enforcement, community, and congregational
leaders to prevent and respond to the victimization of places of worship.