* 1349435
* SusChEM:Collab.Research:RUI:Linking the Geochemical Composition of Airborne Particulate Matter with Arsenic Bioaccessibility and Bioavailability in Contaminated Mining Environments
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2016
* Christopher Kim, Chapman University
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 07/31/2016
* USD 100,536.00

This project has implications for increasing understanding of the primary
geochemical variables influencing the potential toxicity of arsenic, a
carcinogen, which exists in elevated levels in gold mine wastes throughout
California and elsewhere. Human exposure to fine-grained arsenic-bearing mine
wastes through the inhalation pathway is a potentially significant exposure
route about which little is known. Furthermore, airborne transport processes and
risks posed by airborne mineral dusts are likely to grow in importance over time
with increased land-use activity and climate change, which could result in
larger, drier, hotter, and windier (semi-)arid regions where such mine tailings
are located. Careful physical and chemical characterization of the tailings, in
vitro simulated inhalation studies, and in vivo bioavailability studies could
greatly improve the ability to predict the toxicity potential of arsenic in
respirable airborne particles. Results will be disseminated to relevant
stakeholders impacted by the mine sites and may also lead directly to the
development of remediation strategies in areas where arsenic contamination is
cause for environmental concern. This project will also entail the training of
undergraduate students in independent and interdisciplinary research. This
project has additional potential implications for understanding how to more
safely mine other elements, which is of global importance given the demand for
elements (e.g. rare earths and precious metals) for critical technologies such
as computers and cell phones. Understanding the potential interaction of mine-
produced dusts with animal models could provide a foundation of knowledge upon
which to base practices for safer harvesting of earth resources. Given this
dimension, this project is being partially supported by the NSF Sustainable
Chemistry, Materials and Engineering initiative.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
investigators propose a systematic, integrated, multidisciplinary approach to
determine the relationships between particle size and the physical and
geochemical properties of airborne particulate matter generated in contaminated
mining environments in the north-central Mojave Desert. It is expected that
these relationships will improve the ability to predict the bioavailability of
arsenic in the airborne size fraction and to provide a sound scientific basis
for the development of effective remediation strategies to control metal(loid)
fluxes and exposures from these mine sites. This approach utilizes a combination
of macroscopic analyses of both physical and chemical properties of airborne
particulate matter, synchrotron-based spectroscopic studies, simulated
bioaccessibility extraction tests, and animal exposure experiments. Such
knowledge is applicable and expected to be transferable to other
environmentally-contaminated regions where fine-grained dusts and their
associated contaminants have the potential to be mobilized and inhaled,
increasing exposure to residents/visitors.