* 1349259
* Building an Effective Service-Oriented Cyberinfrastructure Portal to Support Sustained Polar Sciences
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2016
* Wenwen Li, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Marc Stieglitz
* 12/31/2016
* USD 333,971.00

This project will develop components of a polar cyberinfrastructure (CI) to
support researchers and users for data discovery and access. The main goal is to
provide tools that will enable a better access to polar data and information,
hence allowing to spend more time on analysis and research, and significantly
less time on discover and searching. At the end of the project, the PIs will
deliver a large-scale web crawler to continuously mine the Internet to discover
dispersed polar data and a quality monitoring tool allowing polar data
reformulation. Beside identifying polar data in major data repositories, the
crawler will be able to bring individual hidden resources forward, hence
increasing the discoverability of polar data. Quality and assessment of data
resources will be analyzed, providing a key tool for not only identifying issues
but also to connect the research community with optimal data resources.
&lt;br/&gt;The project will impact several disciplines, users and communities of
practice - within and beyond the polar sciences. The broader impacts include the
improved discoverability of data and better access so that the time spent
searching the data could be reduced (and hence used for research purposes). The
data quality and crawler components of the work will be made available to the
scientific community to serve future purposes and support additional work.
Moreover, the project will also contribute to the growth of a 'cyberpolar'
community, through the collaboration of computer scientists focusing on specific
polar issues. Results will be incorporated into lessons and hands-on experience
for undergraduate and graduate students through classroom activities and two PhD
students will be involved full time for the duration of the project.