* 1349029
* CSBR: Living Stocks: The Bacillus Genetic Stock Center, an established key resource for a diverse and dynamic scientific community
* BIO,DBI
* 05/15/2014,04/30/2018
* Daniel Zeigler, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 04/30/2018
* USD 450,001.00

An award is made to the Bacillus Genetic Stock Center (BGSC) at the Ohio State
University to support a central repository for maintaining, documenting,
publicizing, and distributing a standardized collection comprising important
strains of the bacterial genus Bacillus and its relatives. Bacillus plays a
vital role in microbiology research. They synthesize a wide range of
antibiotics, fine chemicals, vitamins, and industrial enzymes and serve as
production platforms for biofuels and ecofriendly pesticides. Some species are
useful as probiotics or in vaccine production; others play important roles in
sterility assurance, food safety, and bioterrorism prevention. Bacillus research
provides insights into bacterial physiology, development, and behavior.
Accessioned cultures are stored cryogenically at a secure site at the Ohio State
University. This award facilitates the provision of standardized cultures at a
reasonable cost to qualified scientists and educators.

Each year, BGSC strains are used for hundreds of innovative projects, resulting
in peer-reviewed publications and US patents. In addition, the BGSC supports
undergraduate lab experiences and high school science fair projects. This award
will support and strengthen the nation's scientific infrastructure by ensuring
that this resource remains available to America's science and education
communities. Additional information on strain data and community outreach
programs is publicly available on the BGSC website (http://bgsc.org) and
integrated into Bacillus gene and genome databases in the USA and Europe.