* 1349713
* EAGER: Biomimetic Catalysts For Selective Methane Oxidation
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2013,11/30/2015
* Cynthia Lo, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 11/30/2015
* USD 79,703.00

Abstract #1349713 Lo, Cynthia S.

Successful oxidative upgrading of methane to methanol would simultaneously
utilize abundant shale gas reserves, reduce human reliance on traditional fossil
fuels, and mitigate greenhouse gas emissions in a thermodynamically favorable
manner. As the preferred oxidation target, methanol is quite versatile since it
can be converted to a variety of hydrocarbons and retain much of the energy
density of traditional fossil fuels. Unfortunately, the key issue with the
oxidative conversion of methane is related to selectivity, rather than
reactivity; it is difficult to avoid total oxidation to carbon monoxide or
carbon dioxide. To partially oxidize methane, catalysts must be designed that
either disfavor the elementary steps comprising the total oxidation process, or
selectively release only a requisite amount of oxygen to produce the desired
products.

Prof. Cynthia Lo from Washington University, St. Louis, MO hypothesizes that
copper oxide/graphene oxide composites will be effective catalysts for the
selective methane oxidation to methanol. The active sites in the proposed
catalyst design mimic the active sites in the MMO enzyme, which contains oxo-
bridged copper (II) complexes that stabilize methane derivatives. n-type
Graphene oxide serves as the source of oxygen for this reaction, with p-type
cupric oxide used to stabilize the composites. Photochemical activation of the
catalyst composite will be used to achieve selective methane oxidation to
methanol. The product distribution should be a monotonic function of the oxygen
content on the graphene surface. The catalyst should be regenerated by oxidation
in air.

With this EAGER award made by the Catalysis & Biocatalysis Program of the
National Science Foundation, the PI plans to experimentally validate the
catalyst design in a flow-through reactor and compare performance to the
predictions generated from first-principles calculations. This requires a unique
reactor design that facilitates selective methane oxidation to value-added
chemicals and fuels. The new design is for a flow-through, monolithic optical
fiber photoreactor necessary to accommodate the catalyst system proposed here.
The logic of the catalyst design rests on utilizing the cupric oxide/graphene
oxide composite as a mild oxidant should reduce the propensity of methane to
completely oxidize to carbon dioxide. Using photochemical activation should
facilitate the breaking of only one C-H bond in methane, compared to the
multiple C-H bond dissociations observed at elevated temperatures in standard
oxidation reactions. The integration of these concepts represents a potentially
transformative approach to catalyst design and reaction engineering, where the
catalyst provides one of the reactants (i.e., oxygen) for use in the process;
indeed, this reaction may ultimately be incorporated into a chemical looping
technology.

The broader impact of this proposal is to advance desired societal outcomes in
two areas: the mitigation of greenhouse gas emissions, and the creation of an
economically-viable means of transitioning from traditional fossil fuels to
alternative energy technologies. As the global warming potential of methane is
approximately 25 times higher than that of carbon dioxide, pursuit of basic
scientific research on methane conversion technologies that are carbon neutral
and do not produce carbon dioxide as byproducts is logical. More academic and
industrial effort should be devoted to upgrading methane to value-added
chemicals and fuels, and closing the carbon cycle. In addition, all materials
used to synthesize the catalysts and construct the reactor are composed of
inexpensive and earth-abundant elements, in the best example of sustainablility.

This project is appropriate for the EAGER funding mechanism, in that it involves
a radically different approach to the current research efforts aimed at methane
conversion. By developing a more complete understanding of catalyst structure-
property-reactivity relationships across multiple length and time scales, a
start will be made on achieving effective utilization of the abundant and
inexpensive methane reserves, and lay the path towards energy independence. The
skills of Prof. Lo will be utilized in testing the hypotheses in this EAGER.
Over the past six years at Washington University, she has developed significant
expertise in computational catalysis elucidating structure property
relationships in metal oxide catalysts, and demonstrating that methane
activation and dehydrogenation proceeds at the interface between catalyst phases
(e.g., metal-support) particularly when site defects are present. This supports
the catalyst hypothesis presented in this study.

The PI plans to continue existing efforts in science outreach to the local K-12
community, by working with underserved middle school students at KIPP: Inspire
Academy in St. Louis City that are preparing for the Missouri Science Olympiad
Competition; this effort has been ongoing since 2011, and has successfully
promoted STEM learning. The participating middle school students will be invited
to visit the PIs laboratory at Washington University and observe a demonstration
of the reactor.