* 1349990
* CAREER:  The Mesoscale Climate Dynamics of Rocky Mountain Snowpack Depletion
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/2014,03/31/2021
* Justin Minder, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 03/31/2021
* USD 621,956.00

The surface-albedo feedback (SAF) from mountain snow cover is one of the
dominant influences on the regional-scale response to large-scale climate
variability and change in the mid-latitudes. At global scales, detailed analyses
have illuminated the controls on the SAF and sources of spread in SAF magnitude
between global climate models (GCMs). While regional climate model (RCM)
simulations over complex terrain suggest substantial regional effects of the
SAF, no detailed quantitative analysis of the regional SAF has been undertaken.
This project will quantify and diagnose the SAF in high-resolution RCM
simulations over the Rocky Mountains (and later the continental United States)
using the WRF model. They include 8-year reanalysis-forced control simulations
and 8-year pseudo-global-warming (PGW) simulations, wherein reanalysis boundary
conditions are perturbed by monthly mean changes predicted by a GCM under
greenhouse forcing. This framework allows for clean diagnosis of thermodynamic
and mesoscale mechanisms of climate change in isolation from changes in large-
scale circulations and storminess.

Analysis will include: (i) Quantification of the SAF and its contributions from
various physical processes: The SAF will be separated from other forcings and
feedbacks via linear feedback analysis and via RCM simulations with a suppressed
SAF. The mechanisms controlling the strength of the SAF will be diagnosed
including: the relative roles of snow cover and snow metamorphism changes, the
atmosphere masking of surface albedo changes, and the role of atmospheric
advection. (ii) Evaluation of simulated snow cover and albedo: RCM output will
be evaluated against high-resolution remote sensing provided by the MODIS
instrument (including the new MODSCAG snow product) to critically test the
realism of the simulated SAF and identify sources of bias. (iii) Examination of
the interactions between the SAF and regional-scale circulations: This will
include a determination of the role of advection in balancing radiative
perturbations and the role of radiative perturbations in altering thermally
driven mesoscale circulations. (iv) Comparison with other mountain ranges,
forcing scenarios, and model parameterizations: Analysis of additional
simulations with different model configurations will be used to understand how
geographic setting modulates the SAF. It will also be used to examine
differences in the SAF between simulations with and without changes in large-
scale circulations or dust-on-snow forcing.

Educational impacts at the graduate level will include mentoring and training of
a student. At the undergraduate level, a course on the environmental science of
mountainous regions will be enriched with RCM output from the project and field
observations. At the high school level, annual classroom visits and weeklong
summer camps on weather and climate for local students will be developed. These
programs will serve urban districts with high populations of minorities
underrepresented in the STEM fields. The camps will engage students through
lectures, demonstrations, hands-on laboratory experiences, and an interactive
field trip to a local mountaintop observatory. Students will be introduced to
the university environment, career options, and a range of role models. This
will serve to enable, excite, and recruit students for future study and
employment in the atmospheric sciences specifically and STEM in general.