* 1349212
* CSBR: Natural History: Curation and Digitization of Newly Acquired Modern and Fossil Invertebrate and Protist Research Collections at the SDSM&amp;T Museum of Geology
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2019
* Darrin Pagnac, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 04/30/2019
* USD 499,887.00

An award was made to the South Dakota School of Mines and Technology Museum of
Geology to curate and digitize three recently acquired collections of modern and
Neogene-age (last 23 million years) invertebrates and protists. The targeted
collections represent ancient and recent shallow-marine environments and are a
foundation for conservation paleobiology and contemporary ecological research.
Materials include 1989-2011 field collections of PI Anderson, dissertation
collections of co-PI Belanger, and an orphaned collection from the former
University of South Dakota-Springfield. Products of this project will include
well-curated collections; digitized and georeferenced records including
ancillary data, and illustrated faunal lists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Outreach and
educational activities of this project include the training of graduate and
undergraduate students in modern curatorial techniques. College students will
also be involved in designing exhibits for use in outreach to middle and high
school students. Furthermore, the targeted specimens will be used in course
development for the training of the next generation of museum curators,
including students from state and tribal colleges. Participating students will
be encouraged to become intellectually invested through the development of
research projects using the collections. More information can be found at:
http://www.sdsmt.edu/MuseumCollections.