* 1349179
* RUI: CSBR: Natural History: Securing and digitizing the world's largest Mexican bird collection
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2020
* John McCormack, Occidental College
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 06/30/2020
* USD 399,598.00

Natural history collections document Earth's biodiversity and are the raw
material for studies of how that biodiversity arose and how it is maintained on
our planet. Specimens in natural history collections are of practical importance
as well, providing data on human disease and informing forensic science. This
award funds the rehousing of an unparalleled natural history collection in new
specimen cases. Currently the collection, one of the largest documenting the
birds of North America, is under threat of degradation due to antiquated cases
that no longer protect against pests and adverse environmental factors.
Additionally, this award supports the gathering and dissemination of open-access
data on the location of bird specimens. Digital images of specimens from under-
studied avian groups will be made available through a new web portal that will
engage scientists and the public alike. The location of the world's largest
collection of Mexican birds, at a small liberal arts college in the United
States, provides opportunities to train undergraduates, who are the next
generation of museum scientists, in curation techniques as well as in the
application of specimen data to address biological
questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to secure, georeference, and
digitize the world's largest Mexican bird collection (63,000 specimens), located
at the Moore Laboratory of Zoology (MLZ) at Occidental College in Los Angeles,
California. Not only does the MLZ collection provide a window into Mexico's
endemic bird diversity prior to a major period of development and deforestation,
but also, for many widespread species that occur in the United States. The
specimens housed at MLZ fill a large, critical gap linking bird populations of
the entire North American continent. This project is urgent because new specimen
cases are needed to replace antiquated cases that no longer prevent insect
infestations and would not be able to protect against accidental flooding. In
addition to new cases, the proposed activities include a major update to the
taxonomy and organization of the collection, to facilitate the collection's
research potential. A major goal of this project is to georeference, digitize
and image the collection and make these data accessible as online resources to
inform research and education. The MLZ's mission is to leverage our unique
setting at a small liberal arts college toward: (i) Conducting cutting-edge
research using natural history collections; (ii) promoting the use of natural
history collections in undergraduate education and research; and (iii) promoting
career development for underrepresented groups and women in museum science. More
information is available at the following website: http://www.oxy.edu/moore-lab-
zoology.