* 1349044
* Effects Of Traditional Cradling Practices On Infants' Physical, Motor, And Social Development
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2014,08/31/2016
* Catherine Tamis-LeMonda, CUNY College of Staten Island
* Standard Grant
* david moore
* 08/31/2016
* USD 77,355.00

Prominent theories of infant development have been built on the premise that
freedom to move is essential (e.g., Gibson, 1988), and that restricted movement
is harmful for development. Since it is ethically unacceptable for researchers
to test effects of restricted movement by intentionally restraining infants,
many studies have taken advantage of 'natural experiments' provided by cases of
children reared in impoverished conditions, such as children in Romanian
orphanages who were left in their cribs most of the time (e.g., Nelson, Fox,
&amp; Zeanah, 2014). However, in these situations, children were also deprived
of social interaction with caregivers, which makes separating the effects of
restricted movement versus other types of deprivation difficult.&lt;br/&gt;This
work capitalizes on a rare chance to study effects of restricted movement on
infant development by examining the use of a 'gahvora' cradle in Tajikistan in
Central Asia where restriction of infant movement is common, but infants receive
plenty of social interaction and affection. Dr. Karasik, her collaborators, Drs.
Adolph and Tamis-LeMonda, and their international research team will investigate
the physical, motor, and social development of Tajik infants based on the
duration and degree of restriction they experience during the first two years of
life. This work also provides insights into whether and how development of motor
skills influences development in other domains such as interactions with objects
and people.&lt;br/&gt;This study addresses issues that are core to developmental
psychology, including questions about cross-cultural consistency in children's
development and the effects of context on early experiences and emerging skills.
Data will be shared with the broader scientific community through the
Databrary.org video data-sharing library. This project will engage undergraduate
students and researchers in the U.S. and abroad by offering training in research
methods and developmental science.