* 1349245
* CAREER: Acoustics Lab on a Chip for Comprehensive Biophysical Studies of Tumor Cells: Towards Personalized Cancer Diagnosis and Therapeutics
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2019
* Onur Tigli, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Shubhra Gangopadhyay
* 12/31/2019
* USD 400,000.00

The main objective of this CAREER proposal is to develop surface acoustic wave
devices along with the associated chemical and biological sensors to study the
bio-mechanical properties of cells and its relationship to disease. Acoustic
waves applied at the cellular level can be used to elucidate biophysical
properties of cells and reveal diagnostic as well as therapeutic signatures with
accuracy and sensitivity that are not possible to attain in current
technologies. The research objective of this CAREER proposal is to test this
hypothesis in three steps: 1.Design, develop and characterize a monolithic cell
biology lab-on-a-chip (LOC) integrated with novel magnetic cell capture and
surface acoustic wave (SAW) transducers, 2.Study and evaluate the efficacy of
SAWs for non-invasive, contactless sonoporation and transfection studies on
tumor cells and identify the unique acoustic signature of each cell type for
disease diagnostics, therapeutics as well as drug screening tests, 3.Carry out
systematic studies of cell biomechanical properties as a function of disease
type and state on a CMOS Acoustic LOC with integrated microfluidics and on chip
electronics. Intellectual Merit: Quantitatively understanding the mechanical
properties of cells and their relationship to the cells health may provide a
method to elegantly differentiate between cells without using chemical sensing
techniques that may require alteration of their biochemical state. These studies
can transform the current state of medicine and potentially enable the in-situ
capture and destruction of circulating tumor cells hence obliterating the
metastasis phenomenon. In addition, this project will produce novel resources in
sharing knowledge and collaboration of researchers in the fields of electrical,
biomedical engineering, molecular biology, biochemistry and cancer pathology. In
particular, new knowledge and science will be disseminated in cancer diagnosis
and therapy, cellular mechanotransduction, mechanobiology, microfabrication,
acoustic wave devices and integrated electronics. Broader Impacts: Proposed
multidisciplinary project is expected to transform the engineering and life
sciences education at University of Miami (UM) and integrate educational
activities and cutting-edge research. The PI envisions a transformational effect
on the training of next generation engineers and scientists in the discipline
transcending fields of bionanotechnology, MEMS and VLSI. With over 25% of the
students being of Hispanic descent, UM is proud to be ranked 1st among
universities serving Hispanics in the United States. In addition, College of
Engineering is ranked 15th in the nation for the percentage of women who were
awarded a B.S. in engineering. This remarkable diversity is reflected in the
student members of the PI's research group.