* 1349080
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Bias in Novel Category Learning
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2014,03/31/2016
* Sean Martin, New York University
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 03/31/2016
* USD 4,946.00

Understanding the role that prior linguistic experience plays in the acquisition
of novel categories is critical to our development of theories of how
individuals learn a first or second language.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
dissertation examines learning bias in novel phonetic category learning, as in
artificial language learning experiments or second language acquisition. During
category learning, learners discover categories largely based on the
distribution of their input along phonetic cue dimensions. Learners have been
shown to make approximately optimal use of distributional information when
discovering categories with single cues, whether or not their native language
uses a given cue. In contrast, when learning categories requiring multiple cues,
learners frequently attend to only some of the available cues, resulting in
poorer category learning. For example, Spanish speakers learning English often
show difficulty with the vowel distinction in 'sheep' vs 'ship'. Many learners
initially attend primarily to statistically unreliable vowel duration
differences although stronger cues are available in the form of spectral
differences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under the direction of Dr. Lisa Davidson, Sean
Christopher Martin will carry out a series of experiments to test the degree to
which native language experience gives rise to this type of learning bias in
category learning. Native speakers of English will be trained to recognize new
vowel categories which are distinguished by pairs of familiar and unfamiliar
cues. The stimuli are then systematically manipulated to control which of the
cues is more reliable. In this way, the respective contributions of preference
for statistically robust cues and bias to attend to cues which the learner's
prior experience suggests are reliable can be
distinguished.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A computational model of learner behavior
accounts for expected results in terms of a hierarchical account of category
learning. In order to learn from high-dimensional input like the speech signal,
the model develops generalizaitons about cue reliability while learning category
structure, giving rise to more efficient first-language learning but later
generating learning bias because it initially predicts unfamiliar cues to be
low-reliability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this research will aid
understanding of second language learning, highlighting issues which might
contribute to poor second language learning outcomes. In addition, the proposed
computational model demonstrates an approach which allows for more flexible and
adaptable category representations which might allow future speech recognition
systems to more easily cope with the natural variability of the speech signal.