* 1349663
* CAREER: Development of a platform for cyanobacterial chemical production from CO2
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2020
* Shota Atsumi, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 06/30/2020
* USD 400,000.00

1349663 &lt;br/&gt;Atsumi, Shota&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Biosynthesis of valuable
chemicals has gained increased attention because of energy, environmental, and
economic concerns. Global energy and environmental problems have stimulated
increased efforts towards reducing CO2 emissions and synthesizing biofuels and
bulk chemicals from renewable resources. Direct routes for conversion of CO2 to
chemicals are conceptually preferable and many methods have been reported.
However, these reported methods suffer from low productivity rendering them
uneconomical thus far. The proposed research represents a novel strategy to
establish and improve the production of valuable chemicals from CO2 using
cyanobacteria as biocatalysts. The proposed method will aid in securing both the
nation's energy independence and economic growth. With the exploding interests
in renewable and sustainable chemical production, the proposed research project
has many critical and transformative implications in synthetic biology and
metabolic engineering. The PI will train a new breed of interdisciplinary
researchers who can build bridges between basic science and engineering. The
proposed research will integrate contemporary issues such as CO2 emissions,
climate change, and energy production with education. The benefits of the
proposed research to society are widespread, as the resulting technologies will
significantly impact the ability to resolve some of humanity's most pressing
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While cyanobacteria are naturally able to utilize
CO2, they are not naturally able to transform CO2 into compounds such as
advanced biofuels. For this reason, synthetic biology is applied to manipulate
the cyanobacterial genome to allow generation of specific, valuable compounds.
Cyanobacteria have already been engineered to produce a number of different
compounds. However, the efficiency of biochemical production by cyanobacteria
remains low. Development of a general platform is critical in order to
efficiently engineer cyanobacterial species for biochemical production and to
predict changes in both relevant, cellular dynamics and traits after targeted
engineering. The proposed research possesses three technological impacts: (1)
elucidation of tight repression mechanisms in cyanobacteria; (2) establishment
of strategies to determine favorable properties for chemical production; and (3)
development of whole cellular remodeling to expand the metabolism for chemical
production from CO2. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Due to the
interdisciplinary nature of the project, this CAREER award by the Biotechnology,
Biochemical, and Biomass Engineering Program of the CBET Division is co-funded
by the Systems and Synthetic Biology Program of the Division of Molecular and
Cellular Biology and by the Mathematical Biology Program of the Division of
Mathematical Sciences.