* 1349828
* CIF: EAGER: TeraNets: Ultra-Broadband Communication Networks in the Terahertz Band
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2015
* Ian Akyildiz, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2015
* USD 300,000.00

The research objective of the TeraNets project is to establish the theoretical
foundations of ultra-broadband communication networks in the terahertz (THz)
Band. New channel models for the entire THz Band will be developed. These will
account for line-of-sight, non-line-of-sight and multi-path propagation and will
capture the peculiarities of molecular absorption and scattering from rough
surfaces. Bandwidth-adaptive modulations to exploit the distance-dependent
behavior of the bandwidth at THz Band frequencies will be developed. In
addition, massive MIMO transmission schemes to increase the communication
distance and novel channel coding approaches to efficiently overcome channel
errors at THz Band frequencies are to be investigated. Finally, novel Medium
Access Control protocols for THz Band communication networks are proposed, which
capture the peculiarities of the physical layer and take advantage of large
antenna arrays and dielectric mirrors.

The TeraNets project is expected to pave the way for research in communication
networks in the THz Band. Ultra-broadband communication networks will play a
major role in society within the next ten years by drastically increasing the
capacity of wireless networks, and enabling long-awaited applications not
possible with current wireless technologies. In addition, the THz Band is not
yet regulated. The project team is actively involved in IEEE 802.15 WPAN
Terahertz Interest Group (IGThz), whose objective is to create the first
standard for this paradigm. The research results will be incorporated into the
Information and Network Theory and Wireless Communication and Networks within
the School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, at the Georgia Institute of
Technology, both at undergraduate and graduate levels. This, combined with
grauate student resarch mentoring, will produce new experts in this nascent
field. The research results will be disseminated in important scientific
conferences, journals and premier magazines of the field.