* 1349009
* Presuppositions in Online Language Comprehension
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2014,02/28/2018
* FLORIAN SCHWARZ, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 02/28/2018
* USD 365,978.00

In interpreting linguistic utterances, the human mind has to piece together many
different types of information. While this takes place sub-consciously, language
researchers have developed theoretical perspectives on how distinct aspects of
meaning are factored into the overall interpretation. However, little remains
known about how these theoretical constructs relate to actual cognitive
processes taking place in real-time. The present project will help to fill this
gap by investigating aspects of meaning, specifically presuppositions, with
experimental tools from psychology, and thereby deepen our understanding of a
fundamental aspect of human interaction. This is essential for a comprehensive
perspective on how speakers relate to the world through language, and also bears
on broader issues in society. For example, research on the psychology of memory
has shown that the presuppositional status of information has strong effects on
memory accuracy, which is highly relevant in eye witness testimony and other
related activities.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;With the support of the National
Science Foundation, Dr. Schwarz will study how presuppositions relate to other
aspects of meaning, such as asserted content and certain pragmatic inferences
(specifically implicatures), using a variety of experimental methods.
Presuppositions are backgrounded relative to the main point asserted by an
utterance, and (typically) already count as established in the discourse. For
example, 'again' in 'John left again' suggests that it was already known that
John had left previously, the main news being his second departure. The project
will investigate the relative time-course of these two aspects of meaning in
online processing: Does the presupposition get evaluated first, suggesting that
its role for the overall felicity of an utterance needs to be confirmed at the
outset? Or does it play the role of an additional inference that is only
considered later? Another crucial feature of presuppositions concerns their
relation to operators like negation: 'John hasn't left again' still conveys that
he left before (while denying a second departure). The project will investigate
whether such embedded occurrences of presuppositional expressions introduce
additional cognitive demands. Finally, the project will also study the
availability and potential cognitive cost of an alternative interpretation of
such sentences, as in 'John (certainly) hasn't left again--he never left in the
first place!' The present project constitutes the first comprehensive attempt to
use tools from experimental psycho-linguistics to study the cognitive processes
involved in presupposition comprehension. Using an eye tracker, Dr. Schwarz will
record people's eye movements relative to a visual scene while they're hearing
linguistic stimuli that contain presuppositional expressions. This allows for
real-time insights into the unfolding of individual aspects of the overall
meaning with millisecond-accuracy. Response times and other behavioral measures
further help to understand speakers' interpretation processes and preferences.
By combining theoretical work with foundations in philosophy of language and
formal semantics with experimental methods from psycho-linguistics, this
interdisciplinary project will help to integrate the study of meaning in natural
language more deeply into the cognitive sciences and advance our theoretical and
empirical understanding of the human mind's remarkable capacities at work in
linguistic communication.