* 1349741
* Collaborative Research:  Calibrating Mid-Miocene Greenhouse Climate and Ecology in a Key High Southern Latitude Locale
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2017
* Richard Kay, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Skog
* 03/31/2017
* USD 74,886.00

Collaborative Research: Calibrating mid-Miocene greenhouse climate and e4cology
in a key high southern latitude locale &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By
&lt;br/&gt;Matthew J. Kohn, Boise State University, EAR-1349749
&lt;br/&gt;Richard Kay, Duke University, EAR-1349741 &lt;br/&gt;Caroline
Stromberg, University of Washington, EAR-1349530 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mid-
Miocene Climatic Optimum (MMCO; 14.5-17.0 million years ago, Ma) marks an
unusually warm period in Earth?s history and is the last time that atmospheric
CO2 content (pCO2) plausibly reached levels as high as anticipated in the next
century. Thus the MMCO serves as our best analogue for predicting future
greenhouse conditions. The proposed research will fill a major gap in the
distribution of MMCO terrestrial localities by characterizing climates and
ecologies of Earth?s southernmost site ? the Santa Cruz Formation of coastal
Patagonia (51 Â°S). Previous work and models disagree in terms of mean annual
temperature (MAT), mean annual precipitation (MAP) and the seasonality of
precipitation. We will evaluate paleoecological and paleoclimate hypotheses
regarding MAT, MAP and vegetation at two specific times: 17.45 (pre-peak MMCO)
and 16.85 Ma (peak MMCO). Stable isotope compositions will be used to infer
aridity and seasonality. Phytoliths (plant silica particles) will distinguish
plant communities. Tooth wear and faunas will constrain habitat and climate. Our
research will also intercompare diverse methods of inferring paleoecology and
paleoclimate in terrestrial settings with broad implications for terrestrial
climate intercomparisons worldwide. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dissemination and
sharing of research results will comply with guidelines expressed in NSF13-1. A
new exhibit will be constructed at the Burke Museum (annual visitation of c.
20,000 K-12 students, c. 75,000 total) on biotic responses to climate change, as
well as accompanying web pages ("Explore Your World," "Burke Blog" entries) and
social media (e.g., Facebook). Several graduate students will be supported, and
new paleoclimate-paleoecology-paleontology networks among US and Argentine
researchers will be initiated.