* 1349847
* The Structure, Origin, and Long-Term Trends of the West Coast Thermal Trough
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2014,10/31/2019
* Clifford Mass, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 10/31/2019
* USD 638,887.00

The West Coast thermal trough (WCTT) plays a crucial role in western North
American weather and climate during the warm season (approximately May through
October) and has a substantial impact during the cold season. The WCTT is
expressed as a pressure trough and tongue of warm air near the surface that
extends into the Pacific Northwest from an area of low pressure over the
southwestern U.S. Summer thermal troughs are associated with heat waves and poor
air quality, and greatly impact renewable energy production and wildfire growth.
Winter thermal troughs play a role in many western North America coastal snow
events. The project will begin by completing a series of case studies, using
both high-resolution model simulations and dense regional observations, to
determine the detailed structural evolution of western North America thermal
troughs, as well as to determine the physical mechanisms responsible for their
generation and maintenance. Particular attention will be given to thermal trough
passage across regional terrain barriers; such passages are often associated
with sharp transitions in wind and temperature that can lead to wildfire blow-
ups and rapid changes in wind energy. This work will determine whether thermal
trough frequency, intensity, and evolution have changed over the past half-
century using high-resolution gridded model reanalysis data sets, and then will
evaluate whether natural variability (such as the Pacific Decadal Oscillation)
or anthropogenic warming might explain such changes. It will also evaluate the
potential of anthropogenic global warming for changing the characteristics of
western U.S. thermal troughs over the next century. To do so, global climate
models forced by a variety of greenhouse gas scenarios will be dynamically
downscaled to high resolution (12 km) using a regional climate model. These
fields will then be input into objective algorithms that will determine the
trends in thermal trough frequency and intensity. Specific hypotheses regarding
the effects of global warming on thermal trough intensity and frequency will be
evaluated.

Intellectual Merit : The work completed under this award will provide a
comprehensive description of a feature that dominates the weather of western
North America during the summer, with similar phenomena observed throughout the
world. This work will not only describe the detailed structural evolution of
such features, but their basic physical mechanisms as well. The research will
determine the long-term temporal trends in thermal trough development and
evaluate the origins of these trends. It will examine whether global warming
will change the frequency and intensity of WCTTs, and will explain the
mechanisms behind these changes.

Broader Impacts : Improved understanding of this phenomenon will lead to
substantial societal benefits. Thermal troughs have a large impact on regional
temperatures, wildfire development and control, renewable energy, air quality,
and other critical societal issues. The understanding generated by this proposal
should help improve our ability to predict thermal trough development and
evolution, provide insights into expected long-term trends associated with
global warming, and suggest expected changes in regional temperature extremes,
renewable energy potential, and wildfire frequency.