* 1349684
* The upper mantle structure of southern Africa using full-waveform tomography from long-period ambient noise and earthquake data
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2014,02/29/2016
* Erica Emry, Emry                    Erica          L
* Fellowship Award
* Lina Patino
* 02/29/2016
* USD 174,000.00

Dr. Erica Emry has been awarded an NSF Earth Sciences Postdoctoral Fellowship to
carry out research and to broaden participation of underrepresented minorities
in the Earth Sciences while at The Pennsylvania State University and The
University of Rhode Island. She will investigate the structure of the upper
mantle beneath Africa using new full-wave seismic tomography techniques on
ambient noise and earthquake data. She will address questions of African mantle
dynamics and their impact on surface processes by creating a synoptic map of the
upper mantle shear velocities throughout southern Africa, focusing on the East
African Rift system (EARS) and the Archean cratons. In particular, she will
focus on imaging three unresolved regions in the African mantle and answering
the following questions that will help to elucidate the relationships between
mantle flow, cratonic lithosphere and surface processes: 1) What is the depth
and lateral extent of the Congo craton? 2) Are the East African and Ethiopian
low velocity zones connected at the Turkana Depression? 3) What is the depth and
lateral extent of the Afar hotspot, and are the slowest upper mantle anomalies
associated with the Afar hotspot located beneath the Main Ethiopian Rift (MER)
or the Afar Depression? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results from this project will
contribute to the larger African geology and tectonics community and current
research initiatives such as the NSF GeoPRISMs Rift Initiation and Evolution
(RIE) program. The finalized results of upper mantle structure beneath southern
Africa will be made freely available online for use in other geophysics and
earth science research (http://www.iris.edu/dms/products/emc/). As part of this
proposal, Dr. Emry will expand upon the Africa Array diversity program, acting
as primary instructor for the summer geophysics field course in 2014 and 2015.
This course run by Penn State and the University of Witwatersrand brings
undergraduate students from minority-serving institutions to Penn State and
South Africa to learn geophysical field techniques and South African geology. In
addition to the field course, she will continue to mentor students from the
Africa Array diversity program on a monthly basis during online webinars, by
introducing them to new research, and by discussing careers in the geosciences.
Furthermore, during each school year, she will advise students from the Africa
Array diversity program who are interested in completing a senior thesis focused
on African tectonics or seismology.