* 1349093
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Ethnicity and Locality: Linguistic Variation and Practices among a Vietnamese American Student Group
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2014,01/31/2016
* John Singler, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 01/31/2016
* USD 11,937.00

How do ethnic minorities in the U.S. maintain their cultural identity as they
integrate into American society? This dissertation research will focus on the
linguistic practices of Vietnamese-American students at a university in
Minnesota. Previous sociolinguistic studies of Asian Americans in the U.S. have
focused on East Asians; other Asian groups are largely unstudied, even though
Southeast Asians comprise the majority of the local Asian-American community in
some parts of the country, such as the Twin Cities area in Minnesota. Previous
research has shown that Southeast Asians may view themselves differently, as
indicated by the use of references such as "the other Asian" or "new wave",
terms that highlight a distinction from other Asian groups.

Three questions guide this research: First, in what ways do members of this
organization draw upon linguistic features in constructing their identities both
within the organization and in their local community? Second, is there evidence
that these speakers use features tied to their heritage language? Third, what
practices orient speakers to or away from definitions of "Vietnamese" and "Asian
American"? Data for this study will be collected from members of this
organization as well as control groups of European Americans and native
Vietnamese. Speech data includes individual interviews, group discussions, and
spontaneous speech collected in naturalistic settings. Speech data will be
complemented by ethnographic information collected through participant
observation.

From the point of view of sociolinguistic theory, the purpose of this research
is to examine how speakers negotiate a diverse set of identities within the
bounds of a specific community and how shared experiences shape the social
meaning of linguistic variation. This research will add to our knowledge of the
linguistic practices of Asian Americans and emphasize the wide range of
histories and cultures that this label encompasses. This research will also
focus attention on the varied identities with which ethnic minorities may align
themselves.