* 1349002
* RCN: Building the Research Data Alliance Community through US and International Engagement (RDA 2)
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2021
* Inna Kouper, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Amy Walton
* 09/30/2021
* USD 6,022,637.00

Data-driven innovation requires a foundation of infrastructure to support the
sharing, access, use, re-use, analysis, and stewardship of digital data. Data
infrastructure includes cyber-infrastructure tools for data discovery and
analysis (and their underlying technical structures and components -- persistent
digital identifiers, shared metadata frameworks, etc.), and social
infrastructure in the form of community policy and organizational practice
(harmonization of standards, approaches for data access and preservation, etc.).
To address the growing global need for data infrastructure, the Research Data
Alliance (RDA) was planned and launched in FY13 as an international community-
driven organization. RDA's mission is to build the social, organizational, and
technical infrastructure needed to reduce barriers to data sharing and exchange,
and to accelerate data-driven innovation world-wide. In the wake of precipitous
growth, RDA is now working to develop a stable support model for at least a
five-year period. The RDA 2 project provides support for U.S. participation and
leadership within the RDA, as well as strategic expansion of the U.S. community
within RDA (RDA/U.S.). RDA 2 integrates a) strategic efforts and pilots to
expand, diversify, and strengthen the RDA/U.S. community, and b) support for
U.S. contributions to RDA operations and leadership, including U.S.
participation in, and hosting of, RDA Plenaries. RDA/U.S. will be led by a
Steering Committee consisting of Fran Berman, RPI (Chair), Beth Plale, IU, (Vice
Chair, Technical Programs), Larry Lannom, CNRI, (Vice Chair, Outreach and
Development) and Mark Parsons, RPI (Managing Director).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
RDA 2 project builds RDA through increasing U.S. engagement and leadership. RDA
2 builds RDA/U.S. through pilots in three strategic areas: Community Engagement
and Outreach, Student and Early Career Engagement, and Adoption and Impact
Amplification. The pilots are designed to expand and diversify RDA/U.S. data
community, increase the impact of RDA deliverables in the U.S., and enhance the
benefit of RDA for U.S. institutions, communities, businesses, and individuals.
A strong RDA/U.S. can be a vehicle for accelerating U.S. innovation, and
positioning the U.S. community for greater competitiveness and leadership.
RDA/U.S. can contribute to the data infrastructure needed to make new U.S.
policy approaches and initiatives work, and serve as a means of capitalizing