* 1349391
* CSBR: Natural History Collections of Austin Peay State University: Information and Infrastructure Improvements of the Herbarium and Vertebrate Collections
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2018
* Rebecca Johansen, Austin Peay State University
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 05/31/2018
* USD 310,509.00

The Austin Peay State University (APSU) Natural History Collections (NHC)
include over 100,000 specimens of plants and animals from the Mid-south region
of the U.S. These collections are vital to faculty and student research, serving
as the foundation for over 200 publications, theses, and dissertations. The NHC
are used in public outreach and as instructional materials supporting APSU
biology courses. APSU students traditionally underrepresented in science
including, military (28%), women (>50%), low-income, first-time college, and
minority students, receive training through courses utilizing the NHC and
through collections-based research. Due to recent, drastic growth in the NHC and
the discontinued use of toxic fumigants, collections are threatened by damage
from overcrowding, fire, and insects. This award will secure the collections
through acquisition of storage systems that increases space and prevents
specimen damage. Additionally, funds will be used to improve electronic storage
of specimen data and to increase accessibility through a consolidated and
improved NHC website that provides online access to specimen records, images,
and other associated natural history information.

The Austin Peay State University (APSU) Natural History Collections (NHC)
include the Mid-south's largest herpetological collection, a rapidly growing
fish collection, and the second largest regional herbarium. APSU NHC's mission
is to serve as the primary specimen repository for the Mid-south, to lead
efforts to describe regional biodiversity, and to train new generations of
students through excellence in mentorship, research, and public outreach. While
the NHC have contributed significantly to education and research locally, use by
the broader scientific community has been limited. Due to recent drastic growth,
the NHC are threatened by physical damage from insufficient storage, active
insect infestations, and potential future fire, water, and earthquake damage.
Project goals are to (1) secure existing collections through installation of
compactor shelving systems and implementation of non-toxic pest management, (2)
increase utility through development of a single Specify database, and (3)
increase accessibility via development and enhancement of online interfaces and
collaboration with iDigBio and other data-sharing portals. These actions will
promote the NHC's mission and convert currently under-utilized but regionally
significant collections into broadly accessible resources that will support
education and research related to of one of the most biodiverse areas of the US.
More information about the APSU herbarium is available at
www.apsu.edu/herbarium/databases; similar outlets will be developed for the
vertebrate collections as part of the activities supported by this award.