* 1349560
* Collaborative Research: Unlocking secrets of Earth's largest sand sea: Paleoenvironmental records of the Lower Jurassic Navajo Sandstone, Colorado Plateau, USA
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2019
* Judith Parrish, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Continuing Grant
* Dena Smith
* 01/31/2019
* USD 86,675.00

Study of ancient (paleo-) ecosystems preserved in the Navajo Sandstone, the
largest sand sea (eolian) system ever known that was deposited between 190 and
175 million years ago (Lower Jurassic), will provide crucial information to
understanding biotic, water (hydrology), and landscape (environments) during a
greenhouse period of global climate. Results will reveal how biotic community
structure responded to climate changes during the transition from wetter to
drier eolian landscape successions. This study will transform how biodiversity,
hydrology, and environmental factors of the largest eolian systems are
interpreted for understanding Earth history. This study will be a model for
evaluating climate sensitivities in eolian systems, and provide guidance on
future hydrologic, ecologic, and climatic studies in global warming cycles.
Research will have broad impacts to interpret the links between biological,
chemical, and physical sediment records in a paleoclimate context. Our
collaboration has a firm commitment to increase involvement of undergraduate and
graduate students of underrepresented groups in research and training, and
training of Earth/Space Science education majors and teachers. Each Investigator
is involved with outreach or geologic education efforts. Study results will have
high visibility to the public because of the prominence of the Navajo Sandstone
in so many of the Colorado Plateau's National Parks, Monuments, public lands,
and wilderness areas. Partnerships with government agencies will ensure broad
dissemination of scientific results to the general public and secondary
geoscience teachers via video modules, pictures, and science content for
websites, publications or brochures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This interdisciplinary
study will examine the sedimentology, hydrology, and biology recorded within
paleoecosystems of the Lower Jurassic Navajo Sandstone (Ss) on the Colorado
Plateau, USA. The Navajo Ss represents the largest erg system ever known,
deposited during the: (1) disintegration of the megamonsoonal climate system
after the breakup of Pangea; (2) early diversification of mammals; and (3)
increased diversity and dominance of dinosaurs in continental ecosystems. Two
hypotheses to understand the response of terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems to
high-frequency climatic changes that affected paleohydrologic and
paleoenvironmental settings in a variably arid landscape will be integrated into
one generalized model: (H1) The climatic and paleohydrologic status of the
Navajo Ss evolved from relatively moist in the lower part to relatively dry in
the upper part, as well as regionally moist to dry from east to west. (H2)
Groundwater evolved from fresh to saline from east to west across the basin, and
biota was strongly influenced by its distribution and the change in water
chemistry, such that animal body size, based on burrow diameters, decreases up-
section and regionally towards the west. Field and laboratory studies will
include: (1) stratigraphic and sedimentologic analyses in a stratigraphic
framework to systematically document vertical changes, with the objective to
subdivide the Navajo Ss: (2) C and O stable isotopic and petrographic analyses
of tufas to provide data on paleoclimate and changes in the water budget; and
(3) ichnological and paleontological analyses integrated with sedimentologic,
stratigraphic, petrographic, and geochemical analyses of clastic and carbonate
facies that represent a variety of paleoenvironments. Efforts will focus in the
area northwest of Moab, UT, which is the highest priority target area with a
high concentration of burrowed zones, plant fossils, and tufa and lacustrine
deposits to address H1 and H2. Outcrop exposure is exceptionally good, which
will facilitate establishing reliable timelines. As we establish these
timelines, we may focus the study further to concentrate on the variability
along those timelines.