* 1349261
* Collaborative Research: The legacy of transience: Understanding dynamic landscape adjustment following mountain uplift in two CZO field areas
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2014,09/30/2016
* Jane Willenbring, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 09/30/2016
* USD 178,045.00

This project will further geologic understanding of tectonic history and its
imprint on the current landscape. Understanding landscape response to tectonics
can inform land management decisions and aid in quantifying hazard risk. The
project focuses on two specific landscapes from NSF supported Critical Zone
Observatories (CZO) and leverages existing data and resources from these two
sites. The project combines field work, laboratory analysis, and modeling.
Project outcomes will benefit the Earth science research community as well as
policy makers. Landlab, the computational model that will be used and further
developed in this project, will be made available through the Community Surface
Dynamics Modeling System (CSDMS) website. The project will also provide a K-12
training module and Landlab numerical modeling exercises for undergraduate and
graduate students.

This study explores the unique signature of landscape adjustment following a
change in tectonics in two different settings: South Fork Eel River, Northern
California, USA and Rio Icacos, in Northeastern Puerto Rico. In both field
areas, the current topography indicates that part of the landscape has not yet
adjusted to a past or ongoing tectonic disturbance. The overall objective of the
project is to understand and quantify the temporal evolution of the entire
landscape, focusing specifically on the transformation of the relict topography
to adjusted topography in these two field sites. A framework to interpret
tectonic history of landscapes based on distribution of relict and adjusted
topography will be developed through a combination of field work, cosmogenic
nuclide geochronology, and landscape evolution modeling. Field work will include
mapping relict parts of the landscape and quantifying morphologic features that
vary between the adjusted and relict topography. Field observations will be
combined with analyses of digital topographic maps. This work will allow future
studies to easily identify relict topography in other landscapes. Geochemical
techniques will be used to measure the spatially averaged denudation rate across
the two landscapes. Numerical experiments using Landlab will be performed to
understand how the tectonic history is expressed in the topography and
denudation rate patterns.