* 1349725
* CAREER:  Precision Measurements with Ultracold Diatomic Molecules
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Tanya Zelevinsky, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 07/31/2019
* USD 769,000.00

Non-technical description:&lt;br/&gt;The answer to the question "what time is
it?" ultimately traces back to master clocks that are based on the internal
ticking of atoms. Increasing the accuracy of these master clocks has in the past
enabled such innovations as the GPS systems that we use in our cars and
smartphones to locate our position on the globe. Future improvements in clocks
can be expected to enable similar innovations that are only just beginning to be
imagined. The present project seeks to extend the scope of the science and
technology we can achieve by keeping track of time ever more accurately, using
molecules instead of atoms. Molecules present the possibility of a quantum clock
based on different physics than atomic clocks: nuclear vibrations rather than
electronic transitions. Simple molecules that consist of two atoms will be
created near the temperature of absolute zero and trapped in standing waves of
light to ensure nearly complete isolation from the environment. These strontium
molecules possess very well defined internal energy states that allow precise
manipulation and probing with laser light. This clock is sensitive to variations
in the electron-to-proton mass ratio that may occur as the universe evolves, and
to yet undiscovered forces that might appear at nanometer scales.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description:&lt;br/&gt;A new class of ultracold
diatomic molecules based on laser-cooled strontium atoms was recently
demonstrated by the primary investigator's research group. This work (based on
optical trapping, manipulation, and imaging of these dimers) will enable
precision measurements in molecular physics as well as tests of fundamental laws
that may indicate new physics beyond the Standard Model. Initial work indicates
that by applying atomic lattice-clock techniques to this molecule in both the
excited and ground states, a direct measurement of the nonadiabatic Coriolis
mixing angles of the molecular wavefunctions can be performed; these angles are
critical for describing weak molecular bonding near the atomic continuum. This
project will further characterize the transition from adiabatic to nonadiabatic
behavior in these weakly bound systems. Additionally, tightly bound ultracold
ground-state strontium dimers will be created for vibrational spectroscopy, or a
molecular vibrational clock. If the mass scaling of the van der Waals type
interatomic interaction is better understood, this clock can potentially improve
the knowledge of nanometer-scale mass-dependent forces by several orders of
magnitude. When the systematic effects of lattice spectroscopy of this molecule
are better characterized and state-insensitive lattice trapping is optimized as
part of this project, this molecular clock can set the best model-independent
limit on the stability of the electron-to-proton mass ratio. Robust molecular
clocks have applications in geodesy, navigation, and tests of fundamental
science. Special efforts are made to involve young public school students from
local New York City neighborhoods and expose them to the day-to-day work of
scientists.