* 1349178
* A new theory of clutch size evolution: Consequences of morphology at fledging on mobility and survival interacting with parental energy expenditure (FMR)
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2014,03/31/2017
* Thomas Martin, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 03/31/2017
* USD 536,534.00

How hard should parents work to raise offspring, and how does this work effort
influence the number and survival of offspring that parents attempt to raise?
These are questions that have intrigued scientists for more than a century, and
have major implications for population dynamics of wild animals. These questions
have been highlighted among songbirds because species vary extensively in the
number of young that parents attempt to raise. Even among species that breed in
the same habitat, such as high elevation riparian habitat in Arizona where work
will be conducted, species vary extensively in the number of offspring they
attempt to raise. For example, a green-tailed towhee in that habitat typically
lays 3 or 4 eggs, a red-faced warbler lays 4 or 5 eggs, while a mountain
chickadee may lay 8 eggs. A new theory to explain this variation based on risk
of mortality to offspring and parents is proposed and this grant will fund tests
of the new theory. Species differ in the risk of their young being eaten by
predators, with the open cup nests of the towhee or warbler experiencing high
predation, while the cavity nests of chickadees experience very low risk of
predation. These differences in predation risk affect how long the young stay in
the nest; species like the towhee and warbler leave their risky nest 8 to 11
days after hatch, while chickadees do not leave their safe cavity nest until 20
to 22 days after hatch. As a result, the towhee and warbler young cannot fly
when they leave their nest, while the chickadees are fully flight capable when
they leave. These differences in developmental state of the young when they
leave the nest also potentially affect how quickly they start feeding
themselves, with the chickadees potentially feeding themselves within a few days
after leaving the nest, while the towhee may take 3 weeks to develop this
ability. Potentially, towhee parents must work much harder for each young to
provide all their food compared with the chickadee where young almost
immediately start obtaining some of their own food and can follow parents to
reduce their travel. The extent to which parents are willing to work differs
among species depending on their risk of mortality over their annual cycle.
Taken together, these effects may explain why species differ in the number of
young they attempt to raise, and has critical consequences for population
dynamics of species. The proposed work will use observational and experimental
approaches to testing these hypotheses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fledgling
period (after offspring leave the nest) is a critical period for demography, but
interspecific variation in survival is unknown and documentation will aid
understanding of population vulnerabilities to changing environmental
conditions. Given the documented economic and aesthetic importance of birding to
society, this conservation knowledge is important. Three graduate students whose
thesis research will be supported by this project will be trained. Each year, 1
technician and 6 undergraduates will be trained in field techniques and the
conduct of science, as well as 8 undergraduates from across disciplines (in and
outside of biology) to transcribe videos of parental behaviors. The latter
provides outreach to engage diverse students in scientific principles. Students
will be educated through discussion sessions that will be used to teach the
scientific principles for the work being conducted. To identify possible
recruits, we will use broad advertising approaches to further enhance the
diversity of social and cultural groups from which we can recruit. Finally,
nests provide a rich source of video opportunities to demonstrate differences
among species in social interactions, as well as intriguing videos of predation
events. The researcher started obtaining short, high definition videos to
develop an educational series on parental and offspring behaviors and predation
events to put on YouTube for public outreach. PBS Nature is filming a
documentary on nest architecture and avian family life that will include footage
at the focal field site to further increase public outreach.