* 1349157
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Pilgrimage and the Rise of Cahokia
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/2014,12/31/2015
* Timothy Pauketat, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2015
* USD 23,731.00

A question of concern to anthropology and of contemporary relevance involves the
factors which bind individuals together into effective functioning social units.
It is abundantly evident that in the world today religion can be one important
factor. Archaeology has the ability to trace the development of such processes
over time and this proposal focuses on one specific case study. Pilgrimage was
an essential component in the rise of cities throughout the ancient world.
However, it has never been seriously considered in the rise of Cahokia, the
largest mound center north of Mexico and the only pre-Columbian city in North
America. Nevertheless, recent evidence suggests that pilgrimage may have been
associated with its rise. First, Cahokia rose in tandem with a new religion
circa AD 1050, which involved a new suite of deities and mythical ancestors, new
burial practices, and the intentional alignment of entire landscapes to
celestial events. Second, Cahokia's population peaked at this time, stimulated
in part by an influx of non-local groups from throughout the Midwest. Finally,
several mound centers 20 km east of Cahokia were seemingly connected by a series
of ancient roadways and exhibited specially aligned mounds and religious
structures. Thus, identifying archaeological evidence of pilgrimage at the
Emerald site, the largest of these sites, particularly dating to around AD 1050,
will show that pilgrimage was indeed a critical part of Cahokia's rise.

To this end, B. Jacob Skousen will perform magnetic surveys and targeted
excavations on sections of a possible pre-Columbian roadway that stretches from
the Emerald site to Cahokia. He will also perform limited excavations on
Emerald's largest mound and analyze the artifacts from previously excavated
houses and trash pits from the site. The goal of these activities is to identify
archaeological evidence of pilgrimages and determine when they occurred.
Specifically, the magnetic survey and excavations will verify the existence of
the roadway and determine its material characteristics and chronology, as wide,
overly-straight roads are often built to facilitate pilgrimages. Excavations
will reveal the construction techniques and chronology of Emerald's largest
mound, as pilgrimage centers often exhibit monumental architecture built in
stages, representing the joint, periodic efforts of pilgrims. Finally, analyses
of the houses, pottery vessels, and stone tool artifacts from previous
excavations will verify the chronology, duration, and intensity of occupation,
as pilgrimage centers are marked by ephemeral and short-term occupation.
Furthermore, these analyses will determine if non-local pottery, lithic tools,
and house construction styles were present, which will suggest whether non-local
groups inhabited the site, again a characteristic of pilgrimage centers.

The impacts of this research will extend far beyond the scope of this project.
First, the findings will seek to shed light on the role of pilgrimage and
religion in the rise of cities not only in ancient North American but throughout
the world. Furthermore, the materials recovered from these excavations will be
used to teach undergraduate students at the University of Illinois Urbana-
Champaign standard archaeological analysis techniques under the supervision of
Skousen. Perhaps most importantly, local talks and presentations of this project
will stimulate more interest in and awareness of Illinois's pre-Columbian
heritage. These presentations also seek to stimulate discussions with local
individuals and groups on ways to better manage and preserve ancient sites and
roadways, as these vital resources are actively being eradicated by construction
projects, modern agricultural practices, and neglect.