* 1349876
* Developing a Novel Temperature Proxy to Test Hypotheses about Atmospheric Circulation in Western North America during the Last Deglaciation
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2014,01/31/2017
* Andrew Kowler, Kowler                  Andrew
* Fellowship Award
* Aisha Morris
* 01/31/2017
* USD 174,000.00

Dr. Andrew Kowler has been awarded an NSF Earth Sciences postdoctoral fellowship
to implement a research and broadening participation plan at the University of
California - Los Angeles, in collaboration with Northern Arizona University. The
research project will answer fundamental questions about controls on water
balance in western North America through refinement of clumped isotope
paleothermometry, which will allow utilization of gastropod shells for
reconstructions of ancient air temperatures. This project will make a valuable
contribution to the understanding of the driving forces behind this region's
long-term hydroclimatic sensitivity. Exportation of this work will enable
similar evaluations to be conducted for wet intervals that occurred in other
arid regions, leaving climate models better equipped to examine possible
regional responses to anthropogenic perturbations of the global climate system.
Moreover, the economic and cultural well-being of traditionally underrepresented
Native American populations depends upon the availability and sustainability of
hydrologic resources in both urban and rural areas. The proposed broadening
participation activities address this through establishment of a direct link
between existing educational and conservation initiatives. The PI will partner
with established organizations that work with Native Americans (like Spring
Stewardship Institute, Northern Arizona Univeristy Tribal Environmental
Professionals, GLOBE, UCLA's American Indian Program, and USDA Extension
offices) to map and characterize springs, develop curriculum on hydrological
survey methods for high school students, provide field experiences, and share
data with local communities.

This study addresses a fundamental question in climate dynamics by quantifying
air temperature changes associated with wet intervals in the now-arid
southeastern Basin and Range, during and after the Last Glacial Maximum (LGM:
~24-19 Ka). Specifically, clumped isotope geochemistry will be used to test the
core assertion of the "Monsoon" hypothesis that LGM age lakes and wetlands in
the southern Basin and Range primarily resulted from a reduction in summertime
evaporation, in contrast to H1 highstands which occurred in response to warmer,
wetter summers, 17.5-14.5 Ka. Results from this study would shed much needed
light on the climatic significance of speleothem- and lake core-based proxy
records, now the staple of climate model validation efforts. This, in turn, will
markedly improve meso-scale climate simulations of short-lived intervals of
atypical, yet poorly understood modes of atmospheric circulation that led to
wetter conditions in the past. Improved models will also inform current
understandings of the relationship between temperature and long-term drought, a
topic of intense interest to the Southwestern paleoclimatological community.