* 1349825
* Collaborative Research:  100 million Years of Biotic and Tectonic Evolution in the Western Branch of the East African Rift System
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2014,12/31/2018
* Sidney Hemming, Ohio University
* Continuing Grant
* Dena Smith
* 12/31/2018
* USD 237,929.00

The fossil record of sub-Saharan Africa holds keys for testing a range of
paleobiogeographic hypotheses that assess how large-scale landform dynamics have
influenced biotic evolution over the past 100 million years. Annual expeditions
since 2002 to the Rukwa Rift Basin in southwestern Tanzania have revealed a
remarkable diversity of new Cretaceous and Cenozoic terrestrial and freshwater
vertebrates. Moreover, the discovery and characterization of novel tectono-
sedimentary relationships within the Western Branch of the East African Rift
System (EARS) have firmly established the importance of this region for
examining the interplay between tectonic events and macroevolutionary patterns,
encompassing the origin, diversification, paleobiogeography, and extinction of
major terrestrial vertebrate clades on continental Africa from the Mesozoic well
into the Cenozoic Era. This research group aims to explore the relationship
between landform evolution and biotic response in deep time at both local and
regional levels, sampling time-distinct geological units to document faunal and
floral dynamics at key points in eastern Africa.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New
Cretaceous discoveries from this project represent all major vertebrate groups,
including novel mammals, dinosaurs, and crocodyliforms. The team has
concurrently identified the only late Oligocene terrestrial and freshwater
assemblage south of the equator, preserving a novel and diverse fauna
characterized by spectacularly preserved examples of fishes, snakes, turtles,
crocodylians, birds, and a diversity of mammals. Their field area is unique in
encompassing both sides of the K/Pg boundary within a restricted geographic
area. Multi-modal geochronologic approaches have been applied to reveal that
Cenozoic activation of the Western Branch of the EARS initiated at least 14
million years earlier than previously estimated, penecontemporaneously with the
better characterized Eastern Branch. Taken together, these results underscore
the significance of this region for testing paleobiogeographic hypotheses
regarding the origin and distribution of Gondwanan vertebrates during the
geologically and biologically dynamic period from the Cretaceous into the
Cenozoic. To date the team has explored only a fraction of the deposits within
the RRB, and has recently initiated exploratory surveys into adjacent basins
(e.g., the Malawi Rift Basin). The goals of this proposal are: 1) to provide
explicit stratigraphic, sedimentologic, and depositional context for strata in
the RRB and hitherto unexplored adjacent sub-basins, together with precise age
constraint for fossil-bearing intervals; 2) to further characterize the
interplay between tectonic activity and sub-basin development/drainage patterns
that resulted in these rare terrestrial/freshwater assemblages from sub-
equatorial Africa; and 3) to conduct detailed anatomical and phylogenetic
studies on fossils recovered from the field, using these data to assess
competing macroevolutionary hypotheses related to the origin, diversification,
paleobiogeographic distribution, and extinction patterns of late Mesozoic and
Cenozoic vertebrate groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding how organisms
respond to environmental change is of critical importance, particularly
considering that today?s ecosystems are undergoing an unprecedented rate of
change. Information from the fossil record plays an essential role for providing
a deeper perspective on how environmental changes influence animal and plant
species over time. This project provides important new data from an interval
spanning 100 million years of Earth's history, through geological and
paleontological exploration of a critically undersampled region on the African
continent. Large portions of the large East African Rift System, particularly in
southwestern Tanzania, have received relatively little scientific attention, yet
they record dramatic changes in landform (e.g., rifting, uplift topography,
surface water flow), climate change, and the impact of these events through time
for the region?s resident animals and plants. This project examines three
distinct time intervals within the rift system, integrating geological data with
paleontological data to assemble a precisely dated picture of fossil organisms
within the environmental settings that entombed them. Field teams consisting of
students and faculty from several US institutions will conduct expeditions in
the study area to collect paleontological data (fossils) and geological samples
(for age-dating of rock units and sedimentary rock analyses that document
environmental setting). These data will provide important new information on
environmental change and the evolution of past life on the planet. This research
will (1) provide new paleobiological data from eastern Africa at three key
points in geologic time; (2) utilize new and more precise laboratory approaches
to constrain the age and environmental conditions of the geological settings;
(3) offer numerous opportunities for US researchers (students and faculty) to
participate as part of an international, interdisciplinary research group
focused on integrating field and laboratory approaches for characterizing
biodiversity and environmental conditions in deep time, and (5) disseminate
results to scientific and public audiences via conference presentations,
websites, and museum venues in the US and internationally. &lt;br/&gt;This
research will impact our understanding of animal and plant distributions
(biogeography), ecological conditions of past environments (paleoecology), and
provide fundamental insights into key topics in evolutionary biology (e.g.,
adaptation, extinction). It will also contribute baseline data for use by other
disciplines, including geophysics/tectonics, climate studies, computer modeling,
conservation, and STEM education in biological and Earth
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;This program of work is jointly funded by the Sedimentary
Geology &amp; Paleobiology Program of the Geosciences Directorate, and by the
International Science &amp; Engineering Program of the Office of International
&amp; Integrative Activities.