* 1349125
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Speech perception in bilingual and monolingual speakers under normal and adverse listening conditions
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2014,10/31/2016
* Aline Godfroid, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 10/31/2016
* USD 15,106.00

The ability of listeners to identify words and speech sounds in sub-optimal
listening conditions is a remarkable adaptation to the everyday use of language,
and in order to understand this capacity fully it is necessary to clarify the
role of prior linguistic experience in shaping this ability. Recent research
suggests that whether a listener is a monolingual or bilingual speaker of the
target languages plays an important role in shaping this ability.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under the direction of Dr. Aline Godfroid, Mr. Jens
Schmidtke will investigate speech perception in noise (SPIN) in bilingual
speakers for his dissertation research. While noisy environments generally make
understanding speech more difficult, noise seems to put an extra burden on
bilingual speakers. Results from many studies suggest that monolinguals and
early bilinguals tested in their dominant language perform the same under quiet
conditions; however, bilinguals suffer more from adverse listening conditions
than monolinguals. Though this finding is quite robust, relatively little is
known about the cognitive demands of bilingual SPIN and how noise affects
bilingual speech perception in real time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the first part
of this study the researchers will investigate individual differences in bottom-
up (phoneme perception) and top-down (executive functions) processes that
contribute to SPIN in monolingual and early bilingual listeners. To this end,
participants will complete a test of SPIN and results from various tests
(vocabulary knowledge, working memory, auditory attention, and phoneme
discrimination ability) will be used to predict SPIN performance. The prediction
is that bilingual speakers will rely more on top-down processes to compensate
for weaker processing of bottom-up information. In the second part of the study,
the researchers will investigate SPIN in real time by recording listeners' eye
movements. In the visual-world eye-tracking paradigm, participants see pictures
of objects on a screen while they hear instructions to click on one of the
pictures. Given that eye movements to pictures are closely linked to ongoing
language processing, results will show how noise affects speech perception in
the moment. The researchers predict that, in bilinguals, noise will result in
greater distraction by pictures with similar sounding referents and thus slower
word recognition compared to monolinguals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results from
these experiments may help us better understand the bilingual disadvantage for
SPIN. Results may also deepen our understanding of how factors other than
hearing acuity contribute to bilinguals' ability to hear in noise and thus be of
value to a wide range of researchers and practitioners.