* 1349395
* CSBR: Living Stocks: Species validation, enhanced data access and remote archiving of the Phaff Yeast Culture Collection
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2017
* Kyria Boundy-Mills, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 05/31/2017
* USD 404,361.00

The Phaff Yeast Culture Collection, at the University of California Davis, is
particularly useful for basic research such as yeast physiology, yeast ecology
(especially yeast-insect associations), comparative genomics, and taxonomy
including discovery of new yeast species. The Phaff collection of yeasts are
also used for applied research such as food and beverage fermentation, food
spoilage, biofuels exploration, and the development of improved methods to
identify yeasts that cause human infections. Through the activities supported in
this project undergraduate students will receive training in taxonomy and
molecular biology. In addition, middle school students including
underrepresented groups will learn about microbiology and culture collections
through presentations in the UC Davis Bio Boot Camp.

The Phaff Yeast Culture Collection is the fourth largest yeast collection in the
world. It contains over 7,000 strains belonging to approximately 800 yeast
species. Most strains are unique and not available from any other source. This
project proposes a major overhaul of the collection to make it more useful,
visible, and valuable to the worldwide yeast research and education community.
This project will align the Phaff collection with comparable collections in
Europe and Asia. Aims include: 1) Validate and update yeast species ID by DNA
sequencing, 2) Upgrade to a more powerful database, website and online strain
catalog, 3) Expand global accessibility by plugging into the Global Catalog of
Microorganisms, GenBank and MycoBank, and 4) Complete the archival storage of
yeasts at a remote cryopreservation facility. By posting DNA sequences of
accessions in GenBank and expanding information available on the Phaff
collection online catalog the collection will be more visible and valuable for
all users. Lessons learned through this project will be shared with other US
culture collection curators through the NSF-funded US Culture Collection
Network. More information is publically available at:
http://phaffcollection.ucdavis.edu.