* 1349892
* CAREER: Theoretical investigation of optical properties of quantum dots using explicitly correlated methods
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2014,09/30/2020
* Arindam Chakraborty, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 09/30/2020
* USD 622,123.00

Arindam Chakraborty of Syracuse University is supported by the Chemical Theory,
Models and Computational Methods program in the Chemistry division to carry out
research on explicitly correlated-wavefunction-based methods for the
investigation of optical properties of nanoparticles. In this CAREER project,
Professor Chakraborty and his research group develop quantum mechanical methods
for investigating electron-hole and exciton-phonon interactions in quantum dots.
These methods are used for examining the effects of physical and chemical
transformations including, shape, size, structural strain, core/shell
heterojunction and temperature on the optical properties of quantum dots. The
educational plan focuses on mentoring high school students in the research
program, including computational chemistry in undergraduate curriculum, and
collaborating with high school teachers for promoting STEM education.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project focuses on understanding
the optical properties of quantum dots such as cadmium selenide and how these
properties are affected by various factors such as size, shape, temperature,
structural strain. The theoretical and computational tools developed in this
project have applications in many technologically important research areas
relevant to solar cells, light emitting devices, chemical sensing and
bioimaging. Fundamental understanding of these processes can help in designing
nanomaterials with enhanced photovoltaic and light-harvesting properties. The
algorithms and the computational software developed in this project will be
open-sourced and distributed to the community free-of-charge. The educational
component is designed to mentor high school students in research and inspire the
next generation of scientific researchers.