* 1349604
* CAREER: Polythioketal Hydrogel For Sirna-Enhanced Regenerative Cell Therapies
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2021
* Craig Duvall, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Steve Smith
* 06/30/2021
* USD 500,000.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER Award by the Biomaterials program
in the Division of Materials Research to Vanderbilt University is to develop
injectable hydrogels that contain stem/stromal cells to promote wound healing.
Diabetic patients are more susceptible to formation of non-healing skin wounds.
These wounds create a huge burden (and cost) on our health care system and lead
to tremendous loss in quality of life. In the worst cases, nonhealing skin
wounds lead to infection, cause debilitating pain, and necessitate limb
amputation. In this project, the PI will develop a biomaterial that has the
potential to help hold the stem cells in place at the wound, while
simultaneously delivering a drug to the cells that will promote their survival,
growth, and wound regenerative function. This biomaterial can be injected
directly into the wound as a liquid that rapidly "gels" and then is slowly
resorbed over time as the wound heals. Education and outreach activities carried
out as part of this project will leverage the human health relevance of this
research to motivate high school students to pursue education/research in STEM
areas. The primary target group will be underrepresented students from the STEM
Summer Institute (SSI) for Girls at Harpeth Hall, a local girls' high school.
The PI will work with Harpeth Hall to develop and implement summer programs at
the school. Also, a new component of the SSI will be established that will
promote longer-term contacts with girls who participate in the program in order
to provide them opportunities for additional STEM exposure and career-related
mentoring on campus at Vanderbilt University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Adult mesenchymal stem/stromal cells (MSCs) are in plentiful
supply, relatively easy to harvest, and promising for local delivery to enhance
tissue repair. However, an unsolved challenge is achieving efficient engraftment
of viable cells that proliferate and robustly promote tissue regeneration
following delivery to challenging environments characterized by hypoxia,
inflammation, and high oxidative stress. Small interfering RNA (siRNA) provides
a tool for specific and potent gene silencing and has strong potential to be
used to manipulate cell phenotypes in regenerative therapies. &lt;br/&gt; For
this project, a new, cell-degradable polyethylene glycol (PEG) based hydrogel is
proposed that will promote local retention, viability/self-renewal, and
regenerative performance of stem cell therapies through substrate mediated
delivery of siRNA. This hydrogel will be synthesized using novel polymeric
crosslinkers that degrade through oxidative mechanisms relevant to sites of
wounded and inflamed tissues (e.g., diabetic skin wounds). Optimized hydrogel
formulations will be applied for substrate-mediated siRNA delivery to
encapsulated MSCs in situ. Knockdown of gene targets will be explored with the
goal of enhancing proliferation and regenerative capacity of MSCs transplanted
into diabetic skin wounds. &lt;br/&gt; Education and outreach activities
initiated through this project will capitalize on the exciting, translational
nature of this research in order to catalyze student enthusiasm and creativity
in STEM areas. The primary target group will be underrepresented students from
the STEM Summer Institute (SSI) for Girls at Harpeth Hall, a local girls' high
school. The PI will continue ongoing work with Harpeth Hall to implement
challenge-based, "legacy cycle" curricula. In addition, a new component of the
SSI will be initiated that will establish longer-term contacts with girls who
participate in the program to provide them with opportunities for additional
STEM exposure and career-related mentoring at Vanderbilt University.