* 1349664
* CAREER: Behavioral and Neural Mechanisms of Attention Capture by Episodic Long-Term Memory
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2022
* Deborah Hannula, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 05/31/2022
* USD 400,803.00

Attention is well known to be critically important for learning and memory but
relatively less is known about how attention could be influenced by what one
remembers from the past. With support from the National Science Foundation, Dr.
Deborah Hannula will conduct experiments combining eye-tracking with functional
MRI to characterize the cognitive and neural processes underlying the capture of
attention by episodic long-term memory. These studies will address questions
about how long-term memory retrieval, particularly retrieval of negative memory,
can influence goal-directed behavior by a) identifying the neural mechanisms
that are correlated with memory-based capture, and b) identifying ways to avoid
and disengage from such capture. This project combines memory and attention, two
typically separated areas of studies, to investigate attention in the context of
memory retrieval. This integrative approach moves one step closer to gaining an
understanding of the highly interactive cognitive processes taking place when
the brain operates in the real world. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Characterization of
attention capture by long-term memory is important because in some situations
long-term memory retrieval is undesirable (e.g., post-traumatic stress
disorder). Identifying the neural mechanisms involved in suppressing or
disengaging attention from long-term memory may lead to new developments that
could help remediate these symptoms in psychiatric populations. To complement
the research objectives outlined above, the PI will also implement an education
plan that will provide students and community members with interactive and
accessible introductions to cognitive science, with an emphasis on memory and
attention.