* 1349421
* CSBR: Natural History Digitization of Arctic and Sub-Arctic Marine Invertebrate Collections of the University of Alaska Museum
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2018
* Bodil Bluhm, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 05/31/2018
* USD 231,194.00

An award is made to the University of Alaska Museum (UAM) to generate and
publish electronic records from over 9,000 collections of marine invertebrates
currently archived at the museum. These collections represent the results of
oceanographic research on the faunal diversity of Arctic and sub-Arctic oceans
over a period spanning five decades. The expertly curated, digitized records
will be available to the global community of researchers interested in marine
ecology for study. Understanding the diversity and patterns of distribution of
Arctic and sub-Arctic marine faunas is of special urgency given growing interest
in the development of mineral resources and transportation routes in those
waters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Additionally, in the process of ensuring the
preservation and dissemination of the information associated with the marine
invertebrate collections at UAM, the project will promote training and improve
expertise in taxonomy and biodiversity research. A graduate student will receive
training on natural history collections research and on invertebrate taxonomy.
Undergraduate students will work in the digitization effort and gain first hand
experience with scientific research. All aspects of the project will also
involve training, mentorship and the development of an appreciation of the
importance of collections-based research. Data records from the UAM will be
readily accessible through the Arctos database web portal located at
http://arctos.database.museum/.