* 1349084
* RAPID: Performance and Survivability of Residential Safe Rooms in a Violent Oklahoma Tornado
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2014
* Seamus Freyne, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Kishor Mehta
* 07/31/2014
* USD 9,987.00

It is proposed to collect structural damage data that is caused by the EF5
tornado in the city of Moore, Oklahoma on May 20, 2013. The damage path of this
tornado overlaps the damage paths of two previous tornadoes of 1999 and 2003.
After the 1999 tornado several above ground safe rooms were constructed in
residences. It would be beneficial to assess performance of safe rooms subjected
to an extreme tornado. Even though there are close to 1,000 tornadoes recorded
each year, less than 10 tornadoes are rated EF 4 and EF 5. When an EF5 tornado
impacts a city there is a unique opportunity to document building damage and
learn from the damage. This tornado damaged two schools, several commercial
buildings, few safe rooms and hundreds of residential structures. RAPID funding
provides an opportunity to document the damage before damaged buildings are
cleared and the debris is moved.

The project team will work with other RAPID grantee teams in the field to
improve coverage of the damage area and avoid duplication. The team of faculty
members and students will travel to the damage site and document failure modes,
materials of construction, location of structures with respect to the center of
the path, and debris impacts for each documented structure. This team will
document performance of safe rooms that are in the path of the tornado in
addition to other damage. The RAPID teams will develop contour maps of EF
ratings and wind speeds based on observed Degrees of Damage. These maps will be
compared with past tornado studies to evaluate the similarities and differences.
This comparison will contribute to the understanding of the spatial
characteristics of tornado wind forces on structures. Building failure
progression will be determined in different wind speed zones. The benefits and
challenges of using social media (twitter) to improve disaster assessment will
be determined.