* 1349515
* EAGER: Integration of magnetic and visual cues by C57BL/6 mice in a 4-armed ('plus') water maze
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2015
* John Phillips, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* emilia martins
* 08/31/2015
* USD 160,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Studies of mammalian spatial cognition have
focused primarily on visual landmarks and self-generated cues (optic flow,
vestibular cues, etc.) that operate over relatively short distances, and largely
ignored the global reference provided by the earth's magnetic field that can be
used to place local arrays of visual landmarks into register to form a map of
familiar space. Evidence that the magnetic compass of birds and at least some
rodents (i.e., mice and rats) may be mediated by magnetically sensitive
photoreceptors in the retina has led to speculation that the magnetic field may
be perceived as a complex, 3-dimensional pattern of light intensity or color
superimposed on the animal's surroundings. This pattern could function as a
simple spherical grid or coordinate system that helps to encode directional and
spatial input from other sensory modalities. Behavioral studies have shown that
mice have a well-developed magnetic compass, but there is no information for
mice or any other mammal on how magnetic and non-magnetic cues interact. The
proposed research will use a mouse water maze assay to investigate the relative
salience of magnetic and visual landmark cues when both types of cues are
present, and to determine whether mice that learn a directional response
relative to the magnetic field will transfer the learned relationship to visual
landmarks, and vice versa. Broader impacts of this research include: (1)
understanding the role of a novel sensory input (magnetic cues) in a behavioral
assay widely used in biomedical research (e.g., to study Alzheimer's disease and
other forms of dementia), (2) providing undergraduate students from diverse
backgrounds with interdisciplinary research training, and (3) collaborating with
a nationally recognized expert on interdisciplinary training and assessment to
develop materials to assess undergraduate research.