* 1349832
* Workshop on Silicon Photonic Integrated Devices Open-Access Foundry / Fabrication Facility. To be held at the OSA Headquarters in Washington DC September, 2013.
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2014
* Shayan Mookherjea, Optical Society of America
* Standard Grant
* Mahmoud Fallahi
* 07/31/2014
* USD 25,000.00

Objective: The proposed project seeks financial support for a one-day Workshop
on Silicon Photonic Integrated Devices Open-Access Foundry / Fabrication
Facility to be held at the OSA Headquarters in Washington DC in September 2013.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The Workshop is to discuss the needs
for a U.S. based open-access fabrication facility for photonic integrated
circuits. Discussion at the workshop will provide further specific guidance on
materials, the range of processes, and integration. The Workshop involves a
sequence of invited talks and open discussions concluding with a closed session
for government invitees only. Possible models for a U.S. based fab facility, and
corresponding funding / operating requirements will be
discussed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The Workshop will bring
together leading experts in optoelectronics to discuss the low-volume, but
scalable, manufacturing of state-of-the-art photonic devices, including those
critical to communications infrastructure, large-data networks, metrology,
sensors, and imaging. Key speakers are to describe cutting-edge silicon photonic
technology with decision makers from government laboratories, industry and
funding agencies. The exchange of ideas and collaboration possibilities are
expected to facilitate consensus and serve the research needs of the silicon
photonics community and training of a US workforce in this area. Initiatives
generated a result of this Workshop will benefit the ongoing research and
training of graduate students across the country, the efforts of small
businesses, as well as the largest industrial concerns in this research area.