* 1349042
* Mechanisms of Word Retrieval in Spoken Language Production
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2014,08/31/2018
* Edu Navarrete, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Tyler Kendall
* 08/31/2018
* USD 230,158.00

Basic questions remain unanswered about the cognitive and neural processes that
underlie language processing. One issue that all cognitive and neural theories
of language processing must answer is how a speaker is able to quickly and
efficiently retrieve a given word during spoken language production, from the
tens of thousands of words that she knows. The goal of the proposed research
activity is to test hypotheses about i) how the system resolves which word
should be uttered, and ii) how the system determines when that word should be
selected for speech. The proposed research activity involves a series of
experiments in which response latency is used to test hypotheses about the
cognitive processes involved in language production. Experiments are conducted
with native English speakers at the University of Rochester (USA) as well as
with native Italian Speakers at the University of Padova (Italy). In addition,
an Electroencephalography (EEG) study of the processes underlying overt language
production will be conducted at the University of Padova and a parallel
functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) study will be conducted at the
University of Rochester. These two neural studies will answer basic questions
about the temporal and anatomical organization of the processes involved in
retrieving words in overt speech production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fulfillment of
the aims of this research activity will address the fundamental nature of the
cognitive and neural processes that support word retrieval spoken language
production. This will have implications for rehabilitation of language abilities
in brain damaged patients, improvement of protocols for facilitating the
acquisition of second languages, and will place important constraints on
computational models of language processing. Furthermore, undergraduate and
graduate students will have the opportunity to participate in an international
exchange program to expand their research skills and interests.