* 1349577
* Do forearc crustal faults rupture in response to stress changes from megathrust earthquakes?
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Ashley Streig, Streig                  Ashley         R
* Fellowship Award
* Aisha Morris
* 08/31/2018
* USD 174,000.00

Dr. Ashley Streig has been awarded an NSF EAR Postdoctoral fellowship to carry
out a research and broadening participation plan at Oregon State University. The
project will focus on establishing a temporal and spatial catalog of forearc
faults in Cascadia that may have ruptured as a consequence of megathrust
earthquakes. Triggered fault rupture from stress perturbations in the months,
and years following a megathrust earthquake has great implications for seismic
hazard for coastal regions along subduction zones. Evaluating the spatial and
temporal relationship of earthquakes on these faults with the record of
subduction zone earthquakes will provide insight on the crustal response to
megathrust events and will allow geologists to more carefully consider the
broader range of potentially active seismic sources in Cascadia, as well as
develop more holistic models of crustal structural dynamics. Integration of the
proposed research on crustal fault activity will involve outreach to
underrepresented undergraduate students through partnership with NSF funded
"Increasing Diversity in Earth Sciences" program; students will be engaged
through field trips, and mentoring, and as field assistants.

Geomorphic and paleoseismic studies of this project will allow the investigator
to directly evaluate the slip history of surface rupturing earthquakes on these
faults. The timing of these events will be directly correlated with onshore
paleoseismic subsidence studies that have dated buried forests and marsh
stratigraphy, and the offshore turbidite record for Cascadia earthquakes. The
methodology in this project includes using new LiDAR data to map and
characterize the long-term (10,000 -100,000 yr.) fault expression and using
paleoseismic techniques to evaluate the shorter term (1,000-10,000 yr.) activity
of several key crustal faults along the Cascadia subduction zone. Information on
spatial and temporal activity of onshore crustal forearc faults will be used to
make a qualitative comparison of stress drops post megathrust earthquakes.