* 1349419
* CSBR: Natural History Collections: Critical infrastructure needs in the University of Alaska Museum's bird collection
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Jack Withrow, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 07/31/2017
* USD 405,225.00

Alaska represents about 20% of the land area of the United States. It hosts
diverse assemblages of New World and Old World birds and an endemic regional
avifauna. The Bird Collection at the University of Alaska Museum (UAM) is one of
growing national and international importance, representing many preparation
types that enhance its utility. Additionally, UAM now houses the 8th-largest
vouchered avian tissue collection in the world. This collection is rather
heavily used, probably because it contains the best (and only modern) bird
specimens from this vast region, and supports research in biodiversity,
evolutionary history, management, and conservation. It is also used by artists,
birdwatchers, social scientists, ecologists, ecosystem biologists, and
toxicologists. Thus, the collection informs studies including assessments of
contaminants and stable isotopes, climate change, human artifacts and art, and
the historic diets of Alaska Natives. These collections contribute to our
ability to address large-scale societal challenges such as health, food, and the
environment. The collection's impact is exemplified by its citation in at least
115 publications and 28 student theses in recent years, and its Google Scholar
profile (UAM Birds) further shows its high impact. The collection also serves as
a focus for training and education at undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral
levels, and as a showpiece for public engagement in science. However, the
collection is severely overcrowded and is becoming inaccessible as portions are
forced into unsorted and substandard housing. Skin, skeleton, and open-wing
specimens are inadequately stored, inaccessible to users, and decisions about
collection growth now focus on the size of the specimen being considered. These
problems severely impact the use of this research resource by its diverse
community of users. This project addresses these problems by installing new
specimen cabinets on a compactor system and supporting student trainees to work
closely with museum staff in rehousing the entire collection and in developing
and implementing public outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
supports infrastructure that is critical to many types of studies requiring
avian samples. It will enable the purchase and installation of 92 new specimen
cabinets on a new mobile storage system, maximizing the use of space following
the museum's expansion and renovation. This cabinet installation will adequately
house and make accessible overcrowded specimens and provide room for growth for
the next decade. Importantly, this project will train students in collections-
based science, thus helping prepare the 21st century STEM workforce. It also
engages the public locally and globally in the excitement of biological
collections, fostering a better understanding of science and its role in serving
society. More information about the UAM Bird Collection can be accessed through
our web site at www.uaf.edu/museum/collections/bird/, or here:
www.universityofalaskamuseumbirds.org/.