* 1349415
* CAREER: An Efficient Framework for Design and Modeling of Complex Computer Experiments
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2019
* Ying Hung, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2019
* USD 400,000.00

The primary objective of this research is to develop an efficient framework for
design and modeling of complex computer experiments, especially those with
diverse and high-dimensional inputs and massive outputs. Computer experiments,
i.e., experiments using simulation or numerical codes, have been widely used as
alternatives to physical experiments, especially for studying complex phenomena.
The investigator introduces new classes of designs that can efficiently
accommodate large numbers of both quantitative and qualitative factors in
computer experiments. The investigator also proposes a new adaptive design that
is flexible and robust, yet takes into account uncertainties in the complex
systems. Apart from experimental design, a novel sampling/modeling technique is
proposed to reduce computational complexity and quantify model uncertainty in
the analysis of computer experiments with massive data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed approaches are readily applicable to a variety of scientific
disciplines and will have immediate impact on accelerating discoveries in
numerous fields involving complex experiments like biomechanical engineering,
systems biology, and environmental science. In particular, the proposed modeling
techniques can dramatically enhance the efficiency and prediction accuracy in
the analysis of cell adhesion, which plays an important role in tumor metastasis
in cancer research. Moreover, the proposed methods can benefit the analysis of
massive data for climate change, response to natural disasters, and the spread
of pandemic disease. Integrated into the research outlined in this proposal is
an education plan that emphasizes interdisciplinary training for a broad body of
students and increasing participation from underrepresented groups. Results of
the proposed research will be integrated into the Research Experience for
Undergraduates program offered by Rutgers. Female and undergraduate students
from underrepresented groups will be recruited and actively involved in the PI's
research through Rutgers's highly successful Research in Science and Engineering
program. Software will be written, which allows graduate and undergraduate
students to have hands-on experience to implement the new methods on real
examples.