* 1349153
* EAGER: Boa: A Community Research Infrastructure for Mining Software Repositories
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2015
* Hridesh Rajan, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2015
* USD 96,408.00

In today's software-centric world, ultra-large-scale software repositories, e.g.
SourceForge (350,000+ projects), GitHub (250,000+ projects), and Google Code
(250,000+ projects) are the new library of Alexandria. They contain an enormous
corpus of software and information about software. Scientists and engineers
alike are interested in analyzing this wealth of information both for curiosity
as well as for testing important research hypotheses. However, the current
barrier to entry is often prohibitive and only a few with well-established
research infrastructure and deep expertise in mining software repositories can
attempt such ultra-large-scale experiments. A facility called Boa has been
prototyped: a domain-specific language and a BIGDATA repository containing
700,000+ open source projects for analyzing ultra-large scale software
repositories to help with such experiments.

This experimental research infrastructure is of significant interest to a wide
community of software engineering and programming language researchers. The main
goal of this EAGER project is to examine the requirements for making Boa broadly
available to the software engineering and programming language community, to
work with an initial set of researchers to try to fulfill these requirements,
and to take preliminary steps toward making Boa a community-sustained, scalable,
and extensible research infrastructure. This is an enabling and transformative
project. Its success will aid and accelerate scientific research in software
engineering, allowing scientists and engineers to focus on the essential tasks.
This advance will primarily be achieved by significantly lowering the barrier to
entry and thus enabling a larger and more ambitious line of data-intensive
scientific discovery in this area.