* 1349276
* CSBR: Natural History: Implementation of an Integrated Database Platform for the University of Michigan Biological Collections
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2018
* Daniel Fisher, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 05/31/2018
* USD 398,374.00

This project highlights a new effort at the University of Michigan (UM) to
consolidate its rich and diverse natural history museum collections (over 16
million specimens in Botany, Paleontology, and Zoology) both physically and
virtually into an accessible resource for research, teaching, and public
outreach. The University has committed to build a new, shared facility for the
three museums as well as to adopting a common database platform across the
different museums. These activities will enhance data accessibility and improve
integrative research and educational projects across all collections. The
specific goals of this project are to upgrade and consolidate more than 60
disparate databases by linking together for the first time specimens, notes, and
other forms of data from three major multidisciplinary expeditions that were
based at UM over the past two centuries. These include a) the first natural
history survey of Michigan in the 1830s; b) the first circum-global scientific
expedition by the university led by Joseph Beal Steere in the 1870s; and c) a
series of expeditions to the Himalayan region in the 1930s and 1940s led by
Walter Koelz that amassed a huge collection of birds, plants, and cultural and
anthropological artifacts. An important more recent digital asset at the Museum
of Paleontology is a series of 2D and 3D images (including animations) that
document large mammal bones such as mammoths and the layout of the sites where
they were discovered. These illustrate the kind of ongoing international
research that is being carried out at the UM museums and will be incorporated
into the museum management system. The improvements planned will increase the
value and utility of these collections for basic interdisciplinary research and
the preparation of students in a variety of STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All objects and data associated with the three
multidisciplinary expeditions, including actual specimens, original field notes,
imagery, and additional metadata will be digitized and then databased using the
KE software Electronic Museums data management system (KE EMu) that is being
adopted as the common database platform for the university's museums. This will
provide previously unrealized cross-collection and cross-museum access to all
information derived from these collection events, and it will form the basis for
creating specific web sites for each of the expeditions. These will be designed
to provide new information for the public and research community, including
historians and social scientists, as well as for student training and education
at the K-12, undergraduate, and graduate levels (five graduate and ten
undergraduate students will receive specific training under the grant). The
first natural history survey of Michigan from the 1830s is particularly
significant because it is the only one that documents the original pre-
settlement conditions of parts of the state, but its composition has not been
systematically assessed. Overall, the project will significantly broaden the
outreach, educational and research, value of its combined natural history
collections by making them more accessible and interconnected through a common
collections management system. It will foster much greater collaboration among
the museum units on campus and will allow the university to produce integrated
search results across all of its collections. For additional information about
the University of Michigan natural history museums and their collections,
consult the museum websites at http://herbarium.lsa.umich.edu/,
http://www.lsa.umich.edu/ummz/, and http://www.lsa.umich.edu/paleontology/.