* 1349458
* EAGER/Collaborative Research: Processing and Characterization of Soft Active Nanoparticulate Composites
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,12/31/2014
* Kaushik Dayal, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 12/31/2014
* USD 1,500.00

This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) collaborative research
award provides funding for the generation of preliminary experimental data to
support recent theoretical predictions on the macroscopic response of soft
active nanoparticulate composites (SANCs) with tuned interphases, resulting in
as much as one order of magnitude change in their mechanical response and two
orders of magnitude change in their dielectric response. It is hypothesized that
the interphase regions between the nanoparticle and the reinforcement matrix is
responsible for these behaviors and can be tuned to deliver the desired
response. These remarkable modifications of the macroscale response of nominally
very similar materials call for an in-depth investigation of the
electromechanical behavior of SANCs in terms of the geometry and properties of
the underlying interphases. In this context, in line with recent theoretical
results by the PIs, the objective of this exploratory project is to synthesize
and test a model class of SANCs with interphases that are tailored to result in
enhanced electromechanical properties. Novel fundamental mechanical experiments
will be carried out to calibrate and validate recent multi-physics models and
direct future research to optimum design envelopes for soft functional
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this research will
provide quantitative knowledge of how interphasial phenomena affect the
macroscopic response of SANCs, which has the potential to transform our ability
to advance the technological use of this class of active materials for
applications in significant fields such as energy and medicine. This project
will also provide an initial understanding of ground rules to synthesize soft
nanoparticulate composites with controlled interphases as well as a novel
approach to directly measure the electromechanical properties of such
interphases.