* 1349278
* Biotechnology of thiocyanate degradation: an exploration using meta-omics tools to understand the microbial communities responsible for remediation of mining wastewater
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2015,12/31/2019
* Jillian Banfield, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 12/31/2019
* USD 255,079.00

Biotechnology of thiocyanate degradation: an exploration using meta-omics tools
to understand the microbial communities responsible for remediation of mining
wastewater Wastewater from gold mining, coal and steel processing, and other
industrial operations often contains the chemical thiocyanate, which can be
harmful to human health and the environment. In last two decades, engineering
research has yielded progress toward the complete breakdown of thiocyanate by
microorganisms. This work primarily focused on the chemical and physical
parameters of the process and largely ignored the biology of the microorganisms
involved. As a result, current efforts to harness the potential of
microorganisms in the form of on-site industrial biotechnology yield inefficient
and incomplete remediation. Thiocyanate is degraded by microorganisms that
function within the context of complex microbial communities. Metagenomics,
metatranscriptomics, and metaproteomics methods allow researchers to study the
metabolic capacities and activities of all organisms in such communities.

Using these approaches to interrogate samples from a bioreactor treating
thiocyanate in the laboratory, investigators will learn which organisms are
responsible for breakdown of thiocyanate and which have the potential to degrade
byproducts as well. Specifically, thiocyanate byproducts are nitrogen compounds
such as ammonium and nitrate; these need to be removed prior to release or re-
use of treated water. The nitrogen cycle is a biogeochemical process that also
occurs in the environment and is harnessed for domestic wastewater treatment.
Thus, results from this study will have the basic relevance to natural systems
and may suggest improvements to wastewater treatment processes as well. Graduate
and undergraduate students from the US will travel to South Africa to work in
the laboratory of the collaborator, gaining valuable international experience.