* 1349539
* Early Career:  Instrument and Technician Support for the Isotopic Analysis of Individual Organic Compounds in the Earth System
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2015
* Ronald Benner, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 04/30/2015
* USD 99,934.00

This grant from the Division of Earth Sciences Instrumentation and Facilities
program will support the purchase of a peripheral device to be coupled to
existing instrumentation shared by Earth science researchers at the University
of South Carolina. The instrumentation will provide new analytical capabilities
allowing the characterization of isotopic composition of specific organic
compounds, which can then be used to better understand processes such as
microbial physiology, global biogeochemical cycles and ancient climates. The
availability of this instrumentation will provide researchers to enhance their
ongoing research, and also provide essential hands-on training to students. The
instrumentation will be used as an educational tool to expand on ?textbook?
knowledge presented in undergraduate studies, and will be used in a NSF-
sponsored Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) program.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the researchers will acquire a gas chromatograph (GC)
peripheral for the operation of a gas-chromatograph-combustion-isotope ratio
mass spectrometer (GC-c-IRMS). The integration of a GC front-end peripheral to
an existing IRMS instrument will allow the isolation of specific compounds for
individual isotopic analysis, which are otherwise masked by ?bulk? analysis of
organic matter. The combined instrumentation will advance research in
quantifying the amount of bacterially-produced refractory organic matter in the
ocean, identifying the activities of belowground microbial communities, and
investigating microbial processes in Arctic permafrost.