* 1349692
* EAGER: Integrated Self-Calibrated Analog Front-End for Biopotential and Bioimpedance Measurements
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2016
* Marvin Onabajo, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 09/30/2016
* USD 199,277.00

EAGER: Integrated Self-Calibrated Analog Front-End for Biopotential and
Bioimpedance Measurements &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
This research addresses the need for enhancements of integrated analog circuits
to permit reliable measurements of biosignals over prolonged time periods. The
all-encompassing goals are to realize input impedance boosting and on-chip
calibration in order to enable the use of dry electrodes as well as to alleviate
the impact of manufacturing process variations of complementary metal-oxide-
semiconductor fabrication technologies. A prototype chip will be fabricated and
tested to experimentally validate the proposed concepts while meeting or
exceeding state-of-the-art performance specifications. The instrumentation
amplifier in the system will be designed with a feedback loop that boosts the
input impedance for measurements of biopotentials and bioimpedances with dry
electrodes. Extra circuitry will also be developed to automatically optimize the
suppression of undesired common-mode interference signals at the input. The
auxiliary analog test signal generation circuits and digital calibration
circuits will be integrated together on the same chip as the analog front-end
system. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project will give rise to
circuit design methods that enable long-term brain signal acquisitions with dry
electrodes interfaced to highly integrated chips. The results will improve
systems for monitoring of brain signals during epilepsy diagnosis, drowsiness
detection, and the recognition of intentions in order to allow an incapacitated
patient to communicate or to control robots. Since the same type of
instrumentation amplifier and similar analog front-end architectures are
frequently found in measurement circuits for bioimpedances, the outcomes of this
research will also be applicable to the design of integrated circuits for cancer
and injury detection, movement sensing of body organs, and implantable
pacemakers. Due to the reliability enhancement prospects with the proposed
built-in testing and calibration techniques, the work can potentially provide a
viable path for sustainable performance improvements of portable and implantable
medical devices through the use of advanced fabrication technologies with high
process variations. Knowledge obtained from this project will be integrated into
graduate and undergraduate education, and it will be shared publicly to
contribute to the advancement of design and test engineering methods in the
semiconductor industry.