* 1349985
* EAGER: Infrastructure for Research Data Registration and Interpretation
* CSE,OAC
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2014
* Laurence Lannom, Corporation for National Research Initiatives (NRI)
* Standard Grant
* Robert Chadduck
* 08/31/2014
* USD 99,986.00

CNRI is proposing to develop a framework and a related set of infrastructural
tools that will greatly improve the ability of research organizations to
register scientific data sets, either those they hold directly or those which
they have funded and which are held elsewhere, and expose them for discovery,
analysis, and further processing. The project will build the tools and low-level
APIs to be suitable for use by data producers as well as organizations that are
expert in metadata and data organization.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;There is no
widely adopted infrastructure currently in place for sharing research data.
Individual pieces certainly exist, especially within given domains, but
transparent and seamless sharing of scientific data requires a level of
standardization and acceptance that simply doesn't exist today. To realize the
potential of widely available scientific data, it must be discoverable,
reference-able, and understandable, and it must be so without the investment of
enormous amounts of time and effort on the part of those who are providing the
data or those consuming the data. Research institutions currently expose their
data through institution-specific web sites and APIs. The PI propose to build a
pair of registries that will enable the use of a common API as well as the
ability to federate registries across institutions when it makes sense, without
requiring the existing underlying storage and management systems to change. We
also propose to design basic metadata schemas to be used in those registries.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first of the two registries is a metadata registry in
which data sets can be registered and described. A common API will be built both
for the registration process as well as for access to the resulting metadata
objects. Each metadata object and, if required, each data set, will be given a
unique, persistent identifier. These identifiers will resolve to the metadata
objects and data sets respectively and their assignment will be part of the
deposit API. We will also enable related objects to be associated with each
other through the registry and through identifier resolution, depending on the
specific cases in hand. This will be transparent to users of the access API.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second of the two registries is a type registry. The
metadata objects and data sets will each be typed and the type registry will
provide the information needed to decipher those types. The goal is to be able
to answer the question of, given a specific identifier or piece of data, what
does it represent and how should I interpret it. This interaction will be made
as transparent as possible to the access API. The interaction between these two
registries is key to the proposed framework. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
deliverables will include an open source release of the metadata registry and
the type registry software, the basic metadata schemas applicable for those
registries, and a prototype service that demonstrates the infrastructure
capability by federating research data from at least two sources.