* 1349374
* Microscale Reactivity of Trace Elements in Complex Geochemical Systems
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/2015,12/31/2019
* Dean L. Hesterberg, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 12/31/2019
* USD 270,000.00

Soils supply nutrients to agricultural crops while also preventing toxic
substances from entering food and water supplies. This research project is
motivated in part by the current mass poisoning of 100 million people in
Southern Asia, which is the result of naturally occurring arsenic moving through
soils and into drinking water. The research will provide fundamental knowledge
about binding of arsenic and other toxic substance in soils, which will help to
development better management strategies to protect human health. Investigators
will use highly advanced scientific tools coupled with advanced statistical
analyses to discover how complicated interactions between different types of
soil particles affect binding of toxic substances. The work will help figure out
ways to increase binding of toxic substances on soil particles in order to
prevent these substances from moving into food and water supplies.

Mining, manufacturing, energy consumption, and agricultural production all
release toxic substances into our natural environment. A high standard of living
in the U.S. relies on protecting citizens from exposure to unhealthy substances
while still advancing technologies that enhance our lives. Soils are arguably
the most complicated natural systems at the earth's surface. Precise management
of soils is challenging, but also essential for preventing toxic substances from
impacting human health. The new knowledge created in this research will support
progress of science in soil chemistry and geochemistry. The work will use state-
of-the art analytical techniques at DOE National User Facilities and analyze the
results using advanced spatial statistical models and uncertainty analysis.
Researchers will investigate a new conceptual model for fundamentally
understanding how complex interactions between different soil minerals and
organic matter regulate toxic substance mobility in natural systems. A new
understanding of mechanisms of toxic substance binding in soils will ultimately
improve management practices that advance food production in the U.S., while
protecting people from toxic substances dispersed in the environment by
industrial activities.