* 1349815
* Impacts of Novel Stormwater Management on Groundwater Recharge
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Aditi Bhaskar, Bhaskar                 Aditi          S
* Fellowship Award
* Luciana Astiz
* 08/31/2016
* USD 174,000.00

Dr. Aditi S. Bhaskar has been awarded an NSF Earth Sciences Postdoctoral
Fellowship to carry out a research and education plan at the United States
Geological Survey. Novel forms of urban development aim to engineer systems that
replicate natural hydrologic functioning. This includes preservation of near-
natural groundwater recharge through infiltration of stormwater close to
impervious surfaces where stormwater is generated. A small watershed in the
Piedmont province of Maryland, USA is one of the first instrumented watersheds
that was recently developed entirely with novel, distributed stormwater
management techniques and is used as a case study for the work. This study seeks
to understand how these alterations to the natural landscape impact subsurface
flow systems and groundwater - surface water interactions. A network of field
observations will be used, including measurements of streamflow, precipitation,
hydraulic head, infiltration from and specifications of stormwater control
measures, and hydraulic conductivity. The field data will inform the application
of a three-dimensional, distributed hydrologic model, building on experience
applying the same modeling system to other urban areas.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work will advance our understanding of how urban
development alters hydrologic functioning. Mitigation strategies, such as
distributed stormwater management, may transform the water cycle in previously
unseen ways. Distributed infiltration of stormwater may result in groundwater
recharge above pre-development levels. This means that water that might have
evaporated or been transpired by plants in a natural system, or generated
stormflow in a conventionally developed urban system, is instead redirected to
groundwater pathways. The implications of these potentially major water cycle
alterations are as yet unknown but may include significant changes to riparian
ecology and biogeochemical cycling in ways that are not well understood.
Understanding the effectiveness of these mitigation strategies in mimicking
natural hydrologic functioning will provide a window into both the drivers of
the natural hydrologic system and the landscape changes to which the natural
system is most sensitive. Dr. Bhaskar will work with student researchers and
will carry out education outreach to high schools in the area of the developed
watershed for hands-on presentations about earth science, hydrology,
groundwater, and connections to this research project.