* 1349659
* Interannual and Orbital-Scale Climate Variability in the Early Miocene: Physical, Chemical and Biological Investigations of the Foulden Maar Diatomite
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2016
* William D'Andrea, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Skog
* 03/31/2016
* USD 241,724.00

Interannual and Orbital-Scale Climate Variability in the Early Miocene:
Physical, Chemical and Biological Investigations of the Foulden Maar Diatomite
by William D'Andrea, Columbia University, EAR-1349659

ABSTRACT (The Antarctic Earth Sciences Program (PLR) co-funded the grant with
the Seimentary Geology and Paleobiology Program (EAR). Accurate climate
projections for the future require a fundamental understanding of Earth's
climate system and its behavior during past warm periods. Sediments that have
accumulated in lakes and ocean basins are our only source for observational data
to examine changes in Earth's climate in the deep past. Sediment records that
accumulated over long periods of time, have annual layering and which contain
natural recorders of past climate are extremely rare, but are needed to
investigate inter-annual climate variability (for example, the El Niño-Southern
Oscillation (ENSO)) under warmer global temperature, as well as the response of
the climate system to periodic variations in Earth's orbit. Using a combination
of physical and chemical sedimentological techniques, the investigators will
take advantage of an exceptional sedimentary record to achieve the following
goals:

1) Determine the drivers of early Miocene temperature and hydrologic change at
suborbital timescales using organic geochemical and stable isotopic techniques.
The research will test the hypothesis that natural changes in solar energy at
the equator cause variations in mid-latitude climate with a pacing of
approximately 11,000 years. 2) Document the nature of ENSO variability under
different orbital configurations within the warm background state of the early
Miocene by developing records of annual sediment layer thickness across fourteen
different 1,000-yr periods. This will test the hypothesis that ENSO transitions
to a permanent El Niño-like state during periods of global warmth and will help
determine how the climate system behaves in a warmer world and how orbital
forcing modulates ENSO. 3) Produce a record of atmospheric CO2 concentrations
(pCO2) across an extreme Antarctic glaciation event in the early Miocene using
stomatal density of fossil leaves. This will provide important data to examine
the role (or lack thereof) of atmospheric pCO2 in driving major climate changes
during this time period. The Foulden Maar Diatomite in Otago, New Zealand is an
annually layered lake-sediment sequence that was deposited during a 100,000-year
period, 23 million years ago. This time period is interesting because although
the planet was warmer than present, Antarctic Ice Sheets grew larger than their
present size, even though there were no Northern Hemisphere Ice Sheets.
Furthermore, data suggest that atmospheric pCO2 levels were similar to today.
The investigators will use fossil leaves in the sediments to estimate pCO2
across this enigmatic period of Earth's past, a time when the behavior of ice
sheets and global temperature is at odds with the existing pCO2 data. The
thickness of the annual sediment layers is related to the productivity of algae
in the lake, a parameter controlled by climate. The thickness of these layers
can therefore be measured and used to examine how inter-annual climate
variability (specifically, ENSO) behaved during this time period and whether it
changed due to the natural changes in Earth's orbit. The researchers will
determine how temperature and moisture changed over this time period using
organic molecules in the sediments and will test the hypothesis that natural
changes in solar energy at the equator cause variations in mid-latitude climate
with an 11,000-year cycle. The results will contribute to a better understanding
of the natural forcing mechanisms that impact ENSO dynamics and its influence on
mid-latitude climate. The outcomes of the proposed work will contribute to the
fundamental understanding of Earth's climate system, interactions among
different climatic processes, and the resulting impacts on global climate.