* 1349528
* EAGER: Toward Numerically Robust Software
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2013,03/31/2016
* Zhaojun Bai, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 03/31/2016
* USD 300,000.00

Society increasingly depends on numerical software, which uses finite precision
arithmetic to approximate the reals and necessarily introduces approximation and
error. Anti-lock breaks and medical devices such as haptic control systems for
remote surgery are two such examples. Numerical errors in these systems can be
disastrous. Toyota suspects such errors contributed to its recent, costly
unintended acceleration problem, and the Ariane 5 rocket exploded due to an
overflow in its inertial reference system. This project explores practical
techniques to test and analyze numerical software, which will advance the state-
of-the-art in engineering robust numerical software to help avoid costly,
dangerous errors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In particular, the project focuses on the
two most fundamental sources of numerical errors: uncaught exceptions and
numerical stability and accuracy. The proposed core framework is centered around
symbolic execution, and domain insights will be used to develop principles and
heuristics to make it practical. This project will complete several preliminary
research tasks to validate and demonstrate the promise of the proposed general
approach. It will explore new problem modeling strategies for numerical accuracy
and stability, examining realistic numerical constraints to build insights into
constraint solving strategies and algorithms, and improving the promising
Ariadne symbolic analysis infrastructure.