* 1349507
* EAGER: Thermal pulsing enabled fast and reversible morphology control
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2014
* Ramki Kalyanaraman, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Ruey-Hung Chen
* 07/31/2014
* USD 24,286.00

CBET 1349507 PI: Kalyanaraman

In this research we will investigate the understanding of a discovery in which a
reversible change in the size and morphology of nanostructures can be achieved
in very short nanosecond times. As a result, physical properties such as
magnetism, optical reflectivity, plasmon resonance colors, and electrical
conductivity, that are directed controlled by the morphology, can also be
reversed rapidly. The experimental observation of this effect is that break-up
of nanoparticles can occur under specific combinations of rapid thermal pulses
and a static magnetic field, which can then be re-formed by thermal heating. Our
hypothesis is that the rapid change in size and or density of the material is
central to the break-up. We have designed experiments and modeling to confirm
these ideas. Experiments will involve study of break-up as function of thermal
pulsing, magnetic field, and materials parameters, while the modeling will be
used to predict the spatio-temporal nature of temperature change within the
nanostructures so as to estimate the forces leading to break-up.

Materials and/or processes that can show reversible cycling of physical behavior
are very important for a multitude of applications with wide ranging socio-
economic impact. For example, the data stored on our smartphones and computers
can be read, erased and rewritten multiple times through changes to the
electronic or magnetic state. However, there is a severe limitation of such
materials and processes. For instance computer logic is dominated by
semiconductor materials. Also, it is not possible to reverse every physical
property in a fast enough manner that would enable better new applications. One
example is the photochromic effect found in sun glasses - although useful there,
finds little use in electronic applications because it is extremely slow. The
impact of our research will be from demonstrating this new approach to reverse
physical behavior, based on reversible morphology control. Because it can happen
in nanoseconds, we envision applications in dynamic heat and electromagnetic
shielding, intelligent optical windows, novel data storage and memory, nanoscale
repair, and measurement of heat and temperature.