* 1349082
* EAGER: TAEMILE: Towards Automating Experience Management in Interactive Learning Environments
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2015
* Glen Muschio, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Hoadley
* 08/31/2015
* USD 149,999.00

A key challenge for interactive learning environments is how to automatically
co-regulate ? balancing learners? autonomy with the pedagogical processes
intended by educators. In this Cyberlearning: Transforming Education EAGER
project, the PIs are exploring the use of experience management (EM) to address
this issue. They are collecting preliminary data about (1) the relationship
between a learner's goal orientations and play style and (2) the impact of
dynamically adjusting the learning environment using a variety of EM strategies
and their impacts on learners' autonomy and learning outcomes. These issues are
being addressed in the context of an interactive learning environment called
Solving the Incognitum. Using this environment, learners learn about geological
time and the fossil record. The setting is the historical Charles Willson Peale
Museum of Art and Science, the largest US natural history museum of its day
(1801-1827). Included in this virtual museum are all the dinosaur and ancient
animal bones that Peale and his group brought back from his expeditions.
Learners are challenged to find the bones that are missing from a skeleton, and
clues are scattered around the museum. Learners with a goal-achievement
orientation may not explore enough and may need to be encouraged to do that,
while those who are more natural explorers may need to be guided to move towards
the planning needed to achieve their goal. Reflection in action and reflection
on action are supported.

As ailing governments cut funding for schools, there is a push towards using
technology for providing the kinds of help that aides and specialized teachers
might have provided. For such an effort to be successful, we need to learn more
about how to design engaging learning environments that can help struggling
learners. Learning environments where learners get to explore, design, build,
and solve problems are engaging, but using them to promote learning requires
understanding how to give learners the autonomy they need to remain engaged and
enthusiastic along with the guidance they need to successfully learn. This
project represents an early attempt at addressing that need.