* 1349308
* CSBR Living Stocks: International Culture Collection of Arbuscular Mycorrhizal Fungi (INVAM)
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2018
* Joseph Morton, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 04/30/2018
* USD 269,461.00

An award is made to West Virginia University to support the only large living
collection of a group of fungi (Glomeromycota) that form a mutually beneficial
symbiosis with more than 80% of all plant species. This collection, called
INVAM, has grown to almost 1300 strains from 49 countries and most habitats
worldwide. These fungi are unique because they partnered with plants when they
emerged onto land 400 million years ago and have coevolved exclusively with
them. The collection provides valuable fungal strains to understand the basic
biology and ecology of such a long-term relationship and the many ways in which
this relationship can benefit different types of plants. With this knowledge,
fungal strains can be obtained and exploited to manage or promote these benefits
and to improve or restore communities, especially those damaged by disturbance
or environmental pollutants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to the
preservation and maintenance of these fungal stocks, INVAM is tasked with making
them available to the general public, researchers, teachers, and students, and
offering services and information to these client groups that will promote
scientific advancement, educational experiences, practical application and
commercialization. A website at http://invam.wvu.edu provides extensive
information on available stocks, taxonomy of the fungi, and methods for their
culture and use.