* 1349115
* Experiments on debris-flow initiation from runoff
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2018
* Michael Lamb, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Richard Yuretich
* 04/30/2018
* USD 355,497.00

In steep mountain terrain, debris flows can dominate sediment transport and
bedrock channel incision, and drive landscape change. Although debris flows are
often generated from landslides that fluidize upon failure, there is increasing
evidence for the importance of debris flows generated from runoff and overland
flow, especially in steep alpine landscapes and following wildfire where dry,
loose sediment collects in channels and chutes prior to failure. The initiation
mechanisms for debris-flow generation from runoff are not well understood. To
address this, a series of experiments that will form the baseline to test and
develop theory for debris-flow initiation in mountain channels will be
conducted. The experiments will take place in a new state-of-the-art facility at
the California Institute of Technology designed specifically to investigate
sediment transport processes on very steep slopes. The proposed work will test
four hypotheses concerning the onset of debris flows over a wide range of
channel slopes and sediment sizes. The expected outcome from this work is new
insight into the underlying mechanics that control debris-flow initiation from
within channels, and the development of predictive models that link debris flow
initiation to topography, such as channel slope, and environmental
perturbations, such as floods and wildfires. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Debris flows
are one of the most dangerous and costly hazards of mountainous terrain
worldwide. This work will improve our understanding of debris flow initiation
and aid in our ability to forecast hazards and develop better land-use
strategies. The results will have applications for the Los Angeles area where
runoff-generated debris flows are common following wildfire, in cases resulting
in loss of life and property damage. These results will be made available to the
public through journal publications and to the scientific teaching community
through the GeomorphLectures Wiki, designed to be a resource for young
educators. Educational and outreach activities include training scientists at
the undergraduate, PhD and postdoctoral levels, and volunteer classroom
presentations and laboratory tours through collaborations with the Pasadena
Unified School District, CA.