* 1349229
* Collaborative Research:  Normal-Fault Facets as Recorders of Erosion and Tectonics
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2018
* Scott McCoy, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 05/31/2018
* USD 30,407.00

Earthquakes are expensive and dangerous natural hazards. Managing the risk they
represent requires estimating the size and frequency of earthquakes in the
geologic past. Often, this knowledge, which relies on information about the past
activity of particular faults, is difficult and costly to obtain. This project
tests a new method for estimating past earthquake activity through detailed
field measurements and a simple mathematical model. Because mountain topography
in these settings is also a product of climate, the data collected will provide
information on variations in rates of weathering and erosion during the past one
to two ice ages. Such information about the relationship between climate and
erosion is important for a variety of applications, including models of long-
term sedimentation that the oil and gas industry uses to study the formation of
sedimentary deposits. The project will also foster education by training a post-
doctoral research associate, and it will broaden participation in science by
providing an undergraduate summer research experience for a student from an
under-represented minority group. The project has a strong international
collaboration with the University of Bergen in Norway and the University of
London in the UK.

This research will contribute both to an understanding of climate control on
natural rates and processes of erosion as well as paleoseismology. The project
tests a new method for estimating past earthquake activity through detailed
measurements of the shape and steepness of mountains that lie next to faults,
and which were created by motion on those faults. The method relies on a simple
mathematical model for mountain-front form that predicts a quantitative
relationship between the average rate of fault motion and the steepness of the
adjacent terrain. The project will test this model by studying two locations
where independent estimates of fault-motion rate are already available: the
Wasatch Mountains, Utah, and the central Apennines Mountains, Italy. Measuring
in detail the landscape form adjacent to active faults in these two sites, and
examining the processes of weathering and erosion that modify topography over
time, will provide a test of how well this method works to reconstruct past
fault activity. The research includes field surveys, digital topography
analysis, cosmogenic nuclide analysis, and feasibility testing of facet-slope
analysis as a paleoseismology tool. This project is jointly supported by the
Geomorphology and Land Use Dynamics, Tectonics, and International Science and
Engineering programs.