* 1349322
* CSBR: Natural History Collections: Critical renovation and revitalization of the University of Iowa Fossil Plant Collection
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2018
* Ann Budd, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 05/31/2018
* USD 196,751.00

Fossils tell us about life on Earth over the past 3.5 billion years, but they
can also help us predict what will happen to life in the future, as the Earth's
environment continues to change. Museums hold millions of fossils used by
researchers worldwide. Each individual collection of fossils, regardless of its
size, is a vital piece of evidence, providing it is well maintained and
documented. The fossil plant collection at the University of Iowa Paleontology
Repository (UIPR) is no exception. Since 2005, scattered individual faculty
research collections have been transferred from the UI Biology Department as
faculty retire. These collections are now consolidated as a single unit under
UIPR care. To preserve this new collection, specimens will be organized in
museum-grade cabinets in storage media designed to mitigate deterioration, risks
from pests, and high and/or fluctuating humidity. To make the collection
accessible for research and education, specimen identifications will be verified
and updated, specimens will be cataloged and photographed, and the digitized
information made available on-line. Earth and Environmental Science
undergraduate students, Museum Studies interns, and McNair Scholars will receive
training in collection management and will investigate new techniques for
determining the locality from which specimens were collected. All training
efforts will target students from groups underrepresented in STEM. Trainees will
participate in sharing data on-line and will present papers at conferences under
the mentorship of project staff. They will also participate in the outreach
activities by assisting with the development of educational resources, based on
the collection, to engage K-12 students and the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
specimens targeted by this project are currently stored in far from ideal
conditions and, in the case of humidity-sensitive fossils, are actively
deteriorating with pyrite disease. To halt this loss of scientific evidence and
enable research access of this unique and irreplaceable material, the collection
will be secured and rejuvenated by physical preservation in new museum storage
according to modern standards and best practices, catalogued in the UIPR's
Specify Collections Database, and digitized (high resolution photography). Data
will be shared with on-line resources through initiatives such as iDigBio, the
Paleobiology Database, GBIF, and the Iowa Digital Library. In the process of
securing and preserving the collection, two research studies aimed at improving
curatorial and management practices will be conducted. We will develop and test
new curation methods for the care of pyritized material and coal ball acetate
peels. In addition, we will investigate the geochemical "fingerprinting" of
unprovenanced coal balls. The results of these studies will inform strategies
used by the paleobotanical community. Much of the collection has been
inaccessible to research since the 1980s. However, through this project
collections will be made accessible to researchers and educators, including
Sternberg's Cretaceous Dakota Formation Collection, critical to understanding
the early evolution of angiosperms and their role in the changing structure of
terrestrial ecosystems; Midwest coal ball collections, providing a unique record
of Pennsylvanian floras critical for paleoecological reconstructions of ancient
mire forests and fueling a rich array of phylogenetic hypotheses; the Pella
Collection, a Pennsylvanian compression flora of significant research value due
to its biogeographic, stratigraphic and lithographic context; and Macbride's
1893 Cretaceous Cycadeoid Collection, from the famous Minnekahta site, South
Dakota. More information about the collection and its outreach program is
available at http://geoscience.clas.uiowa.edu/paleo/.