* 1349350
* CSBR: Living Stocks: Provasoli-Guillard National Center for Marine Algae and Microbiota
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2015,03/31/2019
* Michael Lomas, Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 03/31/2019
* USD 450,000.00

An award is made to the National Center for Marine Algae and Microbiota (NCMA)
to serve as a central repository to receive, maintain and distribute living
cultures of (primarily) marine algae. The NCMA holds 2,739 strains in 39
taxonomic classes, representing all the major photosynthetic algal groups. Thus,
the NCMA maintains the largest and most diverse collection of publicly available
marine algal strains in the world. Specific goals related to this project
include: (1) Increasing algal diversity and reducing strain redundancy in the
core collection; (2) Improving curatorial efficiency and user experience through
upgrades in data management and website functionality; (3) Implementing an
aggressive business strategy to ensure future sustainability to support our
mission and; (4) Increase broader impacts through innovative IT-based outreach
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NCMA represents a unique facility for
researchers, educators and companies worldwide, all interested in working with
algae as a resource to investigate fundamental questions in biology, global
processes and biotechnology. Funding will facilitate expansion of education
programs at NCMA to include short focused courses and webinars, increasing the
opportunity for educational outreach. Through an upgraded website, the PIs plan
to publish journalism-style featured articles: that will be actively presented
to customers through 'got algae'?, a new monthly eblast magazine, blogs and
social media. More information may be obtained at: http:www.ncma.bigelow.org.