* 1349952
* CAREER: Land Use and Environmental Controls on Soil Carbon in Human-Dominated Tropical Landscapes
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2014,09/30/2020
* Erika Marin-Spiotta, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Scott Freundschuh
* 09/30/2020
* USD 425,000.00

One of the major uncertainties in predicting changes in earth's climate is how
one of the world's largest terrestrial carbon reservoirs, soils, responds to
environmental change. Changes in land use and land cover, such as deforestation
for agriculture or pasture use, or forest regrowth after agricultural
abandonment, affect the exchange of carbon between soils and the atmosphere,
with implications for climate and soil fertility. Past human activities can
influence the quantity and dynamics of carbon in soils. Despite this, and the
fact that an increasing proportion of the Earth's surface is covered by human-
modified landscapes, few regional-scale assessments of soil carbon incorporate
historical land use. This project will focus on how historical and environmental
factors affect how much carbon is stored in tropical soils and its vulnerability
to disturbance. Tropical regions are experiencing dynamic changes in land cover
and increasing human population growth, yet our understanding of how tropical
soils respond to global change is limited to few soil environments which are not
representative of the global tropics. The proposed field research will take
place in the U.S. Caribbean island of Puerto Rico. Puerto Rico is a model system
to study interactions between environmental and human factors in the tropics
because it represents a diversity of climatic regions, ecosystem and soil types.
The proposed educational activities will provide students with interdisciplinary
research and career skills training and field experience and will increase
participation of underrepresented communities in geography and the geosciences,
in particular women and Hispanic students. Collaborations with agency scientists
will facilitate broad dissemination of research results to managers and
policymakers.

This project aims to measure legacy effects of past human activities on tropical
soil carbon dynamics by taking advantage of an extraordinary natural laboratory
in Puerto Rico with a rich diversity of geologic substrates, precipitation
gradients, and well-documented land-use history. The project will quantify
carbon storage (amount and turnover) under different land uses across
environmental gradients with a long history of human management through the
collection of new data and integration of archived data to increase the
geographic representation of tropical soil environments. The project will
evaluate the magnitude and persistence of historical land use legacy effects on
soil carbon with time across different soil types using carbon isotope depth
profiles and field chronosequences. Improved mechanistic understanding of the
effects of soil type, climate and land use on soil organic matter retention to
will be accomplished through physical fractionation approaches that investigate
the sensitivity of different soil carbon pools to disturbance and the use of
natural abundance radiocarbon isotopes to measure carbon storage effectiveness.
The research and educational activities will provide students with training in
field, lab, geospatial and data analysis skills. The integration of research and
educational activities will create new opportunities for collaborations between
social and physical scientists, especially through the development of a mixed-
methods field course focused on environmental challenges in human-dominated
tropical landscapes.