* 1349252
* Collaborative Research:  Using Iodine-Calcium Ratios in Carbonates to Measure Oxygen in Ancient Atmospheres during the Development of Early Life
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Zunli Lu, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 07/31/2018
* USD 139,989.00

Broader significance (non-technical).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding how
life developed in Earth's history means understanding the environmental
conditions on ancient Earth. One of the most critical conditions to shape the
development of life is the composition of Earth's atmosphere. Unlike today's
atmosphere, which is approximately 20% oxygen, the atmosphere of the ancient
Earth had no oxygen. A major transition in the development of early life has
been strongly linked to the accumulation of oxygen in the atmosphere which began
2.5 - 3 billion years ago, ultimately leading to the biological complexity on
our planet today. To better understand the connection of atmospheric oxygen to
the development of ancient life, it is important to know how much oxygen was
present, particularly in the shallow oceans which served as the cradle of early
life. To measure oxygen content in ancient oceans, this research team is
developing a method to use a chemical tracer, or fingerprint of oxygen recorded
in limestones, analogous to forensic scientists who develop methods to find
evidence at a crime scene.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Preliminary data has indicated
that the presence of the element iodine (the same substance used as an
antiseptic on wounds) in limestones is strongly correlated to the presence of
oxygen in Earth's history. However, to reliably determine oxygen concentrations
in the ancient atmosphere using iodine as a tracer, it is necessary to
understand what factors influence the iodine content of limestones that form in
the ocean. The research team in this study will focus on that question with this
work by studying the chemistry of iodine in modern and near-modern marine muds
and incipient rocks. This work will provide valuable information on iodine
chemistry in the modern world, as well as refining and calibrating iodine
content as a tracer of ancient oxygen. A new means to fingerprint ancient oxygen
has implications for understanding the development of life in ancient
times.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Not only can this work potentially contribute to
understanding how modern life came to exist, it also has a number of educational
impacts. A new collaboration will be initiated between an early-career assistant
professor, Zunli Lu (Syracuse University) and senior professor Tim Lyons
(University of California Riverside). The project will contribute to building
the future US STEM-trained workforce via the training of two graduate students
and undergraduates from the diverse campus of UCR. Additionally, the research
team plans significant outreach for younger students by working with the new
Riverside STEM academy and science fair mentoring.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
shallow waters of the Precambrian ocean were home to the first oxygen-producing
photosynthetic organisms as well as many of the milestones of early evolution,
such as the rise of eukaryotes and ultimately animals. Reliable measurements of
the redox conditions in the Precambrian surface ocean are key to understanding
the evolution of life during this critical transitional period in Earth's
history. Currently, knowledge of oxygen levels in these surface waters is
limited. This project aims to fill this knowledge gap by developing a promising
new proxy, namely using iodine-to-calcium ratios (I/Ca) in limestones and
dolostones. This iodine method is based upon two observations: (1) the oxidized
iodine species iodate exists exclusively in well-oxygenated water and (2) iodate
is the only iodine species incorporated during carbonate
precipitation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will conduct the first
systematic evaluation of uptake and diagenetic overprints for I/Ca in classic
modern/near-modern shallow marine carbonate settings. These plans include
tracking diagenesis from shallow to deep burial in South Florida and the Bahamas
using independently well constrained samples spanning diverse diagenetic
settings and processes ranging from early organic remineralization to meteoric
and marine burial conditions to dolomitization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These
carbonate analyses will be complemented with a novel study of iodine uptake and
retention in modern organic-rich, shale precursor facies. Assimilation into
organic matter represents the largest iodine sink in the modern ocean, and
remineralization of this sink and export back to the overlying water column is
the largest marine input. Because organic matter mostly assimilates the reduced
iodine species, iodide, ratios of I-to-TOC (total organic carbon) in shales
paired with carbonate I/Ca should allow for the discrimination of I/Ca trends
(or portions of trends) reflecting local redox shifts versus broader reservoir
controls. In other words, the proxy, as applied to very old samples, will be
taken beyond simple presence-absence scenarios toward questions of global
conditions through a quantitative understanding of iodine?s ocean-scale mass
balance. Previous studies have noted redox-controlled variations in local I/TOC
ratios in modern environments, thus complicating this relationship and its
relevance to I/Ca ratios in ancient carbonates. In response, the team will
assess iodine uptake and preservation in organic-rich sediments across redox
gradients in two classic modern anoxic settings, the Black Sea and the Cariaco
Basin. Ultimately, the research team plans to cross-calibrate I/TOC ratios
against other diverse and already well-understood proxies for depositional
oxygen conditions as archived in black shales and, in the process, to highlight
the necessity for a multi-proxy approach to reconstructing the environmental
backdrop of Earth's earliest life.