* 1349921
* CAREER: Multi-Level Occupancy Intervention, Simulation and Education for Energy Reduction in Existing Buildings
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/2014,12/31/2019
* Carol Menassa, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 12/31/2019
* USD 400,089.00

1349921 (Menassa). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite significant advances in
technology, existing buildings are still the highest consumers of energy and
emitters of harmful greenhouse gases. While it is argued that education and
information sharing are appropriate occupancy intervention strategies for energy
reduction, no empirical research has been done to understand (1) how different
building occupants respond to intervention strategies, (2) what occupancy
characteristics influence this response, (3) how to supplement education with
other strategies to achieve long term energy reduction, and (4) how simulation
can be used to develop a functional and educational environment for building
stakeholders. The goal of this CAREER grant is to address this gap in research
and education to achieve a fundamental understanding of what occupancy
characteristics and social relationships play a key mediation role to induce
significant energy use reduction in buildings. The investigator will perform
basic research, design appropriate tools, and develop educational materials to
enable effective implementation of energy reduction intervention strategies at
the occupancy level in buildings. This research is targeted to result in
fundamental contributions to understand the mediation role that building
occupancy MOA (Motivation, Opportunity and Ability) and SNT (Social Network
Topology) play in determining the effectiveness of intervention strategies. This
is to be achieved through a scientific approach to quantitatively measure the
occupancy MOA and SNT. Additional important targeted contributions of this
project are to identify the key fundamental differences among various energy
intervention strategies aimed at building occupants, and to establish a
correlation between the effectiveness of these strategies and specific building
clusters. This would significantly reduce time and effort required to choose and
implement energy intervention strategies in buildings by providing a fundamental
scientific understanding of what intervention strategies can be applied for
given occupancy MOA and SNT characteristics. Finally, the proposed research
targets to develop, test and validate a model that allows decision makers to
understand how reducing energy in their buildings is influenced by the
buildings? occupancy MOA levels, SNT and proper selection of intervention
strategies. This approach to understanding and modeling the mediation role that
occupancy MOA and SNT play in processing information included in intervention
strategies aims to result in effective, economical and sustainable approaches to
reduce energy use in buildings. The dissemination of the project results through
different media will seek to have a significant impact of educating decision
makers about which intervention strategies to choose to achieve long term and
effective energy reduction in their building. As part of this project, the
investigator will leverage existing resources at the University of Michigan to
achieve full integration of her research and educational activities. These
resources include: (1) The Center for Research on Learning and Teaching in
Engineering (CRLT-Engineering), (2) the NSF-funded Michigan Louis Stokes
Alliance for Minority Participation (MI-LSAMP), (3) the Office of Engineering
Outreach and Engagement (OEOE) and Marian Sarah Parker Scholars (MSP) Program,
and (4) the Undergraduate Research Opportunity Program (UROP). The latter three
collaborations will allow the investigator to mentor underrepresented minorities
in STEM disciplines, with them potentially moving on to pursue graduate degrees.
Beyond traditional education, the results of this research will be disseminated
through online course offerings to practicing professionals.