* 1349279
* Impact of Quaternary megafloods on erosion of the Tsangpo River gorge, southeastern Tibet
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/2014,03/31/2018
* Katharine Huntington, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Richard Yuretich
* 03/31/2018
* USD 224,001.00

The last decade has seen a resurgence of debate over the role of extreme events
such as earthquakes, landslides and floods in long-term erosion and landscape
evolution. Yet progress in this area is fundamentally limited by the difficulty
of observing extreme events on human timescales and linking them to million-year
average erosion rate measurements. This project helps bridge the gap by
combining field, laboratory and computer modeling approaches to investigate the
first direct evidence of the legacy of prehistoric megafloods in one of the most
rapidly eroding natural landscapes on Earth, southeastern Tibet. This project
will integrate glacial lake deposit chronologies, field observations and dating
of flood deposits, provenance data for sediments deposited in different
magnitude flows, and computer simulations of flood events to (1) model flood
hydraulics, landslide triggering, slackwater sediment deposition and flood
hazard; (2) relate flood conditions to erosion processes and evaluate the extent
to which megafloods focus erosion in the gorge; and (3) begin to constrain the
timing and frequency of megaflood events to better understand their relationship
to climate and impact on long-term erosion. Ultimately, this novel approach of
chemically "fingerprinting" flood sands (using zircon U-Pb ages) to investigate
erosion processes will improve our understanding of possible feedbacks between
river incision and rock uplift, Tibetan plateau margin evolution, and links
between climate and erosion on glacial-interglacial timescales.

The modeling study will benefit society by evaluating flood hazard associated
with hydropower dam development in the region. The project involves
collaborations among the University of Washington, US Geological Survey, and a
disaster management agency in India. Graduate and undergraduate research
students will be trained in field, laboratory, and computer modeling methods. To
promote K-12 STEM education in minority-serving high schools, the researchers
and students will work with a teacher to develop a lesson and activity on floods
and megaflood erosion for the University of Washington outreach program, Rocking
Out. Additionally, research findings will be disseminated broadly through
University of Washington's outreach and high school programs, Indian disaster
management personnel, university courses, conferences and publications. This
project is jointly supported by the Geomorphology and Land Use Dynamics and
International Science and Engineering programs.