* 1349586
* Effect of seamount subduction on fault geometry and rupture propagation
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2017
* Christine Regalla, Regalla                 Christine      A
* Fellowship Award
* Luciana Astiz
* 12/31/2017
* USD 130,500.00

Dr. Christine Regalla has been awarded an NSF Earth Sciences Postdoctoral
Fellowship to carry out a research and education plan while at McGill University
in Montreal, Canada. She will investigate the role of variable fault geometry
and strength in the vicinity of subducted seamounts on the nucleation and
propagation of megathrust ruptures. This work has direct implications for
understanding processes controlling the nucleation and maximum magnitude of
large megathrust earthquakes. Subduction zones generate the world's largest
earthquakes and tsunamis and the limits on earthquake size depend in part on the
geometry of the fault boundary between the two plates. Rough spots and bumps
such as seamounts on the down-going plate can affect the degree of locking along
the plate boundary fault and modulate the magnitude and distribution of plate
boundary slip during earthquakes. Results from this project can be applied to
seismic hazard assessments to help estimate maximum rupture area and moment
magnitude at megathrusts with subducted seamounts. This project will create
opportunities for knowledge sharing between field and modeling-based research
groups, and will provide valuable professional development for Regalla as an
early-career scientist. In addition, this project will involve undergraduate
student researchers, thereby providing opportunities for Regalla to develop
educational and mentoring skills, and provide hands-on research opportunities
for undergraduate students.

Although the subduction of seamounts is common, there is considerable debate as
to whether seamounts act as sites of earthquake nucleation or barriers that
impede rupture propagation. This work will combine analyses of field outcrops of
ancient plate boundary thrust faults that were active during seamount subduction
with finite element models of dynamic rupture to evaluate proposed models of
earthquake rupture. This project will provide the first known descriptions of
the physical properties of the subduction thrust in locations where ancient
seamounts have subducted to seismogenic depths, and will provide
observationally-based model constraints for fault geometry and strength
parameters in numeric simulations of rupture involving subducted seamounts.
Results of this work will provide information on the structural accommodation of
subducted seamounts and their control on earthquake rupture propagation.

The fellowship is being co-funded with the Office of Integrated and
International Activities - International Science and Engineering