* 1349499
* EAGER: Structure-based Engineering of A Diol Dehydratase towards Dehydrating 1,2,4-Butanetriol
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2015
* Yajun Yan, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 07/31/2015
* USD 80,000.00

Abstract #1349499 Yan, Yajun

Intellectual Merit

Characterization and understanding of natural enzymes and biosynthetic pathways
have allowed enzyme and whole-cell biocatalytic approaches to be developed for
the production of high-value chemicals such as artemisinic acid, and bulk
chemicals and fuels such as longer chain alcohols. However, many valuable and
useful compounds that are synthetically derived in the petrochemical industry do
not have biocatalytic production approaches available. As a consequence, there
is an urgent need for novel or engineered enzymes possessing novel properties to
develop these new biocatalytic processes.

1,4-butanediol is a high value commodity chemical in the petrochemical industry
for the production of plastics, polyesters, fibers, medicines, cosmetics, and
pesticides. It has an annual market of 5 billion pounds. Asian-Pacific, Europe,
and North America are the top 3 markets for 1,4-butanediol. Traditionally,
1,4-butanediol production completely relies on petroleum-based chemical
processes, which have very high energy input and are not environmentally
friendly. Given the high demand for 1,4-butanediol and environmental concerns,
alternative production approaches from renewable sources are highly desired and
of great practical value.

Enzyme engineering is a powerful enabling technology which has been used to
develop novel biocatalysts for many important industrial applications. It has
the nature of high risk, since it is hard to predict how long it will take to
find the optimal mutants. It could be quick or take a few years. However, the
risk can be managed by creating and screening creditable mutant pools. Professor
Yajun Yan at the University of Georgia has significant experience in approaches
to enzyme engineering to enable the production of high value commodity
chemicals. He proposes work on the enzyme engineering of a diol dehydratase for
the production of the high value commodity chemical 1,4-butanediol from
1,2,4-butanetriol. The use of diol dehydratase for 1,4-butanediol generation has
never been proposed, investigated, or exploited before. Therefore, the EAGER
proposal will be highly innovative.

In this EAGER proposal, a rational enzyme engineering approach to create a small
and creditable enzyme mutant library will be used. A structural model of the
diol dehydratase enzyme will be used to develop hypotheses for the library
design. After identifying the most critical amino acid residues in the catalytic
pocket that are responsible for the enzyme substrate specificity and activity by
a docking study, saturated mutagenesis at these positions will be performed to
create the mutant library. The PI will use the anaerobic growth based screening
method to screen the library for improved mutants. Any mutants exhibiting novel
or improved activity towards 1,2,4-butanetriol will be sequenced to determine
the mutations and assayed to determine their kinetic parameters in vitro and in
vivo. The identified beneficial mutations will be incorporated into the
structure model to establish a design principle to guide catalytic pocket
reconstruction. The design principle will consider three basic factors:
catalytic pocket volume for substrate docking, charge and hydropathy of amino
acid residues in the catalytic pocket for substrate binding, and interaction
between substrates and catalytic sites for electron transfer. The findings will
provide valuable information for enzyme rational design in general.

Broader Impacts

The research work in the EAGER proposal will be high-payoff since it will lead
to the development of novel enzyme mutants that can be used for the generation
of 1,4-butanediol from renewable sources via whole cell biocatalysis and bring
transformative changes. In addition, the research work will provide new insights
into the catalytic mechanism of diol dehydratase on a molecular level and
promote more intelligent rational redesign of synthetically useful enzyme
mutants, which are of great scientific significance. The proposed research will
further strengthen and diversify the research and education of the BioChemical
Engineering Program at the University of Georgia (UGA) by creating
interdisciplinary training and research opportunities for undergraduate and
graduate students, especially those from minorities and underrepresented groups.
The proposed research will also use the Young Dawgs Program at UGA to educate
and train the students from local high schools to inspire their interests and
enthusiasm in science and engineering.