* 1349205
* CSBR: Natural History: Launching the University of Vermont Natural History Museum Step One: Securing the Collections
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2018
* David Barrington, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 05/31/2018
* USD 471,072.00

The University of Vermont Natural History Museum (UVM) collections are a
valuable resource for researchers throughout the world because of their
worldwide geographic scope and long history of collecting specimens. By far the
largest in the state, they serve as the State of Vermont's official archive for
documentation of its flora and fauna. The reorganization of the collections will
expand its access to a wide array of people, including UVM undergraduate and
graduate students, researchers, citizen scientists, and local volunteers.
Outreach efforts will attract K-12 groups interested in learning about
biodiversity and conservation through hands-on use of the specimens.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This investment into UVM's natural history collections
will help to improve specimen storage conditions, enhancing pest control
strategies and reduce the chance of damage from fire and flood. The targeted
collection houses over 660,000 specimens of plants, arthropods and mammals.
While the specimens are being secured, curators and students will systematically
reorganize them to reflect contemporary taxonomic classification. Also, the
plant and arthropod digitization program will be expanded to fully represent the
collections and make specimen images and related data available to researchers
and educators. Additional information about the collection and its scientific
and educational missions is publicly available on the museum's website:
http://www.uvm.edu/~uvmnhm/.