* 1349595
* EAR-PF: Developing early Holocene records of terrestrial climate in Baffin Bay to understand ice sheet response time to climate change
* GEO,EAR
* 11/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Elizabeth Thomas, Thomas                  Elizabeth      K
* Fellowship Award
* Luciana Astiz
* 08/31/2017
* USD 174,000.00

Dr. Elizabeth K. Thomas has been awarded an NSF Earth Sciences Postdoctoral
Fellowship to conduct research and outreach at the University of Massachusetts,
Amherst and the State University of New York at Buffalo. She will reconstruct
climate change of the early Holocene (7-10 thousand years ago) on western
Greenland and eastern Baffin Island to better constrain the factors that control
ice sheet margin change. Understanding the speed and nature of ice sheet
response to climate change is at the forefront of the scientific community and
public interest, as this is a major uncertainty of state-of-the-art sea level
rise predictions. Dr. Thomas' research will place constraints on the speed and
nature of ice sheet response to climate change on human-relevant timescales,
with direct benefits to communities working to adapt to sea level rise. Dr.
Thomas will broaden participation in Earth Sciences by mentoring undergraduate
researchers and developing outreach programs in Amherst, MA and Buffalo, NY,
communities with significant populations that are underrepresented in Earth
Science. Both of these communities lie near features deposited by the Laurentide
Ice Sheet thousands of years ago, and thus provide natural laboratories for
learning about ice sheets and discussing challenges that scientists and society
face today regarding climate change, ice sheets, and sea level
rise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantifying ice sheet responses to climate change is
critical for predicting sea level rise in a warming world. During the early
Holocene, the Baffin Bay sectors of the Laurentide and Greenland ice sheets
advanced rapidly and dramatically, likely in response to abrupt (10s to 100s of
years) climate changes at 9.3 and 8.2 ka. The character of early Holocene
decadal-scale temperature and precipitation changes in the Baffin Bay region
remains unknown, however, so direct comparison of climate and ice sheet
reconstructions currently is not possible. Dr. Thomas will use organic compounds
(branched glycerol dialkyl glycerol tetraethers and leaf wax hydrogen isotopes)
preserved in lake sediments near the margins of the Greenland and Laurentide ice
sheets to reconstruct decadal-scale temperature and precipitation changes. She
will then compare the climate reconstructions to ice sheet reconstructions to
elucidate ice sheet response time to climate change.