* 1349870
* RIG:  Investigating mechanisms of trophic ricochet in canopy food chains resulting from long-term legacies of historic deer browsing
* BIO,DEB
* 07/08/2013,08/31/2016
* Timothy Nuttle, Carnegie Institute
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 08/31/2016
* USD 173,250.00

When large mammalian predators are extirpated or hunting pressure from humans is
insufficient, mammalian herbivores like white-tailed deer increase in density,
exerting increased pressure on plant communities. Though such effects are well-
documented, it remains untested how herbivore-induced changes in vegetation
ricochet back up the new food chain in these altered plant communities. Making
use of a unique long-term experiment where deer density was manipulated in large
enclosures, preliminary data demonstrate that deer density during stand
initiation (the first 10 yr following clear cut) causes significant legacy
effects in forest canopies, including trees, insects, and birds, lasting at
least 30 years. The current project investigates mechanisms by which this legacy
operates from scales ranging from stand to individual tree to individual prey
item. Preliminary data provide support for mechanisms such as reduced foliage
density, reduced prey base per unit foliage, and reduced prey quality at high
deer density, all due to stand-scale changes in tree species dominance caused by
deer. New investigations in these stands include bird foraging observations and
bird exclusion experiments to examine at what scale and by what mechanisms birds
respond to changes in forest vegetation caused by historic deer
browsing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results from this study are relevant to the ca.
30% or more of eastern US counties where deer are over-abundant. Findings will
be disseminated directly to state, federal, and tribal land managers via
training programs coordinated by the USDA Forest Service Northern Research
Station. The project will broaden participation by under-represented minorities
in three ways. First, the PI is Native American, a group that is under-
represented in STEM disciplines, particularly so in ecology. Second, the PI will
provide mentorship via Indiana University of Pennsylvania's McNair program, a
research mentorship program for undergraduates from under-represented groups
interested in pursuing a PhD. Third, the PI will work with IUP students to
establish a SEEDS chapter, a program of the Ecological Society of America that
seeks to enhance opportunities for students from under-represented group to
pursue careers in ecology.