* 1349327
* CSBR: Natural History: Organization, expansion, and digitization of the larval fish collection at the Virginia Institute of Marine Science
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2018
* Sarah Huber, College of William & Mary Virginia Institute of Marine Science
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 05/31/2018
* USD 499,597.00

An award is made to the Virginia Institute of Marine Science Nunnally
Ichthyology Collection to safeguard this rare resource and preserve it for
current and future scientific research. Among the specimens targeted is a large
and important collection of larval fishes derived from collections made
worldwide. This larval fish collection was collected as part of oceanographic
studies and represent time series over broad geographic ranges. Thus, the
collection of larval fishes lends itself to studying, for example, the effect of
the physical environment or anthropogenic-induced environmental changes on
larval fish communities over time and across a range of habitats. This project
has three main goals: 1) improve storage of specimens to ensure long-term
preservation; 2) identify specimens and increase their utility for research and
teaching; and 3) catalog specimens and link associated environmental data and
images in a publicly accessed digital database.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proper
storage, identification, and digitization of these samples will secure them and
increase their value. The researchers will organize workshops to introduce
students, collection managers, and other professionals to the study,
identification, and care of larval fish specimens. These workshops will offer
intensive training and will be led by prominent larval fish experts. This award
will also contribute to graduate student training, serving as the foundation of
a student?s research and training in curatorial best practices. The results of
this project will be communicated to the general public through seminars,
displays, social media outlets, and tours organized by the collections staff.
Additional information is available at:
http://www.vims.edu/research/facilities/fishcollection/index.php.