* 1349096
* EAGER: Reconfigurable Textile Antennas and Radio Frequency (RF) Electronics Using Microfluidic Techniques
* ENG,ECCS
* 11/01/2013,04/30/2016
* John Volakis, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Dimitris Pavlidis
* 04/30/2016
* USD 260,000.00

The objective of this program is to introduce and research game-changing
approaches for reliable (a) reconfigurable RF front-ends using novel
microfluidics that incorporates movable metal-coated quartz pieces within
polymer channels to realize parasitic loadings, and (b) flexible electronics
into attractive garments with performance similar to their inflexible copper
counterparts. The proposed microfluidic reconfiguration concept has never been
tried before, and is aimed at overcoming issues with previous microfluidic
switching mechanisms that suffer from toxicity and oxidation. Its success is
transformative as it will lead to reliable and non-toxic reconfigurations based
on widely available materials. &lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit is to research
novel microfluidic reconfiguration concepts. Because these concepts have never
been considered before, there are challenges relating to their viability,
requiring coexistence of several new technologies, including fluidic flow,
fabrication of coated quartz particles/pieces, oxidation, fabrication of new
channels using composite polymers, material compatibility, repeatability and
reliability. The proposed devices are aimed at achieving reliable high speed
connectivity, regardless of a person?s position or movement. The broader impact
of the proposed reconfigurable textile antennas and RF front-ends is game-
changing. It will enable efficient access to the entire radio spectrum and
provide for on-demand remote medical monitoring of medical patients, allowing
them to stay at home. The realization of this technology provides for a unique
opportunity to carry out multidisciplinary research in material science,
electrical engineering and textile design/manufacturing. Summer camps for
recruiting underrepresented students by introducing undergrad and graduate
student projects will be pursued