* 1349747
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Long-term Chronology of Subsistence and the Role of Intensive Rice Agriculture in the Central Part of the Prehistoric Korean Peninsula
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/2014,12/31/2015
* Seungki Kwak, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2015
* USD 23,373.00

Subsistence self-sufficiency -- the ability of individuals in small traditional
communities to feed themselves -- constitutes a major issue in many parts of the
world today. In many regions where the potential for outside help is limited,
malnutrition and starvation are recurring problems. This project utilizes an
archaeological context, which can trace change over time and over climatic
fluxuation, to examine the processes at work in one specific situation. Under
the guidance of Dr. Benjamin Marwick, Seungki Kwak will analyze pottery
collections from three major inland habitation sites in the central part of the
Korean Peninsula: Sosa-Dong, Songguk-Ri, and Eupha-Ri. Low hills with gentle
slopes embracing meandering rivers in this region were continuously occupied for
as much as 4,000 years, and large inland habitation sites developed in this
condition provide multiple lines of subsistence data that are required for this
study. Mr. Kwak's research will investigate the subsistence strategy in the
central part of the prehistoric Korean peninsula using organic geochemical
analysis and luminescence dating on potsherds.

The transition from foragers to farmers and the role of intensive rice
agriculture have been among the most controversial subjects in Korean
archaeology. However, the relatively high acidity of sediment in the Korean
peninsula has made it impossible to examine faunal/floral remains directly for
tracing the subsistence change. For this reason, many of the studies on the
transition heavily relied on the shell middens in the coastal areas, which
reflect only a small portion of the overall subsistence. The subsistence
behaviors recorded in numerous large-scale inland habitation sites have been
blurred by the strict dichotomy between hunter-gatherer and intensive rice
farmer. The central hypothesis of this research is that there was a wide range
of resource utilization along with rice farming around 3,400-2,000 BP. This
hypothesis contrasts with prevailing rice-based models, where climatically
driven intensive rice agriculture from 3,400 BP is thought to be the dominant
subsistence strategy. The research will provide a unique opportunity to
understand the subsistence in major inland sites through the direct examination
of potteries: the most wide-spread material culture in the prehistoric Korea.
Organic geochemical analyses will give information for identifying what was
stored and cooked in the pots, and luminescence dating will be able to provide
reliable dates that will directly indicate when the potteries were made. The
combination of these methods will allow us to obtain a critical clue to
understanding the complexity and variety of the subsistence over time and the
role of the intensive rice farming.

This research will seek to have a broader impact beyond the research topics
presented. It will assist with building educational infrastructure about the
ancient subsistence at the institutional level for both the general public and
young generations (K -12). Public lectures related to the project will be
provided on the archaeology day at the Burke Museum, University of Washington.
Its data and results will be shared with the public through online archives.
Through collaboration with the institutions in Korea, data will be shared with
Korean scholars. The results will be published in Korean for the general public,
and readers of young generations will be targeted. All of these efforts will
promote international dissemination of the data and results. Lastly, this
project will reinforce collaboration between archaeology and chemistry and help
train the young scientists from those two different backgrounds who will be able
to create a robust, innovative research program in archaeological organic
geochemistry.