* 1349269
* A Cross Site Study of Silica Dynamics in the Critical Zone
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2019
* Louis Derry, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 03/31/2019
* USD 337,761.00

This project proposes to investigate the dynamics of silica generation and
transport across a series of stream catchments within the NSF Critical Zone
Observatory Network (CZO). Solute concentrations and chemical compositions vary
with stream discharge in complex ways. In some cases, solute load varies only
slightly with stream discharge. In others, solute concentrations drop as
discharge increases, showing effects of dilution, but even in these systems
dilution is only partial. If stream discharge increases while solute
concentration remains near constant, then the total solute load most also
increase. An important question in hydrogeochemistry is where does this increase
in solute flux come from? Do streams simply sample "more of the same", or are
new sources and pathways activated at high flow? In other words, how does water
quality vary with discharge, and why? Silica (Si) is well suited for addressing
this question as it is primarily sourced from rock and soil weathering
reactions, and has a long history of use as a hydrologic tracer. Investigator
has previously shown that germanium/silicon ratios can be used to identify
specific sources of Si in a catchment, and substantially improve the utility of
Si as a tracer. Preliminary data indicate that increased in Si flux associated
with high discharge activate new sources of Si. This study will use a series of
catchments at CZO sites that have similar rock type but different climate,
vegetation, and hydrochemical response patterns in order to learn more about the
fundamental controls on solute sources and water quality.

The proposed research will provide new constraints on the geochemical and
hydrological processes that control Si fluxes from granitoid weathering in the
critical zone. It will address the causes of different concentration-discharge
patterns in streams, providing insight into the coupling of weathering and
hydrologic processes, and providing an improved basis for hydrograph
separation/flow path modeling.

The project will use novel geochemical tracers and the network of Critical Zone
Observatories to understand some of the major controls on soil and ground water
flow paths and water quality in stream catchments. Silica is not only a useful
tracer of hydrologic pathways and solute sources, but also an important buffer
of stream chemistry, an important nutrient for both aquatic and terrestrial
algae and plants, and is tied to the long term weathering sink of carbon
dioxide. An improved understanding of both the short term controls on water flow
paths and solute loads, and the longer term controls on weathering fluxes is of
broad interest. The project includes working with students and researchers from
several CZOs, and will train students from other CZO teams in the measurement
and use of Ge/Si as a hydrogeochemical tracer. It is expected that this will
help increase the understanding and use of Ge/Si and other hydrogeochemical
tracers among the Critical Zone science community.