* 1349366
* Ecology and biogeochemical cycling of photosynthetic arsenite-oxidizing bacteria
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/2014,03/31/2018
* Chad Saltikov, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 03/31/2018
* USD 299,824.00

This project will investigate a new branching point within the complex arsenic
biogeochemical cycle referred to as anoxygenic photosynthetic arsenite
oxidation. During this process, bacteria catalyze light-dependent oxidation of
arsenite to arsenate. Little is known about the biological basis and
environmental significance of arsenite-fueled photosynthesis. There are numerous
environments where this process may be occurring such as in terrestrial hot
springs, shallow water thermal vents, lake and stream euphotic zones, and crop
soils irrigated with arsenite rich ground water, for example in Bangladesh.
Because arsenite is considered a more toxic and hydrologically mobile form of
arsenic, the oxidation of arsenite by photosynthetic bacteria could provide an
important means for natural attenuation of arsenic toxicity within surface
waters impacted by arsenic. The project aims are to determine the abundance,
diversity, and activity of arsenite oxidizing anoxygenic photosynthetic bacteria
in arsenic rich environments. The central hypothesis is that arsenic-dependent
photosynthetic bacteria utilize a 'novel' arsenite oxidase enzyme called ArxA
that can also be used to indicate their presence and arsenic-transforming
activity in arsenic rich environments. The hypothesis will be tested by: (i)
isolating and characterizing new photosynthetic arsenite oxidizers from arsenic
rich environments in various hydro/geothermal features around the Mono Lake, CA
area, (ii) measuring photosynthetic arsenite oxidation rates in Big Soda Lake,
an arsenic rich lake in Nevada that has a seasonal bloom of photosynthetic
purple sulfur bacteria, and (iii) conducting microbial ecology studies in Big
Soda Lake aimed at quantifying arsenite oxidase gene (arxA) abundance vs. depth
and correlating this data to the arsenic biogeochemistry. Results from this
project will lead to the isolation of new photosynthetic arsenite oxidizing
organisms, new methods for quantifying light-dependent arsenite oxidation in
environmental samples, and the development of molecular-based tools that target
the key genes associated with light-driven arsenite-oxidation.

Arsenic is mostly a naturally-occurring water pollutant affecting the health of
millions of people worldwide. Increasing our understanding of how arsenic
changes and moves in the environment from which humans obtain important
resources like water and food has potential implications for the mitigation of
risk from this toxic element. Microbes can play a key role in changing the
chemistry of arsenic, which in turn strongly affects arsenic's mobility and
toxicity. This study focuses upon a recently-discovered form of microbial
arsenic metabolism, specifically examining photosynthetic bacteria that change
arsenite (more toxic form) to arsenate (less toxic form) in anoxic (oxygen-
depleted) environments. Microbial ecology and environmental chemistry studies
will be conducted to determine the activities of these photosynthetic arsenic
oxidizing bacteria. The results will provide important insight regarding how
these newly identified microbes may impact the complex arsenic biogeochemical
cycle. In addition, understanding arsenite-based anoxygenic photosynthesis
(doesn't generate oxygen like standard photosynthesis) may provide insight
regarding the evolution of early forms of photosynthesis.