* 1349075
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Phonology and Morphology of Karuk
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2014,12/31/2016
* Andrew Garrett, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 12/31/2016
* USD 15,120.00

Karuk is a highly endangered Native American language of Northern California,
spoken as a first language by fewer than a dozen elders. Karuk is characterized
by an extraordinarily complex system of morphophonological alternations, that
is, changes in a word's sounds with the addition of prefixes or suffixes, akin
to the consonant change in 'leaf'~'leaves', and the stress shift in
'democrat'~'democracy', in English. The Karuk system is rife with exceptions and
unusual rules of vowel and consonant lengthening and shortening, rightward and
leftward accent shift, and consonant changes. This complexity raises the
question of what organizing principles underlie word formation, in particular,
what determines the placement of prosodic prominence (accent, stress, or high
pitch) in words, and how integrated are the sets of rules for assembling words
from their component parts and those for the pronunciation of those parts. Prior
linguistic scholarship has described many of these alternations in Karuk, but a
unifying analysis, which takes into account the theoretical and technological
advances of linguistics in the past half-century, has yet to be undertaken. This
project addresses these questions by collecting linguistic data on possible
affix combinations and their effects on accentuation and other sound changes in
words, with the aim of a comprehensive analysis of the disparate patterns. Ms.
Sandy will collect data in Northern California from the remaining first-language
speakers of Karuk using elicitation, translation tasks, and free narratives,
making high-quality audio recordings of sessions which will form the basis for
her analysis.

This project will provide empirical data to bear on current theories about the
range of morphology-phonology interactions possible in human languages. It will
also benefit from collaboration with heritage language teachers and learners by
providing linguistic data and training in linguistic methodology for the
heritage community, as well as training in language revitalization and pedagogy
for a linguistics graduate student.