* 1349043
* Race and gender stereotyping in evaluative language
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Monica Biernat, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 07/31/2017
* USD 125,000.00

In everyday life, we often are asked to provide assessments or evaluations of
others' abilities. Stereotypes can subtly shape these evaluations and judgments,
even among those who view themselves as non-prejudiced. This can be very
consequential in certain contexts; for example, hiring and admissions decisions
can be based in part on the evaluative language used in letters of
recommendation, and the language used may be influenced by gender and racial
stereotypes. Further, audiences may also interpret this language with reference
to those negative stereotypes about women and ethnic minorities. The proposed
research addresses how evaluative language content varies depending on the
gender and race of the person being described, and how in turn others interpret
and use that content. This research has broad implications for understanding
bias in real world, evaluative settings. Further, this research will increase
our understanding of barriers that women and members of underrepresented groups
face when considering educational and career opportunities in STEM (science,
technology, engineering and mathematics) fields. Understanding how and when
stereotyping can occur in evaluative contexts is a critical step towards
reducing bias, prejudice, and discrimination.

The proposed research predicts that stereotypes activate different standards of
judgments for members of different groups; therefore, evaluations (adjectives)
mean different things depending on the person described. For example, in a
masculine work domain where women are stereotyped as less competent, "good" for
a woman may mean something objectively less good than "good" for a man. Dr.
Monica Biernat, University of Kansas, will examine actual letters of
recommendation written for male and female, racial majority and minority
applicants to a variety of graduate programs at a public university. These
letters will be coded for content including positivity, complexity, and use of
ability versus effort terms, to examine differences based on gender and race
across disciplines that vary in their gender/race representation. The research
will address whether these content features predict admission decisions. The
findings of this research could be applied to a broad array of real-life
settings where evaluations occur.