* 1349724
* CAREER: Stochastic Models of Cancer Evolution
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2020
* Jasmine Foo, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2020
* USD 400,054.00

This project will develop rigorous mathematical frameworks for understanding
cancer initiation from healthy tissue, and the role of the tumor
microenvironment on the evolution of resistance to anti-cancer therapies. In its
first phase, this project will build stochastic models describing the
evolutionary processes of reproduction, death and mutation in a spatially
structured population, using stochastic interacting particle systems and
mesoscopic approximations of these processes. These models will be analyzed to
investigate how spatial population structure impacts the cancer initiation
process and resulting genetic heterogeneity of the tissue. In its second phase,
this project will develop mathematical models of the feedback between the
evolving tumor cell population and its environment, using non-Markovian
branching processes. These models will be analyzed to help elucidate the role of
the tumor environment in the evolution of drug resistance. The PI will
collaborate with cancer biologist to parametrize and validate these models a
lung cancer experimental system. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
investigates how cancer evolution is shaped by environmental pressures and
spatial population structure. This research can lead to the development of
better statistical tools for assessment of cancer risk from premalignant fields,
survival prediction, evaluation of treatment efficacy, and improved design of
treatment regimens to prevent or delay drug resistance. The mathematical
frameworks developed in this proposal will also be broadly applicable to
understanding similar issues in ecology and disease dynamics, e.g. emergence of
antibiotic resistance in bacterial or viral populations, or the geographic
spread of invasive plant species and pesticide resistant weeds. An education
goal of this project is to increase the representation of women in mathematics,
with an emphasis on recruitment into the mathematical biology and medicine. A
week-long summer program will be held each year at the University of Minnesota
for local high school girls with the theme of "Mathematics in Biology and
Medicine." In addition, a workshop will be held to bring together early career
women in mathematical biology with the aim of sharing research and discussing
emerging areas of the field, and undergraduate students will be integrated into
the proposed research efforts for year-long projects. These programs will be
linked through the development of an online community to provide support,
networking and guidance to alumni, as they continue pursuing their goals beyond
these programs.