* 1349881
* CAREER:  Impacts of Convective and Stratiform Processes on Tropical Cyclone Intensity Change
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2014,11/30/2016
* Michael Bell, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 11/30/2016
* USD 461,658.00

This study will investigate the impacts of convective and stratiform processes
on tropical cyclone (TC) intensity change through analysis of mesoscale
observations, with a focus on aircraft and Doppler radar data. Our ability to
skillfully predict changes in TC intensity is still limited, but recent studies
have suggested that the radial location of deep convective bursts and stratiform
precipitation relative to the radius of maximum wind (RMW) may play an important
role in intensification efficiency. Testing these new hypotheses using mesoscale
observations is needed to diagnose the most important physical processes
responsible for intensity change and improve TC intensity forecasts.

Intellectual Merit: Analysis of Doppler radar, dropsonde, satellite, and other
observations will be used to examine TC convective and stratiform structures,
their thermodynamic and dynamic environment, and their impacts on the TC
circulation. Previous theoretical and numerical studies have suggested that
convective heating and associated low-level convergence inside the RMW can
efficiently intensify the maximum winds. Outside the RMW, mid-level inflow
associated with stratiform precipitation can efficiently spin-up the broader
circulation through convergence of absolute angular momentum above the
frictional boundary layer. The research will use existing research observations
at different stages of the TC lifecycle from intensifying and non-intensifying
storms to test these hypotheses. A new variational analysis technique called
SAMURAI developed by the Principal Investigator will be used to integrate
aircraft and radar observations into three-dimensional thermodynamic and
kinematic fields for analysis. High-resolution Cartesian and low-wavenumber
cylindrical analyses with improved radar thermodynamic retrievals will be
conducted and augmented with numerical simulations to improve our understanding
of TC intensification.

Broader Impacts: This study integrates research and education by developing a
new graduate radar meteorology course with a digital, interactive textbook, and
incorporating mesoscale TC observations into physical meteorology curricula to
train and encourage students to test scientific hypotheses using field
observations. The open source SAMURAI analysis software and material from the
digital radar meteorology textbook will be available to the atmospheric science
community to enhance research and education infrastructure. The University of
Hawaii at Manoa represents a demographically and geographically unique state in
an EPSCoR jurisdiction, and the Principal Investigator is committed to improving
diversity by including women and underrepresented minorities such as Pacific
Islanders and Native Hawaiians in the project. Improvements in our understanding
of TC intensity change can have a significant positive impact on society. The
application of the findings from continued research on hurricanes and typhoons
can ultimately help to improve our forecast ability and reduce life and property
loss throughout the globe.