* 1349605
* CAREER:   Understanding the Transport Circulation of the Troposphere
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2017
* Gang Chen, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 05/31/2017
* USD 755,801.00

This is a CAREER award in which the research component examines the transport
circulation of the atmosphere. Here transport circulation refers to the movement
of air masses and atmospheric constituents, including water vapor and chemical
tracers which move over long distances before being rained out or removed by
chemical reactions. The transport circulation of the atmosphere is of interest
for two practical reasons: first, it plays a key role in determining air
quality, as local air quality can be affected by pollutants transported from
remote sources. Second, the transport of water vapor, energy, and momentum
largely determines the evolution of weather patterns. This is true not only for
daily weather but also for month-to-month and year-to-year change in weather
patterns such as those associated with El Nino events, fluctuations of the jet
streams, and global climate change. In the stratosphere the transport
circulation determines the distribution of ozone and the size and severity of
the ozone hole. In this project the primary focus is on the longitudinally
averaged transport circulation in the north-south direction, for example the
movement of constituents into and out of the tropics and polar caps, and the
extent to which this movement is enhanced or impeded by various dynamical
processes. For example, to what extent do the midlatitude jet streams constitute
a mixing barrier which reduces exchange between the polar caps and lower
latitudes?

More specifically, the research seeks to 1) characterize and quantify the
transport circulation using both observed winds (from reanalysis products) and
mean tracer motion in numerical simulations; 2) investigate and isolate the
mechanisms of tropospheric transport in idealized models; 3) examine the causes
of interannual variability in the transport circulation; and 4) investigate the
changes in transport circulation associated with changes in time-mean (Eulerian)
circulation induced by climate change (for example, the widening of the tropics
and the poleward shift of the jet streams). The numerical simulations are
performed using a hierarchy of models in which the most realistic is the Whole
Atmosphere Community Climate Model (WACCM), which has a well-resolved
stratosphere and sophisticated representations of atmospheric chemistry. Other
models include an aquaplanet configuration of a global atmospheric model, used
to study the transport circulation in an idealized setting which includes the
effects of atmospheric moisture (including parameterized convection). Variations
in the width of the Hadley cell, positions of the storm tracks and jet streams,
and other circulation features would be created in the model by varying the
imposed sea surface temperature, and the transport response to these variations
would be examined. Further experiments would be performed using an idealized dry
atmospheric model driven by highly simplified physics (primarily Newtonian
damping), in which transport can be studied as a function of basic factors
including atmospheric stability, equator-to-pole temperature gradient, and
planetary rotation rate. Much of the diagnostic analysis of observations and
model output focuses on the effective diffusivity of the longitudinally-averaged
mean circulation. A new formalism based on equivalent latitude coordinates is
used in which the longitudinally averaged meridional transport of tracers is
represented as a resolved eddy flux and an effective downgradient diffusive
flux.

The education component of this CAREER proposal is based on demonstrations and
experiments performed with a portable rotating tank. The tank is rotated to
induce a Coriolis force and circulations can be generated in the tank which are
analogous to the motions of Earth's atmosphere. The tank is used both on campus,
in undergraduate and graduate courses, and in museum-based outreach to middle
and high school student groups and to the general public. The on-campus activity
consists of a week-long lab module incorporated into six different classes, in
which students identify a phenomenon of interest (for example, a midlatitude
cyclone) and design an experiment in the tank to simulate and study it. The
rotating tank lab is motivated by a desire to present students with a hands-on
learning experience which will allow students to develop an intuitive, hands-on
appreciation for atmospheric dynamics. In the absence of such hands-on work
students in atmospheric dynamics can become so focused on mastering the
mathematical formalisms that they fail to appreciate the physical significance
of the dynamical equations. The museum-based outreach would take place at teh
Paleontological Research Institute's Museum of the Earth. Two forms of outreach
are planned, one consisting of 50-minute demonstrations targeted to groups of
middle and high school students, and another consisting of video presentations
of atmospheric circulation features and their analogs in the rotating tank. The
video exhibits would be complemented by 30-minute demonstrations of the rotating
tank, to be performed on a monthly basis. The museum activities will be
documented, evaluated by an external evaluator, and shared with other museums.

In addition to the broader impacts of the education component, work under this
award has societal relevance due to the effect of the transport circulation on
atmospheric weather and pollution, as noted above. In addition, the work will
have scientific broader impacts by building connections between the research
communities engaged in atmospheric chemistry and atmospheric dynamics. The work
will also support and train a graduate student, thereby providing for the future
workforce in this research area.