* 1349651
* Collaborative Research:   ACACIA:  Ancient Climate and the Authigenic Clay Index of Aridity
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2019
* Gail Ashley, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Dena Smith
* 05/31/2019
* USD 77,217.00

Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;ACACIA addresses several key issues facing
Quaternary geology, paleoclimatology, and limnogeology. The project hypotheses
include 1) that whole-rock geochemistry of lake sediments is influenced by the
composition and abundance of authigenic clays; 2) that the onset of aridity in
East African lacustrine watersheds is reflected by enrichment in octahedral Mg
content and oxygen isotopic compositions; 3) that octahedral Al enrichment
reflects freshwater watershed flushing associated with the termination of arid
phases; and 4) that environmental fluctuations reflect precession (Olduvai) and
eccentricity (Olorgesailie) orbital influences thought to dominate at those
times. ACACIA will sample and analyze sub-micrometer authigenic clay minerals
and associated materials from well characterized stratigraphic sections in the
Olduvai (Tanzania) and Olorgesailie (Kenya) Basins. To carry out this work we
will partner with leading international field teams - Proyecto Olduvai at
Olduvai Gorge (led by Universidad Complutense de Madrid), and the Olorgesailie
Drilling Project at Olorgesailie (led by the Smithsonian Institution and the
National Museums of Kenya). ACACIA mobilizes a team with extensive field
experience in East Africa, along with analytical expertise in sedimentology,
X-ray diffraction and fluorescence, high-resolution transmission electron
microscopy, and silicate stable isotope geochemistry. These efforts will improve
our understanding of the global climate system, tropical environmental responses
to global climate change, changes in vertebrate and invertebrate ecosystem
structure, and the evolution of the human lineage. ACACIA will support
undergraduate research, enhance international collaborations, and partner with
the only elementary school in the region near Olduvai Gorge, Tanzania, providing
educational outreach and support to over 1000 Tanzanian K-8
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;ACACIA will
bring modern analytical approaches to bear on the question of how lake sediments
record environmental changes in the past. Although scientists have previously
used tools to reconstruct past environmental change such as the study of fossil
pollen or plankton, many lakes have sediment accumulations that contain no
fossils or other materials for reconstructing the ancient environment. For those
cases in particular, ACACIA will develop the study of clay minerals, many of
which chemically precipitate directly from lake water. We will sample from
outcrops and cores in the Olduvai Gorge, Tanzania, and the Olorgesailie Basin,
Kenya, which have well-dated volcanic ashes so we know the ages. From these lake
sediment samples we will separate out particles that are smaller than 1/1000th
of a millimeter, analyze their chemistry, and use electron microscopes to take
pictures and analyze them. Based on those analyses, we will be able to infer
when these ancient lakes contained fresh versus saline water, which is a strong
indicator of when climate was humid versus arid in East Africa. Combined with
other knowledge of environmental change in East Africa, this will give us
important clues as to how tropical environments respond to global climate
change, how African ecosystems have changed over the past few million years, and
how the environments of early human evolution changed through time. This will
also give us great insight into how microscopic clay particles interact
chemically with lake water, which is important to the environments of lakes
worldwide. ACACIA will support several undergraduate and graduate students,
build international collaborations with Canadian, Spanish, Tanzanian, and Kenyan
institutions, and conduct outreach to a Tanzanian elementary school with over
1000 students and few resources.