* 1349486
* Quantifying total volatile budgets of explosive volcanic eruptions:   An experimental investigation of silicic peralkaline magma from Paektu volcano
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2016
* Kayla Iacovino, Iacovino, Kayla D
* Fellowship Award
* Lina Patino
* 05/31/2016
* USD 174,000.00

Dr. Kayla Iacovino has been awarded an NSF Earth Sciences Postdoctoral
Fellowship to carry out a research and outreach plan at the US Geological Survey
- Menlo Park, California. Results of this research will provide a model for
quantifying the amount and composition of gasses prior to volcanic eruptions,
improving the ability to accurately predict volcanic processes. Magmatic
volatile species (H2O, CO2, S species, F, and Cl) power explosive eruptions and
influence the chemical evolution of magma. Once emitted, these volcanic gases
can substantially alter atmospheric chemistry, climate, and ecology. The
investigation will be based on geochemical and petrological data from the
Millennium Eruption of Paektu volcano, located on the North Korea-China border.
For outreach activities, Dr. Iacovino will create a series of educational videos
targeted at young women by highlighting her own research and showcasing female-
led research projects at the US Geological Survey.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite
being one of the largest volcanic eruptions in human history, with ash deposits
reaching as far east as Japan, the Millennium Eruption of Paektu volcano is very
poorly studied in large part due to its location in a geopolitically complex
region. In 2002-2005, signs of volcanic unrest at Paektu caught the attention of
local and regional officials, prompting the Mt. Paektu Geoscientific Experiment
(MPGE), a collaborative international effort between the US, UK, China, and
North Korea. In collaboration with the MPGE, Dr. Iacovino's research will
investigate the gas budget of the Millennium Eruption and will test the
hypothesis that magma bodies that feed voluminous, highly explosive eruptions
widely contain a pre-eruptive vapor phase at weight percent concentration
levels. Detailed measurements of pumice and lava chemistries will be carried out
using electron microprobe, Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy, and ion
microprobe techniques. The results of these measurements will be used to
construct experiments aimed at reproducing the pressure-temperature-chemical
conditions that existed beneath Paektu volcano prior to the Millennium Eruption.