* 1349811
* Noble Gases, Lower Mantle Structures, and the Origin of Ocean Island Basalts
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Curtis Williams, Williams                Curtis         D
* Fellowship Award
* Luciana Astiz
* 08/31/2016
* USD 174,000.00

Dr. Curtis Williams has been awarded an NSF EAR Postdoctoral fellowship to carry
out a research and broadening participation plan at the University of California
- Davis. The investigator will determine noble gas systematics and develop
models of mantle convection to better constrain the formation, location, and
preservation of the source region for mantle plumes. Ocean island basalts (OIBs)
represent the surface manifestation of plumes that originate in the lower
mantle; as such, OIBs provide valuable information regarding chemical structure
and dynamics of Earth's lower mantle. The study of noble gases in OIBs is
crucial to the understanding of the chemical composition and structure of
Earth's lower mantle, the understanding of Earth's accretion, its subsequent
differentiation and degassing, and the formation of the atmosphere. Dr. Williams
will contribute to the training of the next generation of Earth scientists by
being a role model and engaging students from under-represented groups.

This investigation will use noble gas systematics of OIBs to: [1] constrain the
source region of the primitive noble gases in the lower mantle; [2] document the
heavy noble gas signature of enriched mantle components and understand the
genetic relationship between the different components as determined from the
noble gases; [3] use dynamic models of mantle convection to understand the
preservation of chemical heterogeneities and whether the degree of entrainment
of a dense basal layer in the lower mantle is consistent with geochemical
observations in mantle plumes.