* 1349607
* How Development and Behavior Interact to Change Skull Form:  Exploring and Sharing Evolutionary Insights from the Fossil Record of Cetaceans (Whales, Dolphins, and Porpoises)
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2018
* Jonathan Geisler, New York Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Dena Smith
* 03/31/2018
* USD 220,180.00

How Development and Behavior Interact to Change Skull Form: Exploring and
Sharing Evolutionary Insights from the Fossil Record of Cetaceans (Whales,
Dolphins, and Porpoises)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By &lt;br/&gt;Jonathan H.
Geisler&lt;br/&gt;New York Institute of Technology&lt;br/&gt;NSF
EAR-1349607&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Extant cetaceans (whales, dolphins, and
porpoises) display an extraordinary diversity of skull shapes, yet there is wide
anatomical gap between the skulls of cetaceans and those of other mammals.
Fortunately the fossil record of cetaceans bridges much of this anatomical gap,
making it one of the best documented, but least appreciated, examples of large-
scale evolutionary change. In this project we will explore how the cetacean
skull evolved and test whether its shape was influenced by changes in brain
size, feeding behavior, or the advent of echolocation. To accomplish these aims
we will apply a wide array of technology to more than 400 skulls of recent and
fossil species, including a laser scanner to generate 3D digital computer models
of skulls, X-ray computed tomography (CT scans) to probe inside fossil skulls,
and sophisticated computer applications that can analyze the data we collect in
the context of evolutionary relationships. We will also formally name four new
species of 30 million year old fossil whales that document key stages in the
cetacean evolution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our project will use several
strategies to share and disseminate our discoveries. The new fossil species we
name will be displayed at the College of Charleston Natural History Museum, and
3D printed models of their inner ears and brains (developed from CT scans) will
be displayed at that museum as well as at the Georgia Southern Museum. In both
places these objects and specimens will be integrated into exhibits that
describe the remarkable history of whale and dolphin evolution. A wider audience
will learn of our discoveries through an updated website on cetacean evolution.
In all stages of our project, we will involve students in the act of scientific
investigation, thus training future scientists. Specifically we will engage
undergraduates at the College of Charleston and New York Institute of Technology
as well as medical students at the latter institution. A Postdoctoral Scholar is
part of the project team, and through this project, he/she will develop a
diverse skill set that should serve as a catalyst for a successful career in
science.