* 1349248
* CAREER:Quantitative Principles of Multi-Input Signaling in Eukaryotic Cells
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2019
* Michael Springer, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Devaki Bhaya
* 03/31/2019
* USD 505,215.00

Intellectual Merit: Cells are constantly bombarded with environmental signals.
Often these signals are in opposition; for example, one signal on its own might
lead to growth, another to death. When both signals are simultaneously present,
the cell needs to integrate two pieces of information to make a single decision.
Currently, there is little understanding of how the integration of multiple
inputs is achieved, but it is key to predicting the behavior of cells in complex
environments. For yeast, a well-known example of multiple signaling is that of
the presence of mixtures of the two sugars glucose and galactose. The textbook
description of the integration event is simple: glucose signaling dominates over
galactose signaling. This project will test a hypothesis challenging that
description - for a broad range of concentrations, the response is far more
complex, and involves a novel "ratio-sensor" mechanism. The mechanism would make
it possible for the cell to opt for "the best of both" rather than being limited
to "all or none". Establishing the existence of such flexibility in yeast
responsiveness to sugar mixtures has far-reaching implications, in that it may
extend to any number of other trade-off situations between two conflicting
physiological or evolutionary objectives where the optimal decision would depend
on the relative levels of a plurality of signals.

Broader Impacts: Many institutions have highlighted the need to introduce
quantitative, theoretical and computational approaches into the life sciences
mainstream. In response to that need, an initiative has been undertaken to
develop an integrated quantitative curriculum for life scientists, beginning
with a quantitative "bootcamp". The bootcamp has been extremely well received
and materials have been used at other institutions around the world; within the
next year a series of modules derived from the bootcamp will be made available
via Harvard's online course offerings, HarvardX. The present project will
generate data and conceptual approaches that will be used as examples in the
bootcamp, and also in other curricula to be developed that will teach, hand-in-
hand, experimental design, visualization, and quantitative and analysis methods.