* 1349356
* CSBR: Natural History: Critical infrastructure and digitization upgrades for the Frost Entomological Museum (PSUC) at Penn State
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2017
* Istvan Miko, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 06/30/2017
* USD 402,489.00

The Frost Entomological Museum is an active research institution within the
Department of Entomology at Penn State's flagship campus in University Park. The
Museum houses a large collection of arthropods, estimated at almost 2 million
specimens, and a public exhibition and educational space that receives &gt;1,000
visitors per year. This project will unify the storage system onto a single
standard, and move specimens to storage cabinets that are more protective - that
is, built using archival materials and properly sealed from environmental
elements and museum pests. Specimens will be imaged and their collected event
data entered into a publically-accessible digital database. There will also be
substantial training and outreach components aimed at raising awareness of the
importance of insects. Individuals from a broad array of backgrounds - grade
school students, undergrads, grad students, and non-expert adults - will be
educated in museum practices and the importance of natural history collections.
Outreach activities include 'Bug Camp' for kids aged 8-14, meet-the-curator
events at the museum, graduate student training, summer internships for
undergraduates, public exhibits at the museum, and the 'Great Insect
Fair'.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The museum's holdings include one of the largest,
most diverse collections of sucking lice (Anoplura, which includes the medically
important lice) in the world, alongside renown collections of aphids (Hemiptera:
Aphididae, including economically important pests), dragonflies and damselflies
(Odonata), substantial collections of parasitic wasps (Hymenoptera, which
includes species used to control pestiferous insects), native pollinators
(including bees and butterflies), and Pennsylvania insects. Despite their
extensive use in research and substantial investment in this resource by the
University, the collection suffers from poor storage conditions, evident from an
abundance of inadequate specimen cases, and the absence of a modern, accessible
database. The activities proposed in this project are designed to remedy these
problems by: replacing all specimen cabinets with a purpose-built archival
system, increasing storage space, reorganizing the slide-mounted and ethanol-
preserved specimens into appropriate storage, and setting up a Web-accessible
specimen database. The data will be further disseminated through InvertNet and
iDigBio. The database avails Frost Museum data for public data mining and
fundamental research in areas such as epidemiology, invasive species biology,
global climate change, pollinator declines, and the evolutionary history of
insect lineages. More information can be found at the official Frost
Entomological Museum website: http://ento.psu.edu/facilities/frost.