* 1349110
* Lexical and sentence processing in novice L2 learners: Psycholinguistic and neurocognitive investigations
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2014,09/30/2021
* Ping Li, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 09/30/2021
* USD 523,509.00

Being able to speak more than one language is key to success in a wide range of
professional and academic fields. As conventional wisdom has assumed that
"younger is better" for second language learning, an increasing number of
children learn a second language (L2) at school, sometimes as early as
Kindergarten. However, we know remarkably little about the cognitive and neural
mechanisms underlying the initial stages of lexical and syntactic learning in a
second language classroom setting at school, or how the processes subserving the
acquisition and use of L2 knowledge change with increasing age. The currently
available neurocognitive evidence is mostly based on adult second language
learners, but because children are still developing their language and literacy
skills in their first language, children may differ in principled ways from
adults in how they integrate novel second language lexical and syntactic
knowledge into their first language system. With support from the National
Science Foundation, Dr. Janet van Hell and colleagues Dr. Ping Li and Dr. Darren
Tanner, will use behavioral and electrophysiological measures to longitudinally
study cognitive and neural mechanisms associated with the initial stages of
lexical and syntactic processing in novice classroom second language learners at
three ages: 5-6 years (Kindergarten), 11-12 years (6th grade), and young
adulthood. The research project will also lead to an understanding of how
individual differences among learners (i.e., variations in first and second
language proficiency, working memory, executive control functions, and
attitude/motivation) impact the rate and nature of early-stage second language
learning and lexical and syntactic processing. More generally, by studying
novice second language learners at three different ages the research will
provide insights into the neural plasticity of language learning.

Educators, parents, business professionals, and policymakers increasingly
acknowledge the importance of teaching foreign languages in US elementary,
middle, and high schools. This project will contribute to much needed knowledge
of how second language lexical and syntactic learning occurs at different ages,
and will provide further input for more effective classroom instruction and
instructional methods. Because the research team trains many female students,
often from an ethnically diverse student population, the project contributes to
enhancing diversity in the field of neuroscience and the planned outreach
activities in the school will promote involvement by underrepresented
populations in scientific inquiry.