* 1349946
* Student Travel Support for IEEE CNS 2013
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2014
* Yong Guan, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Thyagarajan Nandagopal
* 08/31/2014
* USD 14,000.00

Funds are requested to support students to attend the first IEEE Conference on
Communications and Network Security (CNS), which is sponsored by IEEE ComSoc and
will be held on October 14-16, 2013, in Washington DC, USA. IEEE CNS conference
is a spin-off of IEEE INFOCOM, and is positioned to be a core ComSoc conference
that serves as a premier forum for communications and network researchers,
practitioners, policy makers, and users to exchange ideas, techniques and tools,
raise awareness, and share experience related to security and privacy. It
provides a unique bridge for the communications and networking community and the
security community. The technical scope of this conference encompasses a large
number of areas in communications and network security which facilitates
gathering of prominent scientists from academia, governments and industries from
around the world to discuss the emerging and multidisciplinary frontiers of
networking security technology. The PI requests support from NSF (at the total
amount of $14,000) to help cover the expenses of approximately 15-20 US-based
graduate students. The selection process for the travel award will involve a
sub-committee of the CNS 2013 Executive Committee, chaired by the PI. Priority
will be given to students who will benefit from attending this conference, but
are unlikely to attend due to the unavailability of travel funding. The travel
grants will tend to benefit a wider demographic of graduate students, which will
help to broaden participation in the research area of communications and network
security.