* 1349074
* EAGER: Leveraging 3D structure estimates for photo collection based geo-localization and semantic indexing
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2015
* Jan-Michael Frahm, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 09/30/2015
* USD 282,521.00

This project advances the state of the art by utilizing geometric consistency as
a mid-level visual similarity cue used to develop a visual index of a geo-
located image dataset and use the attained data associations as a means to infer
semantic relationship among dataset elements. The characterization of the image
content in terms of the geometric and semantic elements observed in scene
provides a general framework for both identifying and managing data association
in large scale photo collections. The project develops such complementary data
abstractions into a single framework by focusing on two main research topics:
(1) Determining the geographic location where an image was taken by comparing it
against a large database of geo-located urban imagery - accordingly, the
challenge of balancing both search completeness and computational tractability
is brought to the forefront of research efforts; and&lt;br/&gt;(2) Incorporating
geometric structure estimates attained from large photo-collections or ground
reconnaissance video/photos as a means to identify and recognize semantically
meaningful elements within the reconstructed
3D-environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project leverages the use geometric
consistency as a visual data association primitive in order to introduce the
concept of structural and semantic indexing within the development internet
scale photo collection analysis systems. Moreover, by combining the
complementary data abstraction levels of geometrical structure and semantic
context the research team develops more efficient and robust data organization
framework with applicability well beyond the studied test application of urban
geo-localization.