* 1349072
* SusChEM:  Collaborative Research:  Biogenic Methanogenesis and Biodegradation of Organic Matter in Coals
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2016
* Simon Brassell, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* diane mcknight
* 07/31/2016
* USD 174,890.00

Broader significance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Natural gas, composed primarily of
methane, provides approximately a quarter of the total energy in the US and is
therefore a major cornerstone of the US economy. Coalbed methane (CBM) provided
about 9% of the total domestic natural gas production in 2010 and the U.S.
Energy Information Administration (USEIA) estimates that CBM will continue to be
an important part of the US energy portfolio through 2035 and in subsequent
years. Through recent work and observation of deep coal-bearing sedimentary
basins, it has become obvious that microbes are controlling the generation of
this methane, and yet surprisingly little is known about what controls these
microbes. There is growing public, regulatory, and industrial interest in
recovery of natural gas from unconventional sources because of the continued
need to develop alternative energy sources and the publicity associated with gas
recovery from such sources, especially hydraulic fracturing (fracking). CBM
production is estimated to remain constant through 2035, averaging 1.8 trillion
cubic feet (CF) per annum. Based on a current price of $4.57/MMBtu and the USEIA
2013 average heat content for natural gas (1.025 MMBtu/103 CF), CBM production
has a value of approximately $8.43 billion/year. The investigators on this
project propose to identify the component organisms in the communities that
generate CBM, and importantly, what influences their metabolic processes leading
to methane production. Armed with this knowledge it may be possible to increase
the biogenic production of CBM, and provide a significantly more stable and
profitable fuel resource. Enhancing current biogenic CBM production by even a
modest 0.1% would, based on the above annual production value, would have an
economic return of $8.43 million/year. This research is supported via the NSF
Sustainable Chemistry, Engineering, and Materials (SusChEM)
initiative.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research focuses on characterizing the genotypes and regulatory
networks that mediate CBM-associated microbial metabolism in the subsurface. It
seeks to build on our initial biogeochemical investigation of changes in
hydrocarbon composition that accompany microbial incubations with coal extracts
by elucidating the microbial community structure and functional regulation in
bioreactor enrichments under controlled laboratory incubations. Specifically, we
will determine the influence of low concentrations of terminal electron
acceptors on microbial community dynamics associated with increased organic
matter degradation and altered rates of methane production. We will describe the
genotypes of key components of each system, and determine how their relative
abundance shifts over time and across experimental manipulations of terminal
electron acceptor concentration. We will also map the transcription of their
genes in response to experimental conditions and time, to determine the
potential influence on the metabolism of the complex organic carbon in coals.
These data, in concert with the physic-chemical parameterization of each
bioreactor experiment will be combined to generate a compartmentalized metabolic
model of the microbial assemblage. This model will be a first of its kind,
laying the groundwork for modeling the metabolism of more complex systems.