* 1349345
* CSBR: Natural History Collections:  Building a central database and curation improvements for The McGuire Center for Lepidoptera at the Florida Museum of Natural History
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2014,04/30/2018
* Jacqueline Miller, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 04/30/2018
* USD 498,386.00

An award is made to the University of Florida to curate, digitize, and
consolidate specimens and data housed at the McGuire Center of Lepidoptera and
Biodiversity at the Florida Museum of Natural History (FLMNH). The McGuire
Center houses one of the world's largest collections of butterflies and moths,
including numerous scientifically important specimens. Although professional
collectors developed much of the collection, many specimens came from amateur
scientists and have not been properly curated or integrated into the collection.
The results of this project will increase the accessibility of specimen data,
making them available via the Internet to be utilized by a wide audience of
scientists, educators and students. Undertaking and completing this project
represents an important first step in reorganizing specimens and digitizing much
of the data representing Florida's native butterflies and related organisms.

Several outreach and educational activities using the collection's charismatic
holdings will be developed and will include minorities and groups
underrepresented in STEM programs. Existing programs at the FLMNH, such as the
Summer Junior Volunteer Program, will be leveraged and will include programs for
enthusiast groups, elementary school groups, and high school students.
Additionally, high school, undergraduate, and graduate students will be trained
in research and curatorial techniques using collections digitized in this
project. More information may be found at: http://www.flmnh.ufl.edu/mcguire/.