* 1349048
* CAREER: Deciphering Reductive Transformations of Heteroallenes at Bimetallic Platforms
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2014,05/31/2020
* STANISLAV GROYSMAN, Wayne State University
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 05/31/2020
* USD 541,503.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Catalysis program of the Chemistry
Division, Stanislav Groysman of Wayne State University will investigate
cooperative reductive transformations at bimetallic platforms. The research
conducted in this project is motivated by the need to develop new efficient
catalysts for carbon dioxide reduction. Reductive coupling of carbon dioxide
provides a cost-efficient pathway leading to the higher-chain organic chemicals.
Reductive splitting of carbon dioxide leads to the formation of fuels, carbon
monoxide and methanol. The goal of the current project is to determine the
factors controlling the nature of the reductive transformation of carbon
dioxide, and to develop new catalysts for its reduction. The broader impacts of
this program include the potential for the development of catalysts for the
transformation of carbon dioxide into organic chemicals and fuels, as well as
raising a new generation of scientists educated about the chemistry of small
molecules crucial to the fields of energy and the
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of the project is on the reductive
coupling and reductive splitting of carbon dioxide and related heteroallenes.
The goals are (1) to uncover key factors in the molecular chemistry of carbon
dioxide determining the fate of its reductive transformation and (2) to develop
new molecular catalysts for the reductive transformations of carbon dioxide.
These goals will be achieved via structure-reactivity studies on bimetallic
complexes featuring various geometric and electronic parameters (i. e. the
distance between the metals and the nature of the ancillary ligands). The
educational components of this program encompass the incorporation of a short
course on the chemistry of small molecule activation into the existing curricula
of undergraduate and graduate classes, conducting collaborative research with
local undergraduate institutions, and developing interest in chemistry among
high-school students in the area.