* 1349311
* Sustainability of coastal marshes under accelerated relative sea-level rise
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2014,12/31/2018
* Torbjorn Tornqvist, Tulane University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Yuretich
* 12/31/2018
* USD 132,783.00

Coastal marshes rank as some of the world's most valuable ecosystems in terms of
goods and services; their fate will have major consequences for coastal
fisheries, nutrient cycling, storm-surge protection, and related processes.
Coastal marshes are also rapidly degrading due to accelerated sea-level rise and
other human-induced stresses. Louisiana experiences some of the world's most
rapid rates of coastal wetland loss, constituting a bellwether for other coastal
regions around the nation. Multi-billion dollar coastal restoration projects are
currently being initiated in this area, and it is paramount that these
investments be guided by the best available scientific information. Considerable
effort has been expended to determine the resiliency of coastal environments in
the face of relative sea-level rise, but these studies have largely been limited
to observations over short (annual to decadal) timescales. This project will
fill this important gap through an analysis of the sedimentary deposits of the
Mississippi Delta over the past few thousand years.The project involves close
interaction with the Louisiana Coastal Protection and Restoration Agency within
the context of the Master Plan for a coast that in all likelihood can only be
partially sustained. Furthermore, the project will be used to enhance the
curriculum at a minority-serving New Orleans science and math high school.

The following two hypotheses will be tested: (1) coastal marshes in the
Mississippi Delta can keep pace with rates of relative sea-level rise up to
about 10 mm/yr; and (2) coastal marshes in the Mississippi Delta keep up with
relative sea-level rise to a significant extent by means of the accumulation of
organic matter. The methods will involve a reconstruction of sedimentary
environments in the Delta based upon data from hundreds of boreholes that have
been collected in previous years. The response of ancient marshes to
contemporary rates of relative sea-level rise of ~0.5 to 10 mm/yr (i.e., the
full range from the pre-industrial period to rates predicted for the end of the
21st century) will be determined from a direct comparison of the sedimentary
patterns with the rates. In order to apply the stratigraphic analysis to
present-day marsh dynamics, a compilation of measurements of modern marsh
surface-elevation changes and soil properties from over100 sites in coastal
Louisiana will be carried out. Collectively, this will enable a rigorous
comparison of marsh sustainability over a wide range of time scales.