* 1349776
* EAR-PF:   Quantifying the effects of flow transience on sediment transport
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Colin Phillips, Phillips                Colin          B
* Fellowship Award
* Luciana Astiz
* 08/31/2016
* USD 174,000.00

Dr. Colin Phillips has been awarded an NSF Earth Sciences Postdoctoral
Fellowship to carry out a research and educational outreach plan at the
University of Minnesota. He will investigate the process of gravel transport in
response to transient and intermittent flooding. Gravel rivers represent the
rate limiting step in the incision of mountains and also provide critical
habitat and breeding grounds to numerous aquatic species. These experiments will
form the basis for understanding how potential changes in climate and land use
will affect gravel streams. In addition these experiments will provide a
quantitative framework for stream managers regulating flow releases below dams
and stream restoration projects. The results from these experiments will be
turned into interactive online tools for stream restoration practitioners.
Furthermore, the knowledge gained from this project will be transferred to young
scientists through classes and experiments during the National Center for Earth
Surface Dynamics 2 (NCED2) Summer Institute, and to future young scientists by
collaborating with NCED2 REU students.

A large majority of our understanding of gravel river dynamics comes from flume
experiments under constant or slowly varying floods. Many of the theories
developed under steady flow provide reasonable predictions of the dynamics of
gravel rivers when averaged over numerous floods, however due to the stochastic
nature of sediment transport it remains unclear whether these predictions break
down due to flow unsteadiness or granular phenomena. Through the use of
laboratory experiments he will test the relative importance of flood shape and
sequence to determine how an unsteady flow drives sediment transport. This
project will compare the dynamics of gravel transport at the particle level
through the tracking of several populations of marked particles under a variety
of single and sequences of flows of varying magnitude and duration, but
equivalent impulse (time-integrated momentum above the threshold of particle
motion).