* 1349572
* EAR-PF Toward early detection and tracking of mass movements at volcanoes using seismic methods
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2014,06/30/2015
* Kate Allstadt, Allstadt                Kate           E
* Fellowship Award
* Lina Patino
* 06/30/2015
* USD 76,667.00

Dr. Kate Allstadt has been awarded an NSF Earth Sciences Postdoctoral Fellowship
to carry out a research and outreach plan at the U.S. Geological Survey Cascades
Volcano Observatory. This study will work towards developing new techniques and
improving existing near real-time systems to detect, locate, and estimate the
volume and speed of mass movements such as landslides and lahars, focusing on
well-instrumented and prodigious producers of these events: the Cascade and
Alaskan volcanoes. Mass wasting events such as rockslides, debris avalanches,
ice avalanches, and particularly lahars/debris flows pose significant hazards at
stratovolcanoes worldwide. However, unlike for eruptive activity, there is very
little infrastructure in place to detect and analyze mass wasting events in near
real-time, despite the hazard they pose and the availability of real-time
seismic data. The aim of this work is to fill this gap by advancing our
understanding of the physics of seismic wave generation by mass movements and
the best techniques for characterizing them by these waves. If events can be
detected quickly and reliably, there is time to warn downstream populations and
reduce losses. Furthermore, to foster an enthusiasm and understanding of natural
hazards and our dynamic planet in the next generation, the outreach component of
this project consists of a summer program developed in collaboration with the
Mount St. Helens Institute aimed at middle school girls, an age where interest
in science typically drops. The summer program will combine classroom and field
activities at the volcano to demonstrate how seismology and geophysics are used
to detect earthquakes and landslides, monitor volcanoes, and see inside the
earth - and how this is done in their backyard: the Cascade
volcanoes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study will combine analysis of seismic
recordings of historical mass movements with 3D numerical modeling of future
events and controlled laboratory experiments at the U.S. Geological Survey
debris flume. This combination of empirical, numerical and field experiments
will provide an ideal testing ground for improving our understanding of the
physics of how mass movements of a wide range of sizes generate seismic waves
and for improving existing methods and developing new detection and
characterization techniques. The ultimate goal is to apply the improved physical
understanding and techniques developed in this research to 1) work towards
improving and expanding near real-time systems using existing monitoring
networks and investigate strategic upgrades where existing networks are found
insufficient, and 2) characterize past and present landsliding activity at
Cascade and Alaskan volcanoes that can lead to a better understanding of the
surficial dynamics of these hazardous environments.