* 1349076
* Collaborative Research: OPUS: Beavers as Boreal Ecosystem Engineers
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2016
* John Pastor, University of Minnesota Duluth
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 03/31/2016
* USD 16,684.00

There is a critical need for ecologists and land managers to understand the
potential magnitude, persistence, and ecosystem services of beaver landscape
transformation. This OPUS proposal will integrate the results of four previous
NSF awards relating to beaver ecosystem alteration, bringing the findings
together into works that will analyze the dynamics of a beaver-altered landscape
at Voyageurs National Park. The 86-year record of beaver landscape occupation
and alteration documented from aerial photography and field work provides a
unique perspective of the ecosystem effects and sustainability of beaver
activity. The objective is to synthesize the vegetative, water, soil, and
biogeochemical alterations associated with beaver impoundments. The aims are to
produce a book based on the 37 articles that the researchers have published from
prior NSF-funded research, and a monograph about beaver pond/meadow transitions
in the landscape that combines datasets documenting beaver pond creation and
changes with recent updates about beaver ponds and populations commissioned by
the National Park Service. This project will also transfer the previously
collected datasets from their current in-house data management system to a
public open-format repository. The results of this project will inform other
scientists and managers about the sustainability and long-term ecosystem effects
of beaver activity that is still expanding in much of North America.
Undergraduate researchers will be recruited from the newly-formed South Dakota
State University chapter of SEEDS - Strategies for Ecology Education, Diversity
and Sustainability. This project will contribute to the training of a graduate
student who is researching beaver pond sustainability under separate funding.
The project will strengthen pedagogy as the researchers will use elements from
this OPUS synthesis in an Ecosystem Ecology class. The National Park Service
will publicize and help disseminate the resulting publications, and will also
ensure that scientific findings are incorporated into interpretive programs, web
and print media, wayside exhibits, and visitor centers to reach a wide and
diverse audience. Finally, the project will benefit society by contributing to
land management, both directly at Voyageurs National Park and indirectly at
locations throughout the continent where beaver populations are expanding.