* 1349355
* Workshop: Robot Planning in the Real World: Research Challenges and Opportunities
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2016
* Sven Koenig, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* jeffrey trinkle
* 07/31/2016
* USD 48,058.00

Planning is one of the key technologies in robotics. Yet, robots are deployed in
only a small number of niche areas, and most deployed robots have very minimal
planning capability. This workshop discusses how the field of robot planning
should progress to make robots deployable more widely, performing more novel
tasks and relying less on human supervision. It brings together researchers from
robotics, artificial intelligence, and related research disciplines to discuss
the state of the art in planning, its use in various robotic applications and
current research challenges. By studying planning research across different
applications, analyzing planning challenges as part of complete robot
architectures, and discussing the interaction of planning with other robot
modules (such as perception, control, and user interfaces), the workshop
participants will gain new insights into how planning can help robots become
more robust and efficient. The workshop consists of invited talks, breakout
sessions, panels and a final discussion aiming to converge on the roadmap for
the field of robot planning that will be summarized in a report. The report and
all presentations will be posted on the workshop website. The workshop is
expected to stimulate future research towards robot planning in the real world
and have strong potential to enable advances in all areas of robotics, from home
assistance to medicine to exploration to manufacturing.