* 1350078
* CAREER: Supervised Learning for Incomplete and Uncertain Data
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2017
* Alina Zare, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 04/30/2017
* USD 297,011.00

This CAREER project will advance the state of the art in supervised machine
learning to allow for incomplete, uncertain and unspecific label information.
Supervised machine learning algorithms produce desired outputs for given input
data by learning from example training data. The methods generally rely on
completely and accurately labeled training data to drive the learning algorithm.
However, many applications are plagued with labels that are incomplete,
uncertain, and unspecific (lack precision). Current techniques do not adequately
handle such data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For example, analysis of satellite
imagery to identify the content of each pixel is often conducted by coupling
unsupervised learning methods (that do not rely on labeled training data) with
manual exploration. This is time-consuming, error-prone, and expensive. Imagine,
instead, easy-to-use tools that could understand the content of each pixel in
satellite imagery. Extremely large amounts of road map data (for example from
Google Maps or OpenStreetMap) and social media information (for example geo-
tagged photographs, video clips, and social networking posts) are continually
collected and stored. These data could be used as sparsely-labeled training data
(with varying degrees of specificity and uncertainty) to guide understanding of
satellite imagery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although the data is available,
algorithms have yet to be developed to combine these data sources and identify
the content of pixels in satellite images. This work will advance this and other
potential applications of machine learning where incomplete, uncertain and
unspecific labels in training data challenge the development of effective
machine learning algorithms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project will
achieve these advances through the following research objectives:&lt;br/&gt;(1)
Investigate and develop a mathematical framework and associated algorithms for
Multiple Instance Function Learning that addresses linear and non-linear
classification and regression problems with varying levels and types of
sparsity, uncertainty, and specificity in training
labels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(2) Study and apply the proposed framework and
algorithms towards the fusion of satellite imagery, road map data and social
media for global scene understanding. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will
be conducted in conjunction with integrated education and outreach activities.
In particular, an interactive web application will be developed to provide an
avenue for introducing concepts from machine learning and remote sensing to the
public for dissemination and outreach. This interactive web application will
also be used, along with additional hands-on activities, to introduce high
school students to machine learning and remote sensing concepts during an annual
summer engineering camp held at the University of Missouri in Columbia, MO.
Paired with the web application will be a research website in which data, code,
publications and presentations will be shared with the research community.
Furthermore, undergraduate and graduate research assistants will be trained in
the areas of machine learning and remote sensing. Finally, relevant research
topics will be introduced in the PI's undergraduate and graduate courses.