* 1350909
* CAREER: Time-resolved Studies of the Oxygen Evolving Complex of Photosystem II
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2019
* Yulia Pushkar, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Pui Ho
* 07/31/2019
* USD 500,000.00

The Chemistry of Life Processes Program and the Molecular Biophysics Program are
funding Dr. Yulia Pushkar of Purdue University for research towards a detailed
mechanism for photosynthesis, the process by which plants produce substances
such as sugars from carbon dioxide, water and sunlight. The understanding of
this key life process can advance the development of alternative energy sources
through the design of better water-splitting catalysts that enable artificial
photosynthesis. The work employs various physical measurements to determine the
molecular details of this important process in real time and, as such, is at the
interface of physics, chemistry and the biological sciences. Consequently, the
broader impact of the research is also on several scientific areas including
bioinorganic chemistry and molecular biophysics. Additionally, the work has
consequences on science education at the high school level through the
involvement of the research team in the design of lesson modules about
photosynthesis that high school science teachers can adopt and use. Inquiry-
based educational modules that incorporate the results of the research are
developed for the "Physics of the Green Leaf" program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research is focused on the study of the light-induced function of the oxygen
evolving complex (OEC) in Photosystem II. The light-induced water splitting by
the Mn4Ca cluster of the oxygen evolving complex is a fundamental biological
process that sustains our biosphere. Laser pump X-ray probe time-resolved X-ray
emission and X-ray absorption spectroscopy are used to monitor changes in the
electronic structure of the OEC in real time during catalysis. Transient
intermediates in Photosystem II protein are trapped by ultra-fast freeze-
quenching and their structure is characterized using the extended X-ray
absorption fine structure (EXAFS) method. The research aims are to determine
aspects of both the dynamics of the change in electronic structure and the
geometry of the manganese cluster and, when combined with DFT calculations, to
provide details of the mechanism of catalytic water splitting.