* 1350064
* CAREER: Elucidating MicroRNA Function: What Are They Targeting?
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2019
* Glen Borchert, University of South Alabama
* Continuing Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 04/30/2019
* USD 595,675.00

INTELLECTUAL MERIT. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are noncoding RNAs widely believed to
function primarily in repressing the translation of protein coding messenger
RNAs (mRNAs) through complementary basepairing. While novel miRNA discovery has
led to the identification of over 24,000 of these ~20 nucleotide RNAs over the
last decade, progress in deciphering what genes individual miRNAs are regulating
has proven exceptionally challenging largely due to miRNAs requiring very little
sequence complementarity to the mRNAs they coordinate. In contrast to short
interfering RNAs (siRNAs) which depend upon almost perfect complementarity to
direct message degradation, miRNA target recognition and consequent repression
can be mediated through as few as 7 base pairs. This CAREER project will
characterize several novel caveats to accurate miRNA targeting including: 1) a
subset of miRNAs whose targets cannot be identified by examining genomic
sequence as they regulate edited RNAs in the transcriptome, 2) a subset of
miRNAs whose targets cannot be identified by screening mRNA sequences as these
miRNAs were originally formed from, and therefore likely regulate, other
noncoding RNAs, and 3) a subset of miRNAs initially formed from transposable
elements, which leads them to target mRNAs containing related transposable
element sequences. This research will fill in major gaps in our knowledge of
miRNA function and significantly clarify and potentially transform miRNA target
prediction through improving the parameters widely utilized by thousands of
miRNA research scientists currently using internet-based target prediction
programs to generate hypotheses and design experimental strategies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS. The proposed CAREER research activities
are intimately intertwined with an extensive educational framework incorporating
high school, undergraduate and graduate students. In the classroom, education
and research will be integrated through a novel computational genomics course,
recently developed by PI Borchert, which will directly utilize undergraduates to
execute the computational analyses outlined here. Utilizing a project-based
learning strategy, this course equips students with a novel informatics tool set
and teaches them how to work independently and in small groups to complete a
class-wide research analysis. Significantly, in its first two semesters, this
pilot course has generated 35 student authorships on peer-reviewed articles.
Additional impacts accompanying the adoption of this course include the
development of departmental infrastructure for research and education through
the enhancement of computer lab facilities, presentations at professional
meetings on incorporating research into the undergraduate classroom, and
disseminating class informatics training exercises and guidelines for
instructors on how to implement similar project based learning strategies on the
course website. In the laboratory, education and research will be integrated
through mentoring high school, undergraduate and graduate students in
hypothesis-driven research projects at the interface of biology and computer
science. While undergraduate and graduate researchers will be primarily charged
with executing the experimentation outlined here, the Borchert laboratory will
also offer summer internships to promising local high school students for the
duration of this award. While there are several outstanding high schools in the
Mobile area, there are also several struggling, predominately African-American
inner city schools that will be directly targeted for the recruitment of
interested, talented summer interns. Importantly, at least one position will be
reserved for a local minority student each summer helping to expose these
students to role models in the biological sciences. These efforts are intended
to increase successful completion of BS degrees, increase pursuit of graduate
education, and increase freshman enrollment in biology by members of
underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;