* 1350537
* CAREER: Overcoming Heterogeneity: Ultra-monodisperse Semiconducting Carbon with Parts per Million and Billion Polydispersity
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/2014,04/30/2020
* Michael Arnold, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 04/30/2020
* USD 575,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

The overarching objective of this project, supported by the Solid State and
Materials Chemistry program in the Division of Materials Research, is to uncover
and develop fundamentally new ways for realizing ultra-monodisperse
semiconducting single-walled carbon nanotubes. This work will explore novel
strategies in the post-synthetic separation and sorting of nanotubes using
nanotube-differentiating conjugated polymers, while at the same time implement
metrologies for quantifying monodispersity that are needed to advance the
differentiation and sorting. Certain classes of conjugated polymers such as
polyfluorenes are unusually effective semiconducting nanotube-discriminating
agents, for example discerning by electronic-type so powerfully that under the
proper conditions the conjugated polymers will not measurably disperse nanotubes
that are metallic. Currently, very little is known about these polymers and how
they interact with nanotubes. However, with a better understanding of the
materials chemistry of nanotube-polymer interactions, it should become possible
to realize nanotubes that that are so monodisperse that their bandgap
polydispersity can be counted in only parts per million and their electronic-
type polydispersity in parts per billion (whereas current nanotube
monodispersity is typically measured in parts per hundred). Focused research
will be pursued in 4 areas: (1) Exploration and implementation of metrology that
can quantify "impurity" nanotubes at vanishing concentrations; (2) Fundamental
experimentation designed to understand the materials chemistry and
thermodynamics of nanotube / differentiating polymer binding; (3) Investigation
of the role of defects on polymer-nanotube binding; and (4) Implementation of
single- and multi-step dispersion and post-dispersion differentiation.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

Since their discovery in 1991, carbon nanotubes have tantalized scientists and
the general public, as well, due to their unique structure and exceptional
properties. These materials promise to help overcome many of society's grand
challenges in electronics, energy, and medicine. However, this promise has not
yet been realized because of nanotubes' heterogeneity, which is both physical
and electronic. Recently, a promising class of polymers has been discovered that
can be used to select for specific types of carbon nanotubes and thereby
dramatically reduce their heterogeneity. This project will uncover fundamental
details regarding the materials chemistry of the interactions between nanotubes
and the polymers. The understanding that is gained will then be used to create
carbon nanotubes that are sufficiently ultra-monodisperse to enable applications
that have long been hyped but inhibited by heterogeneity. In conjunction with
the technical project, outreach will be conducted to inspire youth to enter
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) fields and increase
educational opportunities for under-represented groups. For example, a hands-on
STEM-based workshop for middle school students entitled "E3-Engineering, Energy,
and the Environment" will be created and implemented. The workshop will engage
students in materials science topics with an energy and environmental hook (such
as energy efficient or energy harvesting materials), teach creative problem-
solving, inspire the next-generation of scientists and engineers, and involve
undergraduate and graduate students in mentoring and outreach experiences.