* 1350786
* CAREER: Decision-induced Biases in Visual Percepts
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2019
* Alan Stocker, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Lawrence Gottlob
* 05/31/2019
* USD 513,382.00

Cognitive science has long established that human decision-making is often
flawed by undesirable biases. A fundamental question concerns the underlying
basis of such biases and in what types of situations they are most likely to
appear. Real-world situations often require humans to perform sequences of
decisions based on the same visual information (e.g., deciding whether a fruit
is an apple or an orange and then deciding whether to eat that fruit or the one
next to it). Very little is known about how different perceptual decisions
interact in such visual processing sequences, yet data from a few recent studies
suggest that a perceptual decision based on uncertain sensory evidence can
substantially bias a person's subsequent percept of this evidence. With support
from the National Science Foundation, Dr. Stocker will conduct and oversee
research that uses a combined approach of computational modeling and human
psychophysical experiments in order to understand how and why perceptual
decisions affect subsequent visual percepts. Specifically, the investigator aims
to test the hypothesis that the brain applies a decision strategy that ensures
self-consistency in the interpretation of sensory information across a sequence
of perceptual tasks. The proposed research will constitute a major step forward
in understanding perceptual decision making under more natural conditions (in
which decisions are not made independently). The results of the proposed
research also have the potential to provide a major theoretical advance in
linking perception and cognition, leading to a unifying understanding of human
decision making strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research has direct
applications for procedures that strongly rely on human experts to perform
visual analyses of evidence in their decision-making (e.g. forensic sciences,
medical sciences). A key feature of the research is its focus on the
computational modeling of brain functions. Dr. Stocker's goal is to promote a
rigid quantitative approach to the fields of psychology and behavioral
neuroscience. Toward this end, the modeling techniques developed for this
project will be directly incorporated in the investigator's graduate teaching.
Furthermore, the investigator will organize a yearly modeling workshop for
graduate students and postdoctoral fellows in psychology and neuroscience, and
will also maintain an online repository of publicly-available learning tools
relating to his modeling methods. Together, these efforts will help promote and
integrate computational modeling into the mainstream neuroscience and psychology
curricula.