* 1350189
* CAREER: microRNA Regulation of Spatial Gene Expression During Symbiotic Nodule Development
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2020
* Senthil Subramanian, South Dakota State University
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 07/31/2020
* USD 659,009.00

Global nitrogen needs are likely to be met through a combination of chemical
fertilizers and cultivation-induced biological nitrogen fixation (BNF). The
majority of cultivation-induced BNF occurs in symbiotic nodules of legumes such
as soybean. Understanding the development of symbiotic nodules and enhancing
biological nitrogen fixation would help reduce chemical fertilizer usage, and
provide a sustainable supply of clean water, fertile land and a benefiting
habitat for future generations, an immense benefit to the society. This project
will provide research training for three graduate students and multiple
undergraduate students in plant biology. Undergraduate and graduate exercises in
bioinformatics will be developed using data from the project and disseminated
for use by other educators. Results from the project will be disseminated
through a project website, public databases, and relevant biological
repositories. "Rhizodive", a statewide integrated research and training pipeline
involving high school students, teachers, and university students to examine
rhizobial diversity using trap legumes will be executed (with targeted
recruitment of schools with significant minority enrollment). These activities
will cultivate and promote scientific interest among the younger generation,
promote participation of minorities in STEM areas, help develop a competitive
STEM workforce, and enhance STEM curriculum and educators.

This project will utilize novel genomics-empowered approaches to discover
molecular signaling mechanisms that regulate legume nodule development. Based on
evidence from gene expression, microRNA sensor and suppression assays, one
emerging hypothesis is that microRNAs are one of the crucial determinants of the
development of different nodule zones. The project will test this hypothesis
utilizing a combination of genetic, molecular and micro-imaging approaches.
Specifically the results from the project will help identify early signaling
pathways that cause distinct development of different nodule zones. This
knowledge in combination with other advances in plant breeding and biotechnology
will enable the optimization of BNF (or possibly transfer it to non-legume
crops) thus helping to meet global N needs in a sustainable manner. This is
especially relevant in the context of a growing world population (expected to
reach 8-11 billion by 2050), reduction in cultivable area due to urbanization,
and the essential nature of nitrogen in maintaining plant productivity.