* 1350872
* CAREER:  Effect of the matrix on extinction risk: a large scale experiment at Wog Wog
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2014,09/30/2021
* Kendi Davies, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 09/30/2021
* USD 728,150.00

Global habitat loss accounts for most biodiversity loss. A critical consequence
of this loss is that the only remnants of many ecosystems are small fragments of
once continuous habitat, and so the fate of biodiversity, globally, depends on
the survival of species in fragments of habitat. Therefore, understanding the
fate of species in habitat fragments is imperative. Experimental studies of
extinction are extremely rare outside of the laboratory. Thus, long term and
large scale habitat fragmentation experiments provide real world understanding
of extinction that cannot be uncovered in any other way. The Wog Wog experiment
in southeastern Australia is the longest running, large scale experiment in
temperate forest, fragmented since 1987. The experiment has provided major
insights about which kinds of species are at greatest risk of extinction when
their habitat is fragmented. The site is composed of original native eucalypt
forest fragments now set within managed commercial pine plantation. These
commercial pines are scheduled to be harvested, creating an unprecedented
opportunity to discover, in an experimental setting, how extinction risk changes
when fragments are re-fragmented, something that occurs commonly in practice.
The researchers will determine how re-fragmentation impacts the extinction risk
of species on fragments through changes to the environment and the ecosystem
function of fragments.

Many university students will only take one science class, and often that class
is Introductory Biology. Dr. Davies co-teaches 1400 Introductory Biology
students every year and so has a great opportunity to inspire and increase STEM
participation. She will transform the teaching of her large undergraduate
biology class by focusing learning around her research at Wog Wog by: 1)
focusing on established learning goals, developing mini case studies around
video shot by graduate students in the field, and 2) bringing an undergraduate
into the field every year to collect habitat structure data through digital
photos that will be analysed by the whole class, and used by the PI to model
changes to the environment. Dr. Davies hypothesizes that having real-world,
real-time biology embedded in class will increase engagement and learning gains.