* 1350983
* CAREER: New Representations of Probability Distributions to Improve Machine Learning --- A Unified Kernel Embedding Framework for Distributions
* CSE,IIS
* 05/15/2014,04/30/2021
* Haesun Park, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Hwa
* 04/30/2021
* USD 499,721.00

Computational intelligence touches our lives daily. Web searches, weather
prediction, detecting financial fraud, medicine and education benefit from this
ubiquitous technology. Problems in computational intelligence such as image
classification and predicting properties of new materials produce copious
amounts of high-dimensional, complex data. Many algorithms in computational
intelligence rely on probability distributions, and such data can carry unusual
distributions that challenge traditional methods of modeling. (For example, they
are typically not textbook distributions such as the Gaussian.) In some
applications, the data input to the algorithms are themselves probability
distributions. Existing techniques are cannot both capture unusual distributions
and scale to millions of data points without stalling the computation. There is
a pressing need for a flexible, efficient framework for representing, learning,
and reasoning about datasets arising from these problems.

This project will address these challenges by developing a novel and unified
framework to represent and model, learn, and use probability distributions in
computational intelligence. To evaluate the utility of the new techniques, the
project will test them on difficult real-world problems in computer image
analysis, materials science, and flow cytometry (a biotechnology technique used
for cell counting, cell sorting, and protein engineering).

The project, an NSF CAREER award, will integrate the research results with
several education intiatives. New curricula will be designed for both
undergraduate and graduate students, with empahsis on students from under-
represented groups. A new online course will be created to make the results
accessible to massive online masters students. Finally, advanced high school
math teachers will be engaged to design problems related to the reserach for use
in a math competition for advanced high school students.

This project will (1) create a novel and unified nonparametric kernel framework
for distributional data and distributions with fine-grained statistical
properties, and (2) develop principled and scalable algorithms for nonparametric
analysis of big data. The unified kernel embedding framework will advance large
scale nonparametric data analysis significantly, and play an important
synergistic role in bridging together traditionally separate research areas in
data analysis, including kernel methods, graphical models, optimization,
nonparametric Bayesian methods, functional analysis and tensor data analysis. In
addition to advances in algorithmic methods, the applications to large-scale
image classification, flow cytometry, and materials property prediction have the
potential for transformative impact on society.