* 1350915
* CAREER: The Impact of Aneuploidy on Transcription: A Mechanistic Approach
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2014,01/31/2020
* Robin Dowell, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen DiFazio
* 01/31/2020
* USD 675,781.00

Aneuploidy, an abnormal chromosome copy number, is common in evolution and
nature. For the cell, there are both positive and negative effects of
aneuploidy. Aneuploidy alters transcription but the mechanisms driving these
changes are not understood. The powerful yeast model organism will be utilized
to ascertain the underlying molecular mechanism using a combination of chromatin
immunoprecipitation, next-generation sequencing, and computational analysis.
Understanding these mechanisms will provide tremendous insight into not only
aneuploidy but also transcriptional regulation in general. This project will
lead to a better understanding of the costs and benefits of aneuploidy.

Broader Impact A similar cross-disciplinary approach will be utilized to build
a summer undergraduate research program in synthetic biology and develop an
interactive fiction tool for teaching responsible conduct of research.
Tremendous leaps in scientific understanding often arise from individuals who
ignore traditional disciplinary boundaries to relentlessly pursue the question
at hand. In this proposal, the PI seeks to instill this philosophy into
generations of undergraduates through the development of a University of
Colorado internationally Genetically Engineered Machines (iGEM) team. This
synthetic biology competition brings students together for an intensive summer
to design and construct unique biological circuits. Additionally, the PI seeks
to bring the ante-disciplinary philosophy to teaching responsible conduct of
research by developing an interactive fiction game. This game will not only
train scientists in an engaging and interactive manner but also will enable
studies into how peer pressure influences ethical behavior. The long term impact
of creating honest, intelligent, and creative scientists is incalculable.