* 1350323
* CAREER: Large-scale Appearance Modeling
* CSE,IIS
* 01/15/2014,12/31/2019
* Pieter Peers, College of William and Mary
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 12/31/2019
* USD 473,479.00

The visual appearance of the world around us is the result of complex light
interactions between different surfaces and material properties that comprise a
scene. Despite staggering advances in data-driven appearance modeling, the
creation of accurate models of large environments remains an open problem. The
reliance of most current appearance modeling methods on active lighting to probe
different slices of a scene's appearance precludes their use in environments
where there is limited or no control over the incident ambient lighting.
Furthermore, to facilitate calibration, many appearance modeling techniques
estimate the appearance of a scene from a fixed vantage point, excluding scenes
too large to fit in a single view with sufficient detail. In this research, the
PI will investigate two novel appearance modeling paradigms designed expressly
for large-scale environments under uncontrolled ambient lighting: appearance-
from-motion and appearance-by-similarity. The former exploits relations between
observations from different viewpoints to infer the full reflectance behavior,
while the latter seeks to identify the best match from a library of pre-existing
appearance instances to a possibly under-constrained set of observations. To
support these two paradigms, a novel appearance model will be developed that
builds upon our intuitions regarding scene appearance. The work will focus on
two common types of input: community photo-collections and targeted video
sequences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This research will pave the way
towards practical techniques for in-situ appearance modeling of large-scale
environments, while stimulating new research in computer vision and in data-
driven appearance modeling in computer graphics by answering fundamental
questions as to whether we can model appearance from motion and/or by exploiting
similarity. The project will have far-reaching impact not only on computer
science but also on diverse fields ranging from metropolitan planning to
cultural heritage to entertainment. The ability to model existing environments
will be beneficial to various security and safety training programs (for
example, virtual fire drill simulations of existing buildings and sites could
help train and prepare firefighters and first responders). The emerging field of
virtual reality therapy will also benefit from this research, by making it
easier to create digital models of large-scale environments (so that, for
example, patients who have suffered a stroke can practice motor rehabilitation
skills in virtual reproductions of environments they encounter in their daily
lives, while autistic children can train to improve their social interactions in
virtual reproductions of places such as classrooms which they encounter in their
daily lives).