* 1350883
* CAREER: Systems for Transparency in Personal Devices and Services
* CSE,CNS
* 01/15/2014,12/31/2019
* Steven Ko, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 12/31/2019
* USD 498,419.00

In the current age of personal devices and online services, many "why" questions
people ask are left unanswered. Questions such as "why am I seeing this online
ad?", "is my application sending my contact information to somewhere else?", or
"why is my device not lasting even a day?" are often raised but left unanswered.

The underlying issue of answering these questions is transparency. If a system
is transparent, i.e., if a system provides detailed information that reveals its
inner working, then we can start answering the "why" questions. For example, if
an application or a platform reveals how the application behaves in regards to
all the data read from contacts, we should be able to answer "is my application
sending my contact information to somewhere else?".

To address the challenge of transparency, this project designs a suite of
techniques and tools that provide greater transparency into how applications and
platforms behave. Especially, this project focuses on three most pressing areas
in personal devices and online services that desire transparency?personal data
use, system behavior, and energy usage. For the transparency in personal data
use, this project designs techniques to track personal data use across front-end
smartphones and back-end data center systems. An automated instrumentation
framework for smartphone provenance management and a service for managing
provenance in data centers form the core of this functionality. For the
transparency in system behavior, this project designs a tracing framework for
the Android platform. Our design is tailored to the needs for mobile tracing
such as holistic tracing of both applications and the platform as well as
instrumentation customization for performance and energy. For the transparency
in energy usage, this project designs an activity-based energy usage monitoring
tool for personal devices. This tool raises the level of abstraction to user
activities, providing user-centric transparency for energy usage.

This project provides a unique opportunity that can advance the state-of-the-art
in multiple domains---applications for personal devices, data center systems,
personal device platforms, mobile program and platform instrumentation, and data
provenance management---with a focus on transparency. If successful, this
research will benefit users, developers, researchers, and providers of personal
devices and online services. The results will be disseminated through
publications, open-source software, and real deployment.