* 1350046
* CAREER:   Evolution and Dynamics of the Deep Waters in the Arctic Ocean
* GEO,OPP
* 06/15/2014,08/31/2019
* Mary-Louise Timmermans, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 08/31/2019
* USD 603,985.00

In stark contrast to the shallower regions of the Arctic Ocean, where
significant warming and freshening have been observed, the deepest waters are
isolated vertically by strong stratification and laterally by ocean ridges;
parts of the deep Arctic Ocean have been effectively inaccessible to new water
influxes for hundreds of years. As such, the properties of these water masses
can be used as valuable markers of past climate, while future changes to them
would be compelling signals of an Arctic climate in transition. This proposal
seeks to investigate the origins and history of the deepest waters through
analysis of existing data sets and idealized numerical modeling. Such
understanding is essential to understand how the deep waters of the Arctic Ocean
participate in climate change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will address
several interrelated observational and dynamical questions: What constrains the
evolution of heat and salt in the deep water? How is the deep water influenced
by the rest of the Arctic Ocean? What past ocean conditions and mechanisms
allowed for the formation of the deep water, and what climate shift may have
prompted an end to ventilation of the bottom waters? These aspects of the
climate system will be investigated by dynamical process studies constrained by
analyses of recent ocean measurements from moored instruments and icebreaker
surveys.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project comprises an integrated research,
education, and outreach program that implements a tiered mentoring approach to
provide experience in Arctic climate research for scholars from high school to
postdoctoral level. Education and outreach integrates with Yale University?s
well-established Pathways to Science infrastructure: high school students (over
half of whom are from traditionally underrepresented groups) will be introduced
to Arctic climate science through lectures and laboratory demonstrations, while
graduate students will receive teaching and mentoring experience. The project
generates opportunities for independent climate research appropriate to a range
of skillsets and interests, with high school students being recruited
concurrently with undergraduate students for summer research internships.
Through an international partnership with the University Centre in Svalbard
(UNIS), undergraduate and graduate students will be introduced to the Arctic
environment, learning fundamental concepts of the Arctic climate system through
lectures and participating in fieldwork. Students will deploy innovative Arctic
instrumentation in the fjords of Svalbard and will then process and interpret
the measurements. In collaboration with the Yale Climate and Energy Institute
(YCEI) and the International Arctic Science Committee, an international
workshop, motivated by the central theme of the proposed research, will bring
together researchers across a range of disciplines (including anthropologists,
paleoceanographers and contemporary climate scientists) to explore the important
relationships between culture and Arctic climate change over the past millennia.