* 1350647
* CAREER: Electrokinetic Flows and Electrochemical Dynamics in Concentrated Electrolytes and Ionic Liquids
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2019
* Aditya Khair, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* William Olbricht
* 04/30/2019
* USD 400,075.00

CAREER: Electrokinetic Flows and Electrochemical Dynamics in Concentrated
Electrolytes and Ionic Liquids&lt;br/&gt;PI: Khair,
Aditya&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Carnegie Mellon
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many liquid and particle systems in technology
and biology contain ions, and in some of these systems, the concentration of
ions is large. The theory that scientists and engineers use to predict the
dynamics of these systems is based on assumptions that the ions can be
considered to be point charges and that interactions among the ions are not
important. The equations based on this theory work well for dilute ion
concentrations, but they fail to predict interesting phenomena observed when the
concentration of ions is large. Systems containing high concentrations of ions
appear in many problems of technological and biological importance, including
water desalination, the development of batteries and super-capacitors, and
transfer of ions across cell membranes through ion channels. The goal of this
project is to develop an integrated research and teaching program to develop a
new model that scientists and engineers can use to describe the essential
features of electrically driven transport in concentrated systems. Understanding
such phenomena and training students to appreciate them will enhance
manufacturing capabilities and may lead to new technological developments such
as novel separation protocols for nanoparticles and biomolecules based on the
motion of charged objects. The multi-tiered educational plan for the project
includes outreach activities, undergraduate and graduate course design and
research, technical software development, and organization of scientific
meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a continuum framework
for electrically driven (electrokinetic) fluid flow and particle transport in
concentrated electrolytes and ionic liquids, via a combination of modeling,
computation, and experiment. Concentrated electrolytes and ionic liquids are
attractive materials for energy storage and conversion technologies, but
existing theoretical models fail to describe their dynamical response to applied
voltages. The central hypothesis of the project is that explicit ion-ion
interactions in concentrated systems, due to steric repulsion and electrostatic
correlations, result in their dynamics being radically different from dilute
solutions. Molecular simulations can quantify ion-ion interactions in
equilibrium systems; however, they are often too computationally expensive to
capture electrokinetic phenomena. Thus, there is a pressing need for a
continuum-level theory that encapsulates the essential features of
nonequilibrium transport in concentrated charge-carrying liquids in complex
geometries. A model will be developed for anomalous electrokinetic transport in
concentrated systems, including electrophoretic mobility reversals. The
electrostatic forces between particles in concentrated electrolytes and ionic
liquids will be quantified to predict suspension stability and flocculation in
these media. The electrochemical dynamics of ionic liquids will be analyzed.