* 1350258
* CAREER: Towards the Next Generation of Data-Driven Computational Brain Analytics
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2014,09/30/2016
* Shuiwang Ji, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 09/30/2016
* USD 502,072.00

Old Dominion University is awarded an Early Faculty Career Development grant to
support Dr Shuiwang Ji in research leading to a better understanding of the
brain. The brain is an enormously complex system, and the analysis of brain data
is thus an equally enormous challenge. Human brains contain billions of neurons
and trillions of synapses (junctions); and each of them is unique in their basic
biochemistry, functions, and dynamics. The brain is also a multi-level system
organized across different spatial scales, ranging from genes, synapses, and
cells to circuits, brain regions, and systems. Today, brain science is
experiencing rapid changes and is expected to achieve major advances in the near
future. Recent technological innovations are enabling scientists to capture the
gene expression patterns, connectivity, and neuronal activities at increasing
speed and resolution. This is generating a deluge of data that capture the brain
activities at different levels of organization. To attack the central challenges
of analyzing these new data, this project will develop a class of efficient,
integrative, multidimensional, predictive, and correlative techniques and use
them to analyze large-scale, high-resolution, and multi-modality sets of brain
data. Specifically, this project will develop analytics tools to predict the
cellular-resolution, brain-wide connectome ("wiring diagram") from genetic
transcriptional profiles. This analysis will elucidate the information pathway
from genes to connectivity and ultimately, to function. This project will also
integrate other brain dimensions by performing multidimensional network
correlative analytics. In addition, this project will address the relationship
between gene expression, cell types, and brain structures. The success of this
project will be a new class of efficient, robust analytics methods that are
flexible enough to be adapted for integrating, modeling, and mining current and
future brain data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this project will have an
immediate and strong impact on multiple disciplines, including brain data
analytics and computational neuroscience, biological image informatics, and big
data analytics. A future long term goal is to uncover basic underlying
differences between normal and impaired brain functions. The unified treatment
of brain data analytics will be readily transformable into new courses for
training next-generation computational biologists. The multidisciplinary nature
of this project provides unique opportunities for integrating its components
into existing curricula. Brain science has been shown to be a valuable resource
for inspiring scientific interests in K-12 students. Components of the project
will be integrated into an existing high-school student internship program,
thereby inspiring future science students. Underrepresented students will be
especially encouraged to participate throughout the project. The results of this
project will be disseminated in the form of peer-reviewed publications, open-
source software, tutorials, seminars, and workshops. All findings, publications,
software, and data will be made publicly available at the project website:
http://compbio.cs.odu.edu/CAREER/