* 1350870
* CAREER: Transforming data analysis via new algorithms for feature extraction
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2014,09/30/2016
* Luis Rademacher, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jack S. Snoeyink
* 09/30/2016
* USD 270,471.00

Analysis and exploration of data, including classification, inference, and
retrieval, are ubiquitous tasks in science and applied fields. Given any such
task, a fundamental paradigm is the extraction of features that are relevant. In
the design of algorithms for the analysis and exploration of data, feature
extraction techniques act as basic building blocks or primitives that can be
combined to model complex behavior. Some of the fundamental feature extraction
tools include Principal Component Analysis (PCA), Independent Component Analysis
(ICA), and half-space-based learning and classification. Data rarely satisfy the
precise assumptions of these models and feature extraction tools, and combining
these tools amplifies errors. This motivates the challenging task of designing
new algorithms that are robust against noise and that can be combined as
building blocks while keeping the error propagation under
control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will:&lt;br/&gt;(1) Raise ICA
from a very successful practical tool to an algorithmic primitive with strong
theoretical guarantees and applicability to a rich family of problems beyond
independence.&lt;br/&gt;(2) Find reasonable assumptions and algorithms that
allow efficient learning of intersections of half-spaces.&lt;br/&gt;(3)
Systematically study the following well-motivated refinement of PCA known as the
subset selection problem. This refinement aims to select relevant features among
the given features of the input data, unlike PCA, which creates new and possibly
artificial features.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New feature extraction algorithms
enhance the toolbox available to researchers in data-intensive fields such as
biology, signal processing and computer vision. They also enable improved data
analysis by practitioners in security, marketing, business and government
processes, and essentially any field that involves the analysis of feature-rich
data. The proposed work includes the implementation of the more practical
algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Education and outreach aspects of this project
include the mentoring of young researchers, the design of a new course for
graduate and undergraduate students incorporating some of the PI's research, and
the involvement of pre-college students and local communities into science and
research.