* 1350401
* CAREER: Development and Application of Multi-scale Modeling for Biomolecular Association
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2014,12/31/2020
* Chia-en Chang, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 12/31/2020
* USD 601,432.00

The objective of this project is to investigate complex interactions among
molecules, including proteins, enzymes and nanoparticles using computer
modeling. Understanding association processes will increase fundamental
understanding of protein-ligand binding and its applications. Along with
binding, molecule's kinetic behavior - how they move - also plays a crucial role
in understanding how rapidly they interact, undergo change, and bind with one
another. Traditional approaches in protein binding and enzymology typically
focus on a final chemical-protein structure, instead of the kinetic and binding
processes that precede that final stage. Yet, exploring binding processes
deepens our understanding of how molecules recognize binding partners, and will
guide molecular designs and engineering of enzymes for more efficient chemical
catalysis. Simulations have provided powerful tools to study molecular
associations. However, real molecular systems are quite complicated, and these
tools are usually either very time consuming or tend to over-simplify a
biological system. This project will combine multi-level coarse-grained and
atomistic simulations to efficiently and accurately model molecular associations
and kinetic enhancement of the enzymes and nanoparticle systems. Reliable and
efficient molecular simulations play an ever-increasing role in studying binding
kinetics. They provide unique insights into the mechanisms of biomolecular
activity, an in the integration and interpretation of experiments. In addition,
understanding binding kinetics contributes to the design of novel molecules and
engineering enzymes and enzyme complexes for more efficient chemical activity.
Successful completion of this research will improve understanding of protein-
ligand binding kinetics and assist the design of nanostructures, nanoparticles
and engineered enzymes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will train young
scientists, including graduate, undergraduate, and high school students.
Seminars and summer courses will be organized to train students from the local
colleges, high schools and UC Riverside. The outreach program will broaden
participation of underrepresented groups by supporting under-represented
minority students in science. Summer courses and seminars will introduce the
field of computational chemistry and provide hands-on help for students doing
research in the PI's laboratory. The results of this project will be integrated
into regular courses at UCR and in special courses/seminars. The methods
developed in the project will deepen understanding of protein-ligand recognition
and binding kinetics. These are important in molecular design; therefore, the
work will have practical benefits in various areas such as chemistry, biology,
engineering and environmental sciences.