* 1350949
* CAREER: Evolution and Engineering of Cellular Bet-hedging Devices
* BIO,MCB
* 12/15/2013,11/30/2018
* Ahmad Khalil, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 11/30/2018
* USD 760,000.00

The award, funded by the Systems and Synthetic Biology Program in the Division
of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences, addresses a classic problem in
evolutionary biology: understanding how organisms adapt in ever-changing
environments. Many organisms rely on bet-hedging strategies to deal with
unpredictable and fluctuating environments. This widespread biological trait
underlies diverse phenomena from antibiotic tolerance in bacteria to immune
diversity in mammals. For example, a microbial population can enhance its
fitness by allowing individual cells to stochastically transition among multiple
phenotypes. The resulting population diversity ensures that some cells are well-
adapted for an unforeseen environmental change. Uncovering these adaptive
switching mechanisms is key to understanding microbial evolution and life in
ever-changing environments. Recently, it was proposed that prions - originally
discovered as the cause of neurodegenerative diseases in mammals - are bet-
hedging elements in fungi, maintained to promote survival in fluctuating
environments. Prion proteins can switch between multiple conformational states.
Conversion to a prion state has been shown to generate new, heritable
phenotypes, which are beneficial in many conditions. The overarching goal of
this project is to test the prion bet-hedging hypothesis. According to theory,
phenotypic switching rates of bet-hedging elements evolve to be in tune with the
rate of environmental fluctuations. A central focus of the project will be to
test these predictions by studying prion switching in prescribed, fluctuating
environmental selection. A second focus will be to use synthetic biology
approaches to de novo engineer prion bet-hedging devices, thereby exploring how
adaptive properties might be encoded in these elements. These studies will
require the development of new genetic tools, as well as innovative
technologies, such as microfluidic platforms, for simulating complex
environments and studying cells in ways that are beyond the capabilities of
traditional biological experimentation. This work will have broad implications
for our basic understanding of evolution, development, and cellular systems. The
project will also shed light on the diverse roles of prions, unique elements
that are emerging to be common in the microbial world. Finally, the proposed
work will have a transformative impact on synthetic biology, enabling new
schemes for rationally engineering a wide array of cellular functions.

The focus on multidisciplinary approaches, both experimental and theoretical,
will provide exciting opportunities for students of all levels to contribute to
this largely unexplored, but significant, area of biology. A broad goal of the
project is to inspire and train students from K-12 to graduate school to think
conceptually about how quantitative, interdisciplinary, and engineering
approaches can help in understanding life. Among the specific activities to be
pursued, K-12 education will be impacted by developing a 'systems & synthetic
biology bootcamp' for Boston University's Summer Challenge, a residential summer
program for high school students. The hands-on activities developed will be
translated to a broad high school audience via the Inspiration Ambassadors
Program. At the undergraduate level, iGEM activities will be expanded and
several undergraduates per year will be mentored via the project. At the
graduate level, a new integrated course on quantitative systems biology will be
developed. Finally, the project will promote exciting technological developments
for miniaturizing and automating biological experimentation within lab-on-a-chip
systems. Infrastructure for making device designs and operating software freely-
available will be implemented in order to make the technology widely accessible
and allow students the opportunity to readily prototype ideas.