* 1350571
* CAREER: Do anemonefish exploit anemone sensory mechanisms to evade attack by their hosts?
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2014,02/28/2021
* Robert Drew, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 02/28/2021
* USD 849,863.00

The relationship between anemonefish (clownfish) and sea anemones is one of the
most widely recognized examples of symbiosis. A defining characteristic enabling
this interaction is that the fish can swim unharmed among the stinging tentacles
of the sea anemone. Despite over 50 years of research, the physiological
adaptations enabling this interaction remain a mystery. What is known is that
the protection involves the mucous coat of the fish and that sea anemones detect
prey by sensing sugar chains that are attached to proteins through a process
called glycosylation. The current study will investigate this question from two
angles. First, to identify potential physiological mechanisms protecting the
fish, mucous glycosylation patterns will be compared between non-symbiotic fish
species and several species that have independently evolved interactions with
sea anemones. The researchers will then test the effects of these glycosylation
patterns on stinging responses of sea anemones. Second, the researchers will
investigate the ability of anemonefish to gain protection from sea anemones that
are initially hostile. High-throughput methods will compare naive and
associating anemonefish to determine if they regulate gene expression, protein
expression, or mucous glycosylation during acclimation to a sea anemone. This
project also integrates the above research goals with education and outreach
approaches tailored to UMass Dartmouth and the surrounding community. UMass
Dartmouth is a predominantly undergraduate-serving institution, and over 50% of
its undergraduates are first generation college students. An open-ended
classroom research experience is being developed to reinforce genetics concepts
taught in lecture through molecular laboratory investigations of genes related
to the anemonefish-sea anemone symbiosis. In addition, three graduate students
and ten undergraduate researchers will be trained on the project. Finally, the
researchers are partnering with the New Bedford Ocean Explorium to develop
education opportunities and teacher training workshops to enhance regional K-12
science education.