* 1350911
* CAREER: Rational Design of Novel Electrocatalyst with Enhanced Properties
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2019
* Feng Jiao, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 06/30/2019
* USD 412,000.00

Title: Rational Design of Carbon Dioxide Reduction Electrocatalysts with
Enhanced Properties&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Reuse of carbon dioxide emissions from
fossil fuel utilization is beneficial for human society. In the past decade,
researchers have extensively studied a wide range of catalysts with activity to
convert carbon dioxide into useful chemicals in an efficient and selective way.
Copper is the most widely used electrocatalyst for carbon dioxide reduction,
because of its abundance and unique capability to produce hydrocarbons. However,
two unsolved major drawbacks of copper catalysts are the poor selectivity and
large overpotential. In order to address these challenges, a highly integrated
approach is proposed by CAREER award winner Feng Jiao at the University of
Delaware to explore bimetallic catalysts as potential candidates. The proposed
program combines computational modeling, experimental assessment, and advanced
characterization methods, which will greatly advance the fundamental
understanding of carbon dioxide reduction on the surface of bimetallic
catalysts. The knowledge generated in the proposed research will be utilized to
develop efficient liquid transportation fuel production systems using renewable
energy and some of the carbon dioxide emitted from various combustion sources.
Additionally, the proposed program will broaden the participation of the
underrepresented groups, especially African American students, and inspire the
young generation to develop a long-term interest in STEM
subjects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this CAREER proposal is to establish
an integrated research platform for the development of novel copper-based
bimetallic carbon dioxide reduction electrocatalysts with enhanced efficiency
and selectivity. The proposed research program consists of three major tasks:
first-principles modeling of carbon dioxide electroreduction on ideal bimetallic
catalysts, experimental investigation of the kinetics on prototype bimetallic
systems, and advanced in-situ structural characterization methods. A systematic
study of the reactivity on various copper-based bimetallic surfaces will be
performed using first-principle methods. The outcome will provide guidance for
designing more active and selective bimetallic electrocatalysts. In parallel,
efforts will be devoted to the synthesis of copper-based bimetallic thin films,
the investigation of carbon dioxide electroreduction kinetics, and the
assessment of model predictions. The combination of first-principle calculations
and experimental efforts will lead to fundamental insights and development of
the structure-reactivity correlation in copper-based bimetallic electrocatalysts
for carbon dioxide reduction. Additionally, in-situ structural diagnostic tools
will be developed through collaborations with scientists in the national
laboratories. The tools will enable the monitoring of catalytic reactions at
molecular level under realistic conditions in real time. The integration of
these pillars will set the foundations for the long-term career in heterogeneous
catalysis research for Dr. Jiao.