* 1350061
* CAREER: Using Analytics on Security Data to Understand Negative Innovations
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2021
* Samuel Ransbotham, Boston College
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 05/31/2021
* USD 401,213.00

The world increasingly relies on computer systems and associated software, yet
attackers continue to exploit vulnerabilities in this software to threaten
security in new and sophisticated ways. This research views exploitations of
software vulnerabilities as critical, but not unique, examples of innovations
that society would like to discourage? many other examples (e.g., biological
weapons, sports doping, terrorist devices, privacy intrusions) exist. Purely
technical panaceas are unlikely; instead, given inherent residual risk, society
needs to better understand how adversaries adopt technological innovation and
the efficacy of measures to stem their diffusion. Using large-scale data
analysis, this research builds on innovation diffusion theory to model how
exploitations of security vulnerabilities spread through attacker populations.
The study of the specific software security context (particularly regarding
disclosure and transparency) can clarify the complex interaction between attack
and countermeasure activity and help society benefit from technology while
reducing concomitant negative consequences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
integrates a cohesive set of empirical studies based on a massive dataset of
intrusion alerts augmented by the National Vulnerability Database and manual
data collection. It combines theory from economics, computer science, and
sociology with advances in analytical tools to build predictive models. While
researchers recognize that deeper understandings of attacks and countermeasures
are critical, they remain difficult problems. However, recent advances in
analytical techniques combined with the availability of large datasets present
an emerging opportunity to model and understand attacker behavior. The project
also promotes awareness of security through a range of activities (including
instructional modules, workshops, and course offerings), using the theoretical
insights from the research program to promote diffusion of measures that counter
security threats. Regardless of how the threat landscape continues to evolve,
rigorous methods for modeling attacker behavior and diffusing information will
remain crucial.