* 1350799
* CAREER: Measuring Search Engines' Ability to Help Users Complete Tasks
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2019
* Benjamin Carterette, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 05/31/2019
* USD 550,000.00

The purpose of this project is to improve search systems' ability to help users
complete tasks. The usefulness of any search engine ultimately depends on how
good it is at aiding its users. The systems and the tasks they are used for can
be very complicated; small changes in a system's implementation or a task's
execution can have major effects on the usefulness of the system, especially
over a long lifespan of use by a large base of people. The traditional approach
to understanding utility involves the use of test collections, which consist of
a collection of documents to be searched, unchanging information needs, and
human judgments of the relevance of documents to needs; these components are put
into a simple batch process that measures search effectiveness and tests simple
statistical hypotheses. While this approach is useful, it often fails to capture
variability present in users and tasks: different users often interact with the
same system in very different ways, meaning a system that is useful for one user
or one task may not be useful for another user or task. Therefore, this project
focuses on developing new methods for understanding, estimating, and improving
the usefulness of information retrieval (IR) systems that take variability into
consideration. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The methods investigated in this project
are designed to model user interactions with a system to complete a task,
including how users determine relevance in context, how they modify their
interaction with a system over time, and how different approaches by different
users affect the overall system usefulness. The project will produce new types
of test collections, evaluation measures, and statistical methods for batch-
style systems-based information retrieval evaluation for use by researchers and
practitioners in academia and industry. The work will demonstrate how to use
these both to improve system utility to a population of users as well as to pose
deeper hypotheses about causality in IR system development, thus leading to
improvements in IR technology in all domains. Research will be integrated with
educational activities for students as well as researchers and practitioners to
learn advanced experimental design and analysis. Educational efforts will
include tutorials and teaching courses on empirical methods in IR and computer
science, methods in use in the wider scientific community, and how the newly
developed methods relate to those. Results produced from this project can be
found on the project web site (http://ir.cis.udel.edu/IIS-1350799).