* 1350877
* CAREER: Design of Catalysts for Cooperative Small Molecule Activation
* MPS,CHE
* 03/15/2014,02/29/2020
* Nathaniel Szymczak, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 02/29/2020
* USD 650,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Catalysis program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Nathaniel Szymczak of The University of Michigan will
develop transition metal complexes capable of cooperative interactions with
metal-coordinated substrates for bond activation and functionalization
reactions. The work seeks to provide fundamental insights into how small
molecules, such as H2, can be activated with assistance from Lewis acid and base
sites in the secondary coordination sphere of a metal complex. The study targets
pincer-based metal-ligand scaffolds that feature pendent borane and amine sites.
These will be selected to confer a highly polarized secondary coordination
sphere environment that will bias the system toward heterolytic bond
activation/transfer reactions. The directed delivery of H-E (E=H, SiR3, BR2) is
a goal. The Educational Plan involves the development of an authentic research
design approach to teaching undergraduate lab courses. Hypothesis-driven
experimentation, which simulates a real-world research environment, will be
incorporated into both lower and upper level undergraduate laboratory courses.
This should better prepare students for careers in STEM fields. The broader
impacts of this work include potential societal benefits from the discovery of
low-energy chemical conversion strategies. These may ultimately be adapted to
earth-abundant metals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hydrogenation reactions are among
the widest used catalytic reactions, encompassing many industrial sectors,
including petrochemical, food, and pharmaceutical production. This project
focuses on the development of transition metal compounds that contain multiple
reactive sites in order to promote otherwise difficult hydrogenation reactions
of chemical feedstocks. By using a system with highly modular units, synthetic
catalysts are targeted that are ultimately scalable, promote highly specific
chemical reactions applicable to many fields, generate minimal waste, and
contain earth-abundant metals. The educational component will provide
interdisciplinary training for undergraduate and graduate students to prepare
them for careers in teaching, in industrial chemistry, at a national lab, or in
public policy.