* 1350625
* CAREER: Deciphering and Engineering Biological State Machines with Synthetic Biology
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2018
* Timothy Lu, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 12/31/2018
* USD 720,669.00

Biology is full of rich and complex systems where the interplay between past
events, present inputs, and genetics determines cellular behavior. For example,
stem cells are in a pluripotent "state" in which they can self-renew and also
transform into diverse cell types with distinct functions, such as skin, bone,
and blood cells, based on the timing and identities of regulatory signals. These
properties require cells to store memory and perform computations, similar to
modern computers. To understand such systems, the investigator proposes that
biological systems can be thought of as state machines, in which the identity
and function of a cell as well as transitions between these cell "states" are
determined by past events and present inputs. The research team will build
synthetic gene circuits that implement artificial biological state machines
along with algorithms to guide their design. The research team will experiment
on these circuits to quantify and gain insights into their behavior.

BROADER IMPACTS. To ensure broad impacts, the investigator will establish a new
course called Biological Circuit Engineering Laboratory (BioCEL) to educate
interdisciplinary scientists at the intersection of biology and engineering and
will provide these teaching materials openly to the public. Furthermore, the
investigator will engage high school, community college, and university students
with opportunities for hands-on research. The investigator will create
competitive games that teach the concepts used in this research to the general
public. Finally, the investigator will establish an online resource to share the
algorithms and circuits developed in this project to encourage their use by the
broader scientific community. The creation of new design strategies for
biological state machines is expected to shed insights into natural biological
systems and advance important basic science, biotechnology, and biosensing
applications.