* 1350573
* CAREER: A Visual Analysis Approach to Space-Time Data Exploration
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2020
* Ross Maciejewski, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 07/31/2020
* USD 466,764.00

From smart phones to fitness trackers to sensor enabled buildings, data is
currently being collected at an unprecedented rate. Now, more than ever, data
exists that can be used to gain insight into how policy decisions can impact our
daily lives. For example, one can imagine using data to help predict where crime
may occur next or inform decisions on police resource allocations or diet and
activity patterns could be used to provide recommendations for improving an
individual's overall health and well-being. Underlying all of this data are
measurements with respect to space and time. However, finding relationships
within datasets and accurately representing these relationships to inform policy
changes is a challenging problem. This research addresses fundamental questions
of how we can effectively explore such space-time data in order to enhance
knowledge discovery and dissemination. This research both extends traditional
visual representations and develops novel views for showing how correlations,
clusters and other various spatial dynamics change over time. Broader impacts of
the research program include: (1) enhanced infrastructure for research and
education in the form of new visual analytics algorithms and open source
software; (2) broad dissemination of visual analysis methods across various
domains including geography, urban planning, and public health; and (3) impacts
on society including the dissemination of novel tools and methods for improved
public health and safety. The primary educational goals of this CAREER project
are to increase students' access to crucial but highly unavailable visual
analytic technologies and to broaden participation in data science and
engineering. Toward those ends, the Visual Analytics Education program will
engage broad student populations (undergraduate and graduate) through innovative
curricula focusing on visual data analysis and the core technologies that drive
the research program (visual analytics tools). By focusing on those technologies
and their synergy in the research program, the education program directly
integrates the proposed research with education. The programs will benefit
multiple groups (researchers, patients, students, underrepresented groups) and
institutions (academia, industry, healthcare, education) both locally and
globally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For spatial data, the translation of such data
into a visual form allows users to quickly see patterns, explore summaries and
relate domain knowledge about underlying geographical phenomena that would not
be apparent in tabular form. However, several critical challenges arise when
visualizing and exploring these large spatiotemporal datasets. While, the
underlying geographical component of the data lends itself well to univariate
visualization in the form of traditional cartographic representations (e.g.,
choropleth, isopleth, dasymetric maps), as the data becomes multivariate,
cartographic representations become more complex. Multivariate color maps,
textures, small multiples and 3D views have been employed as means of increasing
the amount of information that can be conveyed when plotting spatial data to a
map. However, each of these methods has their own limitations. Multivariate
color maps and textures result in cognitive overload where much time is spent
trying to separate data elements in the visual channel. In 3D, occlusion and
clutter remain fundamental challenges for effective visual data understanding.
Utilizing small multiples can help in side-by-side comparison, but their
scalability is limited by the available screen space and the cognitive overhead
associated with pairwise comparisons. Instead of being confined to the original
spatiotemporal domain, this proposal seeks to both extend traditional visual
representations and develop novel views for showing how correlations, clusters
and other various spatial dynamics change over time. Underlying these novel
views is also the need for visual representations in which the manipulation of
the representation is directly tied to the underlying computational analytics.
Specifically, this research focuses on datasets from urban planning, geography,
public health and crime to address: (1) the extraction of semi-supervised
templates for spatial and temporal aggregation; (2) the development of
interaction techniques for visual steering and classification of spatiotemporal
data; (3) the integration of multiple families of anomaly detection algorithms
and information theoretic methods for semi-supervised anomaly detection, and;
(4) novel algorithms for the extraction of flow fields from spatiotemporal data.
Additional information can be found at the project website
(http://vader.lab.asu.edu/Space-TimeVA) including open source software, course
learning modules and podcasts.