* 1350837
* CAREER: Aiding Comprehension of Complex Software Dynamics to Support High-Quality Software Development
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2019
* James Jones, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 06/30/2019
* USD 499,010.00

This research is aimed at helping software developers understand, diagnose, and
fix bugs in software. A large class of bugs that are caused by logical
inconsistencies in the software code, i.e., incongruences between the
developers' expectation of how the program should behave and the way it actually
does. Such common logical inconsistencies typically require developer attention
and comprehension, and are not amenable to algorithmic location and repair. As
such, the goal of this research is to assist software developers performing
software maintenance and debugging tasks by facilitating their comprehension of
the software and its behavior, with the ultimate goal of equipping them to
produce higher quality software, more economically.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Viewing
the challenges of software maintenance and debugging as challenges of human
comprehension, the research aims to help understand where bugs reside in the
codebase, why the code behaves incorrectly, who are the developers best equipped
to understand and fix problems, and when were the changes made that introduced
bugs. These questions are addressed using a combination of (1) automated
recommendation systems to use software artifacts and analyses to provide
automated assistance to engineers; (2) discovery and exploration tools to enable
engineers to develop deeper comprehension of the automated recommendations;
novel experimental protocols and evaluations to determine sources of
comprehension challenges. The research combines ideas from software analysis and
human-computer interaction. Better understanding of software faults and how to
repair them will lead to higher quality software at reduced costs.