* 1350445
* CAREER:  High Speed Reactive Extrusion for Stabilized and Toughened Renewable Polymer Blends and Copolymers
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2019
* Margaret SobkowiczKline, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 12/31/2019
* USD 400,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program grant funds a study of
the processing behavior and life cycle of renewably-sourced plastics, and works
to inspire female students to proactively pursue engineering careers. High-speed
extrusion coupled with interfacial reaction has the potential to intimately
blend dissimilar polymers in order to access the entire range of combinatorial
properties. The research will characterize the effects of this novel process on
blend microstructure and correlate bulk properties to processing parameters.
Creation of a predictive model of the processing rheology will enable expansion
to other polymer blends, including recycled plastics. The research will also be
used as a catalyst for broadening participation of women in engineering by
bringing student-run demonstrations of career options to local vocational and
traditional high school programs. A multimedia informational public service
website and a module on climate change and sustainability for freshman courses
will demystify environmental sustainability and the plastics
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will probe the intersection of
renewable materials and cutting-edge processing strategies to discover new
techniques for reinforcement of biobased plastics. As a result of this research
the stability and properties of bio-based polymers will be modified to create
robust plastics that can be used in place of conventional fossil-derived
polymers in durable goods applications. The use of high shear also has the
potential to reduce energy consumption in extrusion processes. Structure-
properties-processing relationships will be determined for the polymer blends. A
substantial experiential learning effort will be launched to broaden
participation of women in engineering and to expand visibility of the
engineering profession at the critical high school level, including student
populations with less exposure to higher education options. These activities
will establish mentoring relationships and early positive experiences on several
levels of the educational pipeline, while improving science literacy and
communication.