* 1350772
* CAREER: Intraspecific variation in pathogen load in virus-infected birds: role of extrinsic and intrinsic factors
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2014,05/31/2021
* Jen Owen, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 05/31/2021
* USD 907,000.00

In the last century, there has been an unprecedented increase in the number of
emerging infectious diseases that pose significant risks to wild and domestic
animal and human populations. Moreover, greater than 60% of all human infectious
diseases have originated in animals, including West Nile virus and avian
influenza virus, for which birds serve as the sources. A prominent knowledge gap
in disease epidemiology is an understanding of the factors that influence
variation in infectiousness of individuals. This project has four main
objectives: (1) Test how variation in host body condition, through food
restriction, affects how a bird responds to West Nile virus, using American
robin (Turdus migratorius) as a focal species. (2) Use genome-wide technologies
to investigate how gene expression mediates variation in viral shedding using
low pathogenic avian influenza virus and two species of waterfowl, the mallard
(Anas platyrhynchos) and blue-winged teal (A. discors). (3) Develop simulation
models that are parameterized with the data collected in experiments to
investigate the effects of individual variation on pathogen dynamics at the
population level. (4) Adapt the models to allow college, non-STEM students in
general sciences to learn about disease dynamics. Through a user-friendly
computer interface students will be able to manipulate environmental stressors
associated with climate change and/or other anthropogenic disturbances, and then
track disease outcomes that are host and pathogen specific. Implementing a
computer simulation exercise that illustrates concepts taught throughout the
semester and allows students to answer relevant and thought-provoking questions
will improve a student's learning experience in the large class environment.
Overall this CAREER project will increase the understanding about the basis for
variation in pathogen load and also which individuals may shed the highest
pathogen loads (i.e. 'supershedders'), allowing development of more realistic
epidemiological models that lead to cost-effective, targeted prevention and
control strategies.