* 1350724
* CAREER: iProvenance: Integrating Data Provenance with Software Traceability
* CSE,OAC
* 02/01/2014,01/31/2019
* Hazeline Asuncion, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Alan Sussman
* 01/31/2019
* USD 645,097.00

Scientific research is increasingly data-driven -- hypotheses, simulations, and
models, which shape our understanding of the world, are formulated based on
observed data. In order to make valid inferences from these observations,
researchers are finding that they also need to understand data provenance, which
is the origin and context of formation of the data. To tackle the increasing
amounts of data, scientists rely on many different software programs (both
homegrown and commercial) to collect, process, and analyze data. While the
eScience community has made strides toward supporting data provenance,
understanding the software that manipulates the data is a key research area that
has largely been unexplored. Meanwhile, in software engineering, a concept
related to provenance known as software traceability plays a key role in
understanding source code. Traceability enables engineers to link source code to
various pieces of documentation to answer questions such as "Why is this code
used?" and "What tests were executed on the code?" Software traceability also
facilitates other development tasks, such as debugging, determining software
quality, and ascertaining the impact of a change. This CAREER Award project
focuses on the crucial interplay between data and software in eScience by using
a conceptual framework, iProvenance, that integrates data provenance with
software traceability and is grounded in a holistic examination of provenance
challenges. iProvenance provides the ability to model and capture software-
centric and data-centric information in tandem, create provenance methods that
holistically address challenges similar to those in software traceability, and
develop powerful yet accessible automated provenance software for scientists in
various domains. The approach is beneficial to every scientific field that
engages in eScience and data provenance. The results of the research also have
the potential to transform the management of provenance in industries with large
amounts of digital records, including electronic health records and clinical
trials. Finally, the educational activities interwoven with research activities
will not only equip future computer science professionals with knowledge in data
provenance techniques and methods, but these activities will also provide
curriculum and educational materials that can be used at other institutions.