* 1350957
* CAREER: Experimental & Computational Studies of Ancient Sm-based RNA Assemblies
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2014,09/30/2021
* Cameron Mura, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 09/30/2021
* USD 731,845.00

Intellectual Merit: The biological information that defines an organism is
stored in its genetic material (DNA), which must be converted into myriad
proteins to assemble a live, functioning cell. Many molecular steps are involved
in going from DNA to protein, with the biomolecule RNA playing a central role.
Indeed, RNA is now thought to be the ancestral molecule at the dawn of life, as
it can both store information (like DNA) and act as chemical catalyst (like
protein enzymes). A remarkable, evolutionarily conserved family of Sm proteins
plays key roles in RNA processing, in organisms ranging from humans to ancient
single-celled organisms from the Archaeal branch of life. Sm-mediated pathways
vary in scope from mRNA splicing in eukaryotes to RNA-regulated inter-cellular
communication networks in bacteria. In each of these pathways at least one key
step is mediated by a molecular assembly built upon Sm proteins. Given the
ubiquity of the Sm family in contemporary RNA biology, ancient Sm proteins may
have played a role in the pivotal transition from an ancestral RNA World to the
ribonucleoprotein (RNP) world of modern life. This NSF project focuses on Sm
systems from deep-branching archaeal and bacterial species. Leveraging both
experiment (biochemistry, proteomics, crystallography) and computation
(bioinformatics, simulations), the project will explore what ancient Sm-based
RNP complexes look like (structure), their assembly pathways and dynamical
behavior (function), and the interrelationships amongst the many Sm systems and
their RNA partners (evolution). The work will help discover how the Sm family
evolved into a pervasive scaffold for the construction of RNA-based molecular
machines. The project's long-term objective - to decipher the biochemical roles
of Sm proteins in the early evolution of RNA-associated molecular machines -
also will illuminate, in molecular detail, the potential roles of the ancient Sm
family in facilitating the transition from a primordial RNA world to our modern
RNP world.

Broader Impacts: Beyond its scientific impact, this project will educate and
train over a dozen under-graduate and graduate students in primary research.
Because the project overlaps several disciplines, including biology (RNA,
evolution), chemistry (crystallography, molecular simulations) and computer
science (bioinformatics), students will learn the biological sciences in a truly
integrated and interdisciplinary manner: The driving questions are biological,
while the tools and approaches are physical/quantitative. This same
multidisciplinary approach, uniting biology and computation, is the basis for
the project's central educational plan, dubbed UVaCompBio. The basic model of
the UVaCompBio project is that undergraduates from the biosciences and the
quantitative sciences (physics, chemistry, CS, etc.) will be paired into teams
that work together on active learning exercises and mini-projects over the
course of an academic term, and in several areas of computational biology
(physics- and informatics-based). This effort will (i) prepare students from the
biosciences for quantitative biology, and (ii) give undergraduates from the
quantitative sciences a working appreciation of the fascinating nature of
complex biological systems. That two-fold goal will, in turn, achieve the
ultimate goal of empowering students to be fearless learners who can work at the
interfaces between seemingly unrelated scientific disciplines. Thus, over the
course of the project period this educational initiative will train scores of
undergraduate students and, with an emphasis on quantitative biology and a
minority outreach component, will simultaneously and directly address these two
major goals of modern science education.