* 1350829
* CAREER: Mechanisms of Cellular Mechanotransduction at the Single Molecule Level
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2019
* Khalid Salaita, Emory University
* Continuing Grant
* Matthias Falk
* 04/30/2019
* USD 803,349.00

Intellectual Merit Mechanical forces regulate processes ranging from cell
division to cell migration, indicating that physical forces are critical to
most, if not all, living systems. The aim of this CAREER project is to
revolutionize the study of mechanotransduction by developing new methods to map
and manipulate molecular forces in living cells. Specifically, the research
project will focus on studying integrin-based focal adhesions as a test-bed
model for mechanotransduction. The investigators will employ a recently
developed fluorescence-based force sensor to image the mechanical tension
exerted across integrin receptors in real-time and in living cells. This
experimental platform will be used to dissect the earliest steps of chemical
recognition and integrin activation, thus probing the existence of integrin-
ligand bonds that strengthen under mechanical tension ("catch" bonds) in nascent
adhesions of spreading cells. These experiments will determine how mechanical
forces are transmitted to focal adhesions that ultimately influence cellular
functions. The proposed program will yield a quantitative description of
mechanoregulatory processes, thus providing new tools to broadly improve our
understanding of mechanotransduction.

Broader Impact The interface between physical and biological sciences is a field
rich with questions that are expected to excite many future generations of
scientists. Therefore, the educational goal of this program is to foster the
pipeline of highly trained scientists that will fulfill our nation's needs in
this area. Correspondingly, the PI will develop a dedicated biophysics course
and modern laboratory experiments that will expand multidisciplinary education.
To reach out to the general public and entice the coming generation of students,
the CAREER project will develop entertaining, informative, and interactive
animations illustrating fundamental concepts pertaining to mechanobiology.
Through targeted dissemination to high school teachers, YouTube, the CancerQuest
educational website (with over 140,000 Facebook fans), and iTunes U the PI will
share these animations with audiences ranging from the lay-person to pre-college
students. By leveraging the GK-12 and HHMI grant programs already in place at
Emory University, and by initiating an outreach program to Atlanta metro public
high schools, the project will attract young people to the physical and
biological sciences. This program represents an integrated effort that will
leverage existing resources to raise the scientific literacy of the general
public and attract students to the fertile multidisciplinary research programs
that span the areas of cell biology and biophysical chemistry.

This grant is funded jointly by the Cellular Dynamics Program in the Division of
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences and the Chemistry of Life Sciences program in
the Division of Chemistry.