* 1350145
* Career: Towards Secured and Efficient Energy-based Critical Infrastructure
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2021
* Wei Yu, Towson University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2021
* USD 436,453.00

The goal of this project is to establish a theoretical and empirical foundation
for secured and efficient energy resource management in the smart grid - a
typical energy-based cyber-physical system and the future critical energy
infrastructure for the nation. However, as a large distributed and complex
system, the smart grid inherently operates under the presence of various
uncertainties, which can be raised from natural disasters, malicious attacks,
distributed renewable energy resources, plug-in electrical vehicles, habits of
energy usage, and weather. These uncertainties make the development of a secured
and efficient energy resource management system challenging. To address this
challenging problem, a novel modeling framework and techniques to deal with
these uncertainties will be developed. Threats and their impact on both system
operations and end users will be studied and effective defensive schemes will be
developed. The outcomes of this project will have broader impacts on the higher
education system and national economy and will provide a scientific foundation
for designing a secured and efficient energy-based critical infrastructure.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The contributions of this project include: a theoretical
framework, techniques, and toolkits for smart grid research and education.
Specifically, a modeling framework for secured and efficient energy resource
management will be developed to quantify uncertainties from both the cyber and
physical power grids. Techniques based on statistical modeling, data mining,
forecasting, and others will be developed to manage energy resources
efficiently. Based on the developed framework, the space of attacks against
system operations and end users from key function modules, attack venue,
abilities of adversaries, and system knowledge will be studied systematically.
Based on the deep understanding of attacks, novel schemes to prevent, detect,
and attribute attacks will be developed. An integrated cyber and physical power
grid simulation tool and testbed will be developed to evaluate the proposed
modeling framework and techniques using realistic scenarios. This project will
integrate research, education, and outreach. The outcomes of the project will be
integrated into curriculum development and provide research and educational
opportunities for both graduate and undergraduate students, including
underrepresented minorities and CyberCorps: Scholarship for Service students.