* 1350339
* CAREER: Combining Crowdsourcing and Computational Creativity to Enable Narrative Generation for Education, Training, and Healthcare
* CSE,IIS
* 02/15/2014,01/31/2020
* Mark Riedl, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 01/31/2020
* USD 549,998.00

The proposed project explores the problem of automated narrative generation, the
creation of narratives by computer systems. The project introduces a
transformative new approach to narrative generation that blends human and
computational creativity with crowdsourcing. The system addresses fundamental
limitations of computer reliance on pre-coded domain knowledge in order to
generate a virtually unlimited variety of narratives and make it possible for
non-experts and non-programmers to create interactive narratives. The research
has four major components: (1) Develop artificial intelligence algorithms that
emulate human ability to create narratives. (2) Design and implement novel
models of human-computer creative collaboration. (3) Study fundamental questions
pertaining to human narrative learning and cognition. (4) Explore the role of
narrative generation in real-world domains: virtual agents that create rapport
with humans and intelligent creativity augmentation tools for creating and
sharing interactive experiences. The work will be piloted in two healthcare
systems: a virtual agent that creates rapport and fosters longitudinal
engagement with patients through autobiographical narratives; and intelligent
tools that allow caregivers to create social skill scenarios for young adults
with autism to practice. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Narratives are important because
they are a fundamental means by which humans organize, understand, and explain
the world. If computer systems could create effective narratives, they would be
better able to interact with people. The research will result in novel
algorithms, software, and a body of experimental knowledge that will enable the
building of interactive narrative systems that are practical, scalable, usable
by non-programmers, and can address societally important problems in education,
training, and healthcare interventions. The proposed approach to creativity
support will significantly lower the technical, artistic, and skill barriers to
creating interactive narrative systems, opening avenues for educators, trainers,
caregivers, and hobbyists to create and share interactive
experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project includes an educational plan to
develop a sustainable, annual summer hack-a-thon camp wherein high school
students work alongside K-12 teachers to create interactive narratives that
motivate and guide classroom inquiry based learning. The hack-a-thon aims to
provide minority and low socioeconomic high school students with hands-on
computing science experience and to produce a library of interactive inquiry-
based learning software systems for K-12 teachers.