* 1350554
* CAREER:  Modeling Stem Cell Decision-Making During Vascularized Bone Development
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2014,04/30/2019
* Warren Grayson, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 04/30/2019
* USD 400,000.00

1350554 &lt;br/&gt;Grayson, Warren L.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The supply of
vascularized bone grafts for the therapeutic regeneration of large, non-healing
bone defects remains a huge unmet clinical need affecting more than one million
people in the US every year. Tissue engineering solutions have the potential to
significantly advance currently available treatment methods. The data from this
study will be utilized to significantly improve approaches to engineer
functional vascularized bone grafts for regenerative medicine. Results from this
CAREER project will be integrated into the educational curricula taught by the
PI, providing students with the tools needed to perform cutting-edge research
and improve fundamental understanding of cell and developmental biology as it
pertains to tissue engineering. The educational benefit will be extended to
international students who will be exposed to world-class research environments
through intensive summer internships. The award will also benefit 'at-risk'
minority high school students through the establishment of a transformative
internship program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall objective of this CAREER
proposal is to develop a fundamental understanding of how the decision of stem
cells to commit to a particular lineage during tissue formation impacts the
structure and morphology of engineered tissue constructs. During vascularized
bone formation in cell culture models, mesenchymal stem cells differentiate into
pericytes (to stabilize the nascent vasculature) and osteoblasts (to deposit
mineral). This decision to become pericyte or osteoblasts varies as a function
of both space and time in culture. Both cell types are critical for the
formation and maintenance of the appropriate tissue organization yet it remains
unclear how the perivascular microenvironment impacts the lineage specification
of stem cells into either of these particular phenotypes. By combining tissue
engineering cell-culture models with molecular biology techniques it is possible
to explore the intricate cell-fate decisions that regulate complex tissue
formation. This proposal tests the hypothesis that regulating the
pericyte/osteoblast lineage commitment of mesenchymal stem cells as a function
of space (proximity to vascular structures) and time underlies the potential to
form integrated vascular networks and mineralized bone deposits. There are three
primary research objectives: (i) Determine the effect of cell composition and
growth factor delivery on the structure and organization of tissue engineered
vascularized bone. (ii) Evaluate effect of growth factor concentration and
spatial gradients on tissue structure. (iii) Investigate the role of pericyte
and osteoblast plasticity in mediating vascularized bone
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award by the
Biotechnology, Biochemical, and Biomass Engineering Program of the CBET Division
is co-funded by the Biomaterials Program of the Division of Materials Research
and by the Mathematical Biology Program of the Division of Mathematical
Sciences.