* 1350474
* CAREER: Phylogenetic tools for studying phenotypic diversification in the tree of life
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2020
* Liam Revell, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Continuing Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 03/31/2020
* USD 852,556.00

CAREER: Phylogenetic tools for studying phenotypic diversification in the tree
of life

The history of life unfolds through a single, enormous, tree of life. The twigs
are individual species (both living and extinct), while the limbs and branches
represent the long-passed ancestors of species that exist today. Considerable
effort has been dedicated to elucidating the coarse and fine structure of this
tree in many major plant, animal, fungi, and microbial groups over the past
fifty years. Phylogenetic comparative methods use these genealogical trees,
combined with trait data for species, to make statistically based inferences
about the nature of evolution over the geological time. Phylogenetic comparative
biology is a computer-intensive field, and this award will support research to
develop a new computational toolkit to address several of the biggest challenges
within this field. Specifically, this award supports the development of new
computer-based approaches for visualizing trait evolution on trees; new methods
to integrate tree estimation and comparative inference; and new approaches to
link micro-scale processes and macro-scale (phylogenetic) patterns on a tree.
All of these tools will serve the ultimate goal of better understanding the
process and history of life's evolution on Earth.

Phylogenetic comparative analyses have become central in evolutionary biology
over the past thirty years. This research will expand the methodological toolkit
of comparative biology in critical areas, including addressing some of the new
challenges of big data, and better linking micro- and macroevolution. This award
will also support the training of postdoctoral fellows and graduate students,
and the development of two different educational programs. The first is an
annual macroevolutionary methods workshop targeting students from Latin America.
The second is a workshop for young phylogeny-method developers. Both programs
will target students from groups traditionally underrepresented in the sciences.