* 1350914
* CAREER: Privacy-Guaranteed Distributed Interactions in Critical Infrastructure Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 01/15/2014,12/31/2019
* Lalitha Sankar, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 12/31/2019
* USD 463,000.00

Information sharing between operators (agents) in critical infrastructure
systems such as the Smart Grid is fundamental to reliable and sustained
operation. The contention, however, between sharing data for system stability
and reliability (utility) and withholding data for competitive advantage
(privacy) has stymied data sharing in such systems, sometimes with catastrophic
consequences. This motivates a data sharing framework that addresses the
competitive interests and information leakage concerns of agents and enables
timely and controlled information exchange.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
develops a foundational approach to privacy-guaranteed information sharing among
distributed self-interested agents in complex systems using information theory
and game theory. This multidisciplinary project focuses on four mutually related
challenges in multi-agent network abstractions of the Smart Grid: (1)
characterization of the fundamental limits of distributed interaction with
privacy constraints; (2) operational and practical significance of information-
theoretic privacy measures; (3) formalizing the cost of privacy and the role of
trust and repeated interactions for cooperation; and a direct application of
these results via (4) distributed algorithms and protocols for privacy-
guaranteed data sharing in the Smart Grid. The research has the broader
implication of enabling information sharing in a variety of complex networks
with strict privacy requirements including electronic healthcare and water
distribution systems, and also engenders academic and industry collaborations in
power systems. This research project incorporates carefully tailored outreach
efforts including privacy awareness for middle- and high-school students, and
active engagement of undergraduate and graduate students, especially females, in
research.