* 1350720
* CAREER: Illuminating the Impacts of Internet Censorship with Principled Network Measurements
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2019
* Phillipa Gill, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 05/31/2019
* USD 514,443.00

The Internet was not designed with information controls, such as censorship or
surveillance, in mind. However, its importance has led many nations to repurpose
Internet protocols (e.g., the Domain Name System (DNS) and Border Gateway
Protocol (BGP)), and network management products (e.g., Web proxies, traffic
shapers) for information control. This unintended use of networking technologies
can lead to unintended international impact of censorship, and raises many
ethical issues when network management products are exported to countries that
use them to violate human rights. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address these
challenges, this project: (1) develops a platform which enables repeatable
measurements of Internet censorship while mitigating risks to individuals
performing the measurements, (2) designs techniques to analyze data from the
platform to detect different types of censorship and even specific network
management products used for censorship, and (3) uses the platform to quantify
instances of national censorship which have unintended international impact on
the Internet. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The use of technology to restrict freedom of
speech and persecute dissidents around the globe is a human rights concern. This
project provides high fidelity technical data to inform policy discussions.
Further, the technical analysis provides insights into the global impacts of
national censorship on the Internet, and how proposed improvements to existing
protocols (e.g., DNSSEC, BGPSEC) can mitigate these issues.