* 1350312
* CAREER: Disorder, tRNA composition and energy transduction in the ribosome
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2019
* Paul Whitford, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 12/31/2019
* USD 956,688.00

The goal of this project, which is jointly supported by Molecular Biophysics in
the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences in the Directorate for
Biological Sciences and the Physics of Living Systems Program in the Division of
Physics in the Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate, is to employ
simulations to identify ways that biomolecular machines convert chemical energy
into mechanical work. In particular, this project seeks to reveal how disorder
is utilized to increase efficiency and accuracy in the cell. The molecular
system of interest is the ribosome, a large complex responsible for building
proteins. Within the ribosome, large-scale conformational rearrangements
facilitate the transfer of energy between chemical and mechanical steps. To
identify the molecular origins of these steps, this project will investigate the
dynamics of Elongation Factors, the molecules that serve as the ribosome's
"engine." By identifying the functional properties of these molecules, these
studies will reveal the physical principles that control biological
function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will have societal impacts, at both
the local and international level. This work will engage undergraduate students
from underrepresented groups and expose them to a diverse range of topics in the
life sciences and physical sciences. As members of the research team, these
students will be tightly integrated within the scientific community, having
opportunities to present their work at conferences and other public venues.
Additionally, the methods used in this project will be incorporated within the
undergraduate curriculum, which will instill an understanding of the connection
between basic science education and real-world research. This project will also
provide nationally-accessible training workshops in molecular modeling to the
broader scientific community. This will enable trainees to apply theoretical
approaches when designing more-precise experimental studies. Internationally,
this project will contribute to the growth of biophysics research abroad through
direct scientific collaborations with Brazil. Further, these collaborations will
enrich the scientific and cultural experience of students in the US by immersing
them in an international research environment. This will give them opportunities
to develop a global network of colleagues, which will help them become
internationally recognized scientific leaders.