* 1350623
* CAREER:Tailoring the nature of the active site of Ni electrocatalysts for electrochemical co-reduction of CO2 and H2O
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2021
* Eranda Nikolla, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 08/31/2021
* USD 447,584.00

CAREER: Design of Robust Heterogeneous Electrocatalysts for Conversion of CO2
and H2O to Syngas&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Extensive use of fossil fuels and
consequential high levels of CO2 emissions are major contemporary challenges.
Solutions to these challenges will require the development of ways to activate
reverse chemical pathways in which CO2 is converted back into high energy
molecules (i.e., CO and hydrocarbon fuels) using renewable energy sources, such
as solar and/or wind energy. These renewable energy sources are most
conveniently used as electricity. Many proposed strategies for dealing with CO2
from chemical processes attempt the conversion of CO2 back to hydrocarbons. The
conversion of CO2 and H2O to syngas (CO+H2) is one such process for which no
efficient approach currently exists. Syngas is a convenient feedstock for making
chemicals and fuels. The Principal Investigator Eranda Nikolla at Wayne State
University proposes to utilize a combination of experimental and theoretical
techniques to design robust electrocatalysts for the co-reduction of CO2 with
H2O to syngas using solid oxide electrochemical systems (SOECs). SOECs are
electrochemical systems that can facilitate the simultaneous co-reduction of CO2
with H2O to syngas with very high rates, due to the favorable reaction kinetics
at their high operating temperatures. The proposed research will have a broad
impact in advancing the field by providing a new fundamental methodology for
designing robust electrocatalysts for efficient generation of syngas from CO2
and H2O, thereby addressing nationally important issues in energy and climate
change. In addition, it will become a tool for (i) educating undergraduate WSU
engineering students from underrepresented groups, (ii) promoting STEM career
interest in K-12 students, through activities with local high schools, the
Michigan Science Center and the NSF-sponsored GoGirls program, and (iii)
training of graduate engineering students though research and course
development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While electrochemical co-reduction of CO2 and
H2O using SOECs offers a great deal of promise, the field is fairly unexplored.
One of the main challenges with this process is the need to operate at high
overall potential, due to activation overpotential losses (the difference
between the potential required to activate an electrochemical process and the
reversible potential) associated with the electrochemical reduction of CO2 and
H2O on conventional cathode electrocatalysts. In order to address this
challenge, the PI proposes to combine quantum chemical density functional theory
(DFT) calculations with experimental electro-kinetic studies to identify the
electrochemical steps that govern the overpotential losses associated with co-
reduction of CO2 and H2O on conventional electrocatalytic surfaces. The
objective is to utilize this knowledge to design improved electrocatalysts that
will minimize the overpotential losses of controlling steps in the co-reduction
process, thereby increasing the energy efficiency of the conversion process. The
proposed work will provide a transformative new methodology for the discovery of
robust and efficient electrocatalysts for conversion of CO2 and H2O to syngas.
Furthermore, it will build the foundation for the PIs long-term goals of
developing (i) a versatile research program, broadly aimed at discovering
mechanistic insights about electrochemical transformation in solid-state
electrochemical systems and translating this knowledge to ways to improve their
performance, and (ii) interdisciplinary educational and outreach programs with
the aim of advancing teaching, training and public awareness regarding energy
and environment.