* 1350710
* CAREER:   Method Development for High-Resolution Underway N2 Fixation Measurements
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2014,02/28/2021
* Nicolas Cassar, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 02/28/2021
* USD 790,179.00

In the oceans, the amount of organic nitrogen is in great part controlled by the
balance between two microbially-controlled pathways: Denitrification, the
reduction of nitrate to nitrogen gas, and nitrogen fixation, the reduction of
nitrogen gas to ammonium. Because the large spatial variability of nitrogen
fixation is difficult to resolve with current measurements, the development of
new methods for high resolution measurements is highly desirable. In order to
characterize the geographical distribution of oceanic nitrogen fixation rates
and ultimately yield better estimates of new nitrogen, researchers at Duke
University will develop a novel method for in situ measurements of nitrogen
fixation. By providing insights into the biogeography of oceanic nitrogen
fixation rates, this method and ensuing observations will fill a gap in the
current state of knowledge of the mechanisms governing the biogeochemistry of
new nitrogen in oceanic environments, and ultimately aid in the refinement of
oceanic ecosystem models for current and future
climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Through a partnership with the
Museum of Life and Science, the project will provide a platform to foster
climate and climate change literacy well beyond the duration of the proposed
work. In addition, Informal Science Education educators will participate in
research to further their scientific knowledge, and educate student researchers
on effective strategies to communicate science. Finally, the study will provide
opportunities for mentoring of undergraduate students, graduate student support,
and teaching material for undergraduate and graduate courses at Duke University.