* 1350499
* CAREER: DrCloud: Drill-Ready Cloud Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2020
* Haryadi Gunawi, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 04/30/2020
* USD 449,350.00

Cloud computing is pervasive, but cloud service outages still take place. This
proposal addresses how to ensure that failure recovery will work robustly in
many deployment scenarios. To address this important question, this project
proposes drill-ready cloud computing (DrCloud), a new dependability paradigm
that advocates cloud systems to routinely perform "failure drills" in real
deployments (i.e., deliberately schedule real failures rather than waiting for
unexpected real failures to happen). This practice can unearth in-production
recovery issues and prevent real outages. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will create five building blocks of drill-ready cloud computing: methodology,
safety, efficiency, usability, and generality. Specifically, these five sub-
projects will substantiate a new research methodology via a formal study of
hundreds of in-production recovery issues, devise mechanisms that guarantee
safety (no data loss and performance disruptions) analogous to a proper fire
drill preparation, develop techniques that maximize resource and monetary
efficiency of drill execution, design a specification language and its runtime
that simplifies drill usability, and finally boost drill generality beyond
failure drills (e.g., supporting software upgrade and configuration change
drills). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The DrCloud project will enrich decades of
research and literature in fault-tolerant computing. The project will also bring
many direct benefits to the society; users from many areas increasingly use
large-scale storage and computation services, depending on high availability and
predictability that drill-ready cloud computing will facilitate. The project
will also involve state-of-the-art scale-out cloud systems (Hadoop, Cassandra,
HBase, etc.). Adding drill-readiness to these systems will provide prototypes of
next-generation reliable systems.