* 1350035
* CSR: EAGER: Multi-physiological Signal Processing Architectures for Seizure Detection
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Tinoosh Mohsenin, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2016
* USD 99,804.00

The objective of this project is to overcome the limitations of sensor artifacts
(noise), false detection, and energy/power constraints by combining the analysis
of multiple physiological signals through specialized hardware which implements
a multi-layer classification technique comprised of a unique sequence of signal
processing and machine learning functions to distill time series data. The
hypothesis is that a hybrid architecture can leverage common operations and
communication patterns between DSP and machine learning to support these
computations more efficiently than traditional digital signal processors and
general purpose processors. This hypothesis is explored in the context of
wearable seizure detection, using traces of EEG and other physiological sensor
data obtained from the Epilepsy Center at University of Maryland Medical Center.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Success of this exploratory research could have a
significant impact for robust and efficient monitoring and use of continuous
multi-physiological data for patients. Just in the context of epilepsy, it could
enable seizure detection and caregiver alerts, which is important at night when
seizures can happen without someone to help nearby. Longer term potential
impacts extend to human-centered cyber-physical systems, cyber-security, and
unmanned vehicles.