* 1350008
* CAREER: Teaching Machines to Design Self-Assembling Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Andrew Ferguson, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2018
* USD 360,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This CAREER award supports theoretical and computational research and education
in the understanding and design of self-assembling biomaterials. Self-assembly
of structured aggregates by the spontaneous organization of their constituent
building blocks is prevalent in the natural world, and is an attractive route to
fabricate artificial materials with desirable properties that cannot be easily
produced by other means. The design of building blocks programmed to self-
assemble custom materials is a grand challenge in materials science.

In this work, the PI will integrate statistical mechanics theory with nonlinear
machine learning algorithms to establish a new theoretical and computational
approach to understand and program the self-assembly of nanostructured
biomaterials. Using these tools, the PI will extract from molecular simulations
the pathways and mechanisms by which building blocks self-assemble into
structured aggregates. This methodology overcomes a key scientific challenge by
integrating thermodynamics and kinetics in a unified framework that identifies
both what stable aggregates form (thermodynamics) and how they assemble
(kinetics and mechanisms).

The collective order parameters unveiled by this approach are good descriptors
of the slow dynamical motions driving assembly, and present a natural
parameterization for kinetically meaningful free energy landscapes that link
building block properties to collective assembly behavior. By "sculpting" the
landscape topography through rational manipulation of building block structure
and chemistry the PI's group will program the assembly of desired structures
that are thermodynamically stable and kinetically accessible (design).

The PI will apply a new approach to three technologically important self-
assembling biomaterials: 1) "patchy colloid" polyhedral clusters for small
molecule encapsulation, 2) ultra-short peptide mineralization templates for
silica nanotubes for controlled drug release, heavy metal ion adsorption, and
catalysis, and 3) antimicrobial peptide amphiphile nanostructures for antibiotic
resistant bacteria. This work will establish new basic understanding and control
of materials assembly, and accelerate development of new structural and
functional biomaterials.

The integrated education and outreach plan incorporates the scientific outcomes
into education and outreach, and supports graduate training, undergraduate
research, and mentoring of underrepresented minority groups. The PI will create
a new materials science course to equip the next generation workforce with
computational tools, support undergraduate students in performing portions of
the work, and promote the recruitment, retention, and success of students of
color through mentorship of minority students and high school outreach.

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY

This CAREER award supports a theoretical and computational research program to
design microscopic building blocks with the ability to spontaneously self-
organize into materials with desirable properties. This way of making materials
is known as "bottom-up self-assembly", as opposed to more familiar "top-down"
manufacturing. Imagine if it will be possible one day to design molecules with
just the right shape and properties so that shaking them in a flask
spontaneously self-assembled a solar cell! In this work, the PI will combine
ideas from the fields of thermodynamics and machine learning (sometimes known as
artificial intelligence) to establish a new tool to allow computers to learn
both what structures can be formed by a particular building block, and how they
assemble. The PI will then flip this problem to use our tool to help reverse-
engineer building blocks to assemble custom materials.

The PI's group will apply these tools to the design of three useful biological
materials: 1) micron-sized particles possessing directional sticky patches that
assemble polyhedral clusters to hold and deliver small molecules, 2) short
peptides that assemble networks to template the synthesis of silica nanotubes
for drug delivery, cleanup of heavy metal pollutants, and catalysis of chemical
reactions, and 3) longer peptides that assemble into nanometer sized rods that
can kill antibiotic resistant bacteria such as the MRSA "superbug".

This award also supports an integrated research and education program in which
the scientific results from this work will enrich and enhance undergraduate and
graduate classes, and high school outreach activities. Undergraduate students
will directly participate in the scientific research by working with the PI
during the summer months. The PI will also design and teach a new class
providing hands-on experience in the computational materials modeling, analysis,
and design, and maintain his commitment to promote the recruitment and success
of students of color through mentorship of undergraduate and graduate minority
students.