* 1350967
* CAREER: Scalable Sensor Infrastructure for Sustainably Managing the Built Environment
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2014,03/31/2018
* Prabal Dutta, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 03/31/2018
* USD 413,956.00

U.S. economic growth, energy security, and environmental stewardship depend on a
sustainable energy policy that promotes conservation,efficiency, and
electrification across all major sectors. Buildings are the largest sector and
therefore an attractive target of these efforts: current Federal sustainability
goals mandate that 50% of U.S.commercial buildings become net-zero energy by
2050. A range of options exists to achieve this goal, but financial concerns
require a data-driven, empirically-validated approach. However, critical gaps
exist in the energy and water measurement technology, and indoorclimate control
science, needed to benchmark competing options, prioritize efficiency
investments, and ensure occupant comfort.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address these
challenges, this project proposes a new kind of "peel-and-stick" sensor that can
be affixed to everyday objects to infer their contributions to whole-building
resource consumption. To use the sensors, occupants or building managers simply
tag end loads like a ceiling light, shower head, or range top. The sensors
monitor the ambient conditions around a load and, using statistical
methods,correlate those conditions with readings from existing electricity, gas,
or water meters, providing individual estimates without intrusive metering. The
sensors are built from integrated circuit technology laminated into smart
labels, so they are small, inexpensive, and easy-to-deploy. The sensors are
powered by the same ambient signals they sense, eliminating the need for
periodic battery replacement or wall power. Collectively, these properties
address cost and coverage challenges, and enable scalable deployment and
widespread adoption.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this
proposal stems from the insight that the transfer and use of energy (and other
resources) usually emits energy, often in a different domain, and that this
emitted energy is often enough to intermittently power simple, energy-harvesting
sensors whose duty cycle is proportional to the energy being transferred or
used. Hence, the mere activation rate of the sensors signalsthe underlying
energy use. The power-proportional relationship between usage activity and side
channel harvesting, when coupled with state-of-the art, millimeter-scale, nano-
power chips and whole-house or panel-level meters, enables small and inexpensive
sensor tags that are pervasively distributed with unbounded lifetimes. But,
networking and tasking them, and making sense of their data, requires a
fundamental rethinking of low-power communications, control, and data fusion to
abstract the intermittent, unreliable, and noisy sensor infrastructure into
actionable information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project's broader impact stems
from an integrated program of education, research, and outreach that (i) creates
a smart objects focused curriculum whose classroom projects are motivated by
research needs, (ii) provides research experiences for undergraduates
and&lt;br/&gt;underrepresented minorities, (iii) mentors students on all aspects
of successful research from articulating hypotheses to peer-reviewing
papers,(iv) disseminates teaching materials on embedded systems and research
pedagogy, (v) produces students who bridge disciplines,operating at the
intersection of measurement science, information technology, and sustainability
policy, and (vi) translates scientific discovery and technical knowledge into
beneficial commercial products through industry outreach and internships, and
(vii) engages with the National Labs to ensure that the research addresses
pressing problems.