* 1350990
* CAREER: Network modulation of cortical neuron computation
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2014,05/31/2021
* Daniel Butts, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 05/31/2021
* USD 513,758.00

The function of sensory neurons is typically defined by the relationship between
sensory stimuli and their responses; however, in the cortex of awake animals,
sensory responses account for only a fraction of neural activity. While activity
not driven by the stimulus is often considered "noise" and neglected in
experiments, such ongoing cortical activity has been linked to a number of
processes related to cognition, and can be influenced by attention, tasks, and
perception itself. It remains unclear how to relate such ongoing cortical
activity to the processing of sensory stimuli, and more generally why it appears
to play such a prominent role in sensory neuron function.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to establish a new framework
for understanding stimulus processing in the context of ongoing cortical
activity, and thereby derive a much richer understanding of sensory neuron
function. This work will leverage the wealth of information about activity
within the cortical network that is now typically available from multi-electrode
recordings, using experiments performed by collaborating laboratories in the
awake visual cortex using tailored visual stimuli. The first aim is to develop
new statistical approaches for identifying relevant modulatory signals
detectable from these multi-electrode recordings, and perform detailed
characterizations of stimulus processing in the context of these signals. The
second aim is to study specific contexts where cortical activity is shaped by
known network inputs, such as during saccadic eye movements, in order to
directly link the modulation of stimulus processing to larger descriptions of
sensory neuron function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will provide potentially
transformative insights into the relationship between sensory processing and
cognitive function. The educational component of this proposal will integrate
computational and quantitative approaches into general neuroscience coursework,
and involve students at the graduate, undergraduate, and high school levels, in
computational analyses of complex neurophysiological data.