* 1350202
* CAREER: Dynamically Adaptive Feed Drive Systems for Smart and Sustainable Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2014,01/31/2019
* Chinedum Okwudire, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Steve Schmid
* 01/31/2019
* USD 400,000.00

The objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program award is
to investigate the introduction of "fast-varying dynamics" into feed drives and
its synergistic exploitation as a means to simultaneously achieve high speed,
high accuracy and reduced energy consumption/costs in precision manufacturing
machines. Feed drives (i.e., motion delivery systems) of manufacturing machines
are currently designed conservatively with fixed electromechanical structures,
resulting in undesirable compromises among speed, accuracy and energy
efficiency. The research imagines feed drives designed like the powertrains of
hybrid electric vehicles; it imagines that they are designed to intelligently
vary their electromechanical structure in real time to achieve high performance
and energy efficiency as a function of the manufacturing operation being
performed. The key challenge with these so-called dynamically adaptive feed
drives is that they require a design approach for generating the best combined
dynamics (i.e., maximizing synergy) under fast switching. No such approach is
available in the literature. The intellectual merit of this research is in
addressing this knowledge gap thus enabling the benefits of dynamically adaptive
systems to be fully exploited. The educational objective is to foster
synergistic thinking in engineering education through curriculum development and
outreach efforts that contribute to a more diverse and capable
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this research is in
enabling significant improvements in the energy efficiency of a wide range of
manufacturing machines without unduly sacrificing their quality and productivity
- similar to the transformative impact of hybrid electric vehicles in the
automotive sector. Collaborations with a US-based industrial partner will enable
the results of this research to be transferred to industry. The educational plan
will develop teaching resources to address the problem of compartmentalized
undergraduate education, and pursue an unconventional outreach effort that
inspires underrepresented middle school students towards pursuing
science/engineering careers by presenting science/engineering careers in the
socio-cultural context of the subjects.