* 1350132
* CAREER: Public Health Insurance, Medical Expenditures, and Labor Market Outcomes
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2021
* Amanda Kowalski, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 04/30/2021
* USD 430,000.00

CAREER Project Abstract: The Impact of Expanded Health Insurance
Coverage&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While the impact of expanded health insurance
coverage has long been of interest to economists, the passage of the
Massachusetts health reform in 2006 and the Affordable Care Act (ACA) in 2010
has brought health reform to the forefront of public discourse. Health spending
comprises a growing portion of the U.S. economy, approaching 18% of GDP. At the
same time, millions of Americans lack health insurance. These two realities
motivate interest in three related projects. The goal of the first project is to
characterize the evolution of nonelderly medical expenditures to inform
insurance design; the goal of the second project is to examine the long term
impact of Medicaid on health and labor market outcomes; and the goal of the
third project is to measure the returns to intensive Medicare spending using
variation across physicians. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Each
project advances the frontier of knowledge by using a different data source that
provides a rare level of detail. Part of the intellectual merit in the use of
these data lies in data preparation -- developing processes to access the data,
cleaning them, and deriving stylized facts from them. Further intellectual merit
lies in the development and execution of simple theory and econometric methods
that do not obscure the richness of the data. &lt;br/&gt;Project 1 uses data on
almost all hospital visits in the state of New York from 1982 to 2009 linked to
mortality records. These data include longitudinal patient identifiers, allowing
detailed characterization of the evolution of medical expenditures for
nonelderly individuals, especially those with high expenditures, mortality, and
likelihood of insurance denial. Project 2 uses data on all federal tax returns
filed from 1996 to 2009. These data permit analysis of the long term impact of
Medicaid eligibility on employment, earnings, and education. Project 3 uses data
on 100% of hospital inpatient Medicare claims between 1991 and 2010 linked to
American Medical Association data on physicians. These data can be used to
evaluate treatment and outcomes for all doctors who treat Medicare
patients.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Building on a wide range of data,
the research projects and education plan will aid in a greater understanding of
the complexities of the health insurance market and its value in society.
&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research agenda is to advance the field of
health economics by finding empirical answers to key policy questions. An equal
priority will be making these answers accessible to other researchers, students,
and the health policy community.