* 1350939
* CAREER: Separations in Cryptography
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2019
* Mohammad Mahmoody Ghidary, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph Maurice Rojas
* 05/31/2019
* USD 423,413.00

Since the seminal work of Shannon in 1949 cryptography has been founded on
unproven computational complexity. The security of cryptographic systems could
fall apart if the assumptions behind their design turn out to be false. Thus, it
is crucial to base the security of crypto-systems on weakest possible
assumptions. A main component of finding minimal assumptions is to ``separate''
cryptographic tasks from assumptions that are weaker than those used in
constructions. In light of recent developments in cryptography, the following
two directions will be pursued:

New Techniques: A formal model to abstract the properties of cryptographic
proofs and techniques is necessary to prove separations. Previously studied
models, however, do not consider some of the most useful recent techniques in
cryptography and mainly focus on uniform, black-box, and classical (non-quantum)
proof techniques. A major goal of this project is to develop new foundations to
model these new cryptographic techniques.

New Tasks and Assumptions: Recently cryptography has gone through a revolution
of exploring feasibility of highly structured crypto tasks, even if this comes
at the cost of using newly introduced assumptions. The second major goal of this
project is to deepen our understanding of the assumptions necessary for
achieving these tasks. A closely related goal is to identify the relative power
of these new tasks among themselves.

To disseminate the above ideas and achieve broader impact, the project will
include educational activities such as: course development, outreach to high
school students to motivate them pursue degrees in theoretical computer science
and cryptography, and mentoring graduate as well as undergraduate students.