* 1350374
* CAREER: Integrating Physical Models into Data-Driven Inference
* CSE,OAC
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2020
* Linwei Wang, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Alan Sussman
* 05/31/2020
* USD 588,826.00

Individualized assessment of high-dimensional spatiotemporal systems - such as
in-vivo human physiological systems - has been increasingly enabled by
paralleled advances in two fields: computer modeling that supports quantitative
understanding of the dynamic behavior and mechanism of these systems, and modern
sensor technologies that continuously improve the quantity and quality of
measurement data available for analysis. There is, however, a gap between the
two fields that is ubiquitous in many application domains: the current state of
computer modeling is generally decoupled from specific measurements of an
individual system, while individualized data-driven analysis often struggles for
realistic domain contexts. This project aims to bridge this gap by investigating
and developing new methodologies, algorithms, and software that will enable the
integration of complex domain knowledge - yielded by computer simulation of
domain physical models - into the process of data-driven inference. The
overarching theme of this research is flexibility and robustness. Specifically,
it addresses the following three challenges: 1) to enable a plug-and-play
inclusion of domain physical models catering to different efficiency vs.
accuracy needs; 2) to further overcome the lack of measurements and potential
errors in domain physical models by exploiting the low-dimensional structure in
high-dimensional systems; and 3) to enable a robust adaptation of the time-
varying error that potentially exists in domain physical models. The driving
application of this project is individualized modeling of in-vivo cardiovascular
systems - using noninvasive biomedical and physiological data - for improved
prevention, diagnosis, and treatment of heart diseases.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outcome of this project will contribute theoretically,
algorithmically, and computationally to the foundations of statistical
inference, and extend to a wide range of applications such as tumor modeling,
climate modeling, systems biology, and finance. In addition, this project will
deliver publicly-available multicore/GPU software that will encapsulate the most
effective algorithms developed. These toolkits will contribute to the national
effort toward noninvasive medicine and healthcare, while supporting numerous
scientific applications involving data-driven modeling and inference. This
project also includes an integrated educational and outreach program to foster
interdisciplinary research training and to increase participation of
underrepresented groups in STEM disciplines. It includes: 1) development and
evaluation of "learning-by-doing" concept in graduate and undergraduate
education; 2) research training for students from graduate to high-school
levels, with a focus on engaging women and underrepresented students at an early
stage; and 3) broader outreach activities to area K-12 students and Paramedic
communities. The participation of women, underrepresented, K-12, and Paramedic
groups are reinforced through continued partnerships between the PI and
different programs offered in RIT, local school district, and community college.