* 1350941
* CAREER: Carbon Footprint Modeling and Elastic Caching for Greening Services
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2019
* Christopher Stewart, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 12/31/2019
* USD 462,813.00

As Internet services scale, their growing energy and carbon footprints present
conflicting challenges. On one hand, services must keep energy costs low. On the
other, they should make costly investments to undo environmental harm caused by
their energy footprint. Carbon offsets are transferable certificates that undo
greenhouse gas emission, even when offset holders are located in carbon-heavy
regions, making them attractive to large-scale, geographically distributed
services. This research project lays the foundation for greening services, a new
class of Internet services that buy carbon offsets for user requests routed
through their servers (i.e., a service that makes other services green). People
who use popular large-scale services could undo their carbon footprint by simply
routing their requests through a greening service. The greening service would
manage costs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual challenge for greening
services is to model or confirm carbon footprints for servers outside of their
control. The key insight is that emerging trends within cloud computing, e.g.,
energy-efficient servers, auto scaling, and open source software, provide
uniformity. Dissimilarity between services, in terms of response times and
energy footprints, is increasingly due to service-specific features. We use
black-box machine learning approaches to infer these
features.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Beyond greening services, the proposed research
will help system managers identify performance bugs, especially costly bugs that
shift energy consumption toward datacenters with high energy costs. As part of
the proposed research, the PI will conduct outreach to underserved institutions
and to local, Columbus, OH, area high schools.