* 1350800
* CAREER:Engineering Efficient, Thin-film Hybrid Photovoltaic Elements Based on Excitonic Energy Transfer
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/01/2014,09/30/2020
* Anton Malko, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 09/30/2020
* USD 400,000.00

The objective of this research is to engineer a new type of ultra-thin,
flexible, yet efficient and robust photovoltaic solar cell. The approach is to
employ solution processable semiconductor nanocrystals that are chemically
grafted on electrically accessible, flexible Si nanopillar p-i-n junction
substrates.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: The design of these novel hybrid solar
cells is based on non-radiative and radiative energy transfer, which provides
efficient electromagnetic coupling between highly absorbing nanocrystals and
3-dimensionally structured thin Si substrates. Such longer-range energy transfer
mechanisms essentially avoid typical charge transfer problems leading to lower
efficiencies of traditional bulk-heterojunction geometries. Optically thick
nanocrystal multilayers with engineered energy transfer interactions will be
grafted on dense arrays of nanopillars processed from thin Si substrates with
enhanced light trapping capabilities and optimized p-i-n junctions for efficient
charge separation and transport. Such nanocrystal-sensitized Si solar cells are
expected to reach 15% conversion efficiency with minimal Si material
requirements.&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The development of thin, yet efficient
photovoltaic elements should assist in lessening our reliance on fossil fuels
and contribute towards the development of domestic, eco-friendly and renewable
energy-generating technologies and industries. Hybrid optoelectronics structures
will be of interest for various light-emitting and sensor applications and such
interdisciplinary approach will provide students with an opportunity to gain
proficiency in the fields of photonics, materials science and engineering and
physics and to connect to industrial projects and international collaborators.
Strong effort will be devoted to involve undergraduate and pre-college students
and facilitate their interest in science and engineering.