* 1350929
* Evolution of a functionally robust, high-performance musculoskeletal system
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2018
* Stephen Deban, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Emily Carrington
* 04/30/2018
* USD 452,744.00

Environmental temperature has strong effects on the physiological processes of
animals such as amphibians whose body temperature is determined by their
surroundings. Activity of such ectothermic animals is limited by the slowing of
physiological processes at low temperatures, notably the speed and power of
muscle contraction. In contrast to the thermal sensitivity of muscle-powered
movements, the ballistic feeding movements of some ectothermic animals are
scarcely affected by environmental temperature. Performance is maintained at a
high level across a broad range of temperatures by virtue of an elastic-recoil
mechanism. This 'bow and arrow' mechanism allows muscles to contract slowly and
stretch tendon-like structures, which subsequently recoil rapidly to power
movement. Because the speed of elastic recoil of collagen has a much lower
temperature sensitivity than the speed of muscle contraction, such elastically
powered movements display greater thermal robustness, potentially expanding the
animal's thermal range. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will examine the
physiological basis for the evolution of high performance and thermal robustness
in elastically powered movements. The research will focus on evolutionary
transitions in performance of the integrated system as well as in the underlying
motor control, morphology, biomechanics, and muscle contractile physiology. This
study will also test the hypothesis that elastic systems evolve from non-elastic
systems via the modification of existing anatomical structures rather than
through fundamental changes in muscle physiology. A generalized model of elastic
recoil will be applied to a focal ectothermic system--ballistic feeding in
salamanders--in which extreme performance and thermal robustness have evolved
multiple times in parallel. The research will make testable predictions about
the robustness to environmental challenges of other diverse musculoskeletal
systems with and without elastic components. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Graduate,
undergraduate and postdoctoral students will be trained in a wide range of
scientific skills and activities, including field and laboratory procedures,
participation at scientific meetings, and dissemination of results. An
interactive online simulation of an elastic system (ballistic feeding in a
salamander) will be developed to be used in teaching and by laypersons.
Partnership with local K-12 teachers and a biology professor in Mexico will
provide training as well as laboratory and field experiences to US and Mexican
researchers, teachers and students. Research experiences for teachers will
enhance the development of K-12 science educators and support the delivery of
new research findings in a cross-curricular framework to classrooms in a large
and diverse school district.