* 1350240
* CAREER: ENGINEER A FUNCTIONAL 3-D VASCULAR NICHE TO SUPPORT NEURAL STEM CELL SELF-RENEWAL
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2014,05/31/2017
* Guohao Dai, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 05/31/2017
* USD 440,000.00

1350240 Dai

Adult neural stem cells (NSCs) have great potential for treating damage or
disease of the nervous system. However, these cells are rare and difficult to
maintain in culture because they quickly lose their multi-potency after being
removed from their native environment. In vivo, NSCs reside adjacent to a
vascular niche, suggesting that it may be possible to maintain these cells ex
vivo if critical functional features of the vascular niche are recreated in the
culture environment.

The hypothesis of the proposed studies is that formation of a perfused,
functional vasculature within 3-D extracellular matrix promotes self-renewal of
the surrounding NSCs. To test this hypothesis, the following specific aims will
be pursued: 1) Create a neurovascular unit that contains perfused vasculature
and NSCs within 3-D matrix using a novel cell printing technology. 2) Establish
the maturation process and functionalities of the synthesized structures with
regard to matrix properties and culture parameters. 3) Examine the NSC behavior
and cell fate using the engineered neurovascular unit; and determine critical
factors that influence NSC fate and its relationship to the functional status of
the vasculature.

Intellectual Merit: The proposed research will build a 3-D perfused vascular
niche to study NSCs in a physiologically relevant experimental system, in which
individual components and parameters can be easily manipulated. Using this
system, the proposed research will define critical factors to achieve
functionality of the vasculature and will elucidate underlying mechanisms of NSC
self-renewal in the dynamically perfused system. Since vasculature is a key
element of many adult stem cell niches, this research will have broader
ramifications in studying other stem cell fields. Overall, this work will
identify design principles and operating parameters for the printed structures
to support the growth of the surrounding tissues in vitro, and thereby lay the
foundation to fabricate tissues of appropriate thickness for biomedical
applications in the future.

Broader Impacts: The proposed research has broader scientific impact in
generating fundamental knowledge related to 3-D vascular tissue formation and
its role in regulating NSC fate. Therefore, the proposed studies are expected to
help develop methods for the ex vivo expansion of patient-specific NSCs to treat
spinal cord injury and neurodegenerative diseases, which will benefit patients
and the society at large. Research will be integrated with educational and
outreach activities targeting K-12 education and underrepresented groups.
Activities demonstrating how engineers can solve societal challenges will
provide incentives to students to pursue careers in science and engineering.