* 1350302
* CAREER: Functional analysis of ubiquitin-mediated pathways controlling stem cell fate and tissue regeneration
* BIO,IOS
* 01/15/2014,12/31/2019
* Ricardo Zayas, San Diego State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Klein
* 12/31/2019
* USD 660,000.00

Normal cellular function relies on constant regulation of protein activity and
longevity. Ubiquitin ligases are enzymes that chemically couple the small
polypeptide ubiquitin to other proteins to regulate their function or mark them
for destruction. Ubiquitin tagging controls a wide range of key cellular
processes such as cell division and cell fate decisions during development.
Consequently, certain ubiquitin ligases have been implicated in many human
diseases including cancer. Most animals have a large number of ubiquitin ligases
(approximately 600 in humans), however, we know very little about the biological
functions or specific protein targets for the majority of these enzymes. This
project investigates the role of ubiquitin ligases in stem cell-based tissue
regeneration using planarian flatworms as model organisms. These animals possess
a large population of pluripotent stem cells that bestow upon them the
remarkable ability to regenerate all of their tissues after injury or
amputation. This research will identify genes encoding ubiquitin ligases in
planarians and analyze their function in tissue renewal using a combination of
genetic, molecular, and microscopy approaches. These experiments will reveal
ubiquitin ligase genes that are required for various aspects of regeneration.
The ability to inhibit ubiquitin ligase gene function in the animal will be
combined with technologies designed to identify alterations in proteins modified
with ubiquitin. This work will contribute to the broad goal of understanding the
biological roles of ubiquitin ligases and identifying cellular targets required
for stem cell regulation, tissue regeneration or body patterning.

Dr. Zayas is an investigator and educator at San Diego State University (SDSU),
a Hispanic Serving Institution. This project will develop a laboratory course
that will integrate undergraduate students with the research outlined here.
Special attention will be given to recruiting students underrepresented in
science to enroll in the course. These students will be mentored on how to
prepare for diverse scientific careers to support efforts to broaden
participation in STEM fields. The educational activities of this proposal
include science outreach at local K-12 schools to help spark enthusiasm for
biology in the community.