* 1350763
* EAGER: Towards Human Centered Visual Understanding: Exploring the Intended and Interpreted Meaning of Images in Social Multimedia
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2018
* Hong Man, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 08/31/2018
* USD 199,170.00

This project explores a new direction in computer vision, which is to model the
context dependent visual semantics associated with images in social multimedia.
The context dependent visual semantics, e.g., the intended and perceived
sentiment of an image in social multimedia, are dynamically formed based on the
various contextual information associated with it. This is different from the
static visual semantics that conventional computer vision research focused on
studying, such as the object category presented in the
image.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project develops a set of new networked and
context aware probabilistic latent semantic models, which integrate situated
contextual information into visual content analysis for modeling context
dependent visual semantics. The research team is verifying two hypotheses: 1)
the context dependent semantics needs to be holistically modeled and jointly
inferred from a collection of related images; and 2) related context dependent
visual semantics, such as intended and perceived meaning of an image, also needs
to be jointly modeled for more robust recognition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project is integrated with education through training graduate and undergraduate
students. The outcome of the research can be applied to many domains, such as
targeted online advertisements; open source information analysis and social
event prediction; and social multimedia security.