* 1350253
* CAREER: Mental Models and Critical Mass: Shaping the Success of Online Communities
* CSE,IIS
* 01/15/2014,06/30/2021
* Richard Wash, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 06/30/2021
* USD 537,678.00

As new computing and communication technologies become mainstream, online
communities are transforming journalism and other industries to support more
interactive, community-driven work. This project will study how mental models of
online communities are formed, how they shape expectations about the future of
the community, how they co-evolve with the community over time, and how they
aggregate to form a critical mass that is essential for successful work and
community survival. In many such online communities, participation is voluntary:
each person must look at the community, develop a mental model of what that
community is, how it works, and what it means for them to join, and then make a
decision about whether they want to participate. And then, as the community
evolves and changes, they need to continually decide whether and how to
participate.

This research will triangulate three research methods to understand how
individuals form mental models of online communities, and how mental models of
multiple individuals interact and aggregate to form a larger community. First,
it will use qualitative interviews to understand how individuals make sense of a
new online community and how they make continuing participation decisions in
communities they are already part of. Second, it will use a series of human
subjects lab experiments to characterize how people form mental models of both
the content available in an online community, and the other users of an online
community. These experiments will also help to understand how a user's mental
model helps her interpret the community's reactions to her participation.
Finally, this project will use statistical analysis and formal mathematical
modeling of existing online communities to understand how online communities
grow over time and when people choose to leave online communities. Results of
this research will be of general value in designing, managing, and participating
in many kinds of online communities, as well as contributing to education in the
information, cognitive, and social sciences. A unique, cross-disciplinary
education program will be created that trains students to use this research to
build special-purpose online communities. This program will include a joint
class linking a School of Journalism with a department of Telecommunication,
Information Studies and Media. This class will form cross-disciplinary teams who
spend the semester creating and growing an online community. This partnership
will teach students to apply social science and computer science research for
real-world applications, and work on collaborative, cross-disciplinary teams
that include technical people, creative people, and topic experts. It represents
a new type of education in journalism that will bring students into new,
community-driven methods of doing journalism, based more on curating content and
facilitating discussion than on original, unidirectional reporting.