* 1350120
* Taking the PULSE: Vision &amp; Change Certification Program Pilot, Phase One
* BIO,EF
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2018
* Thomas Jack, Everett Community College
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 08/31/2018
* USD 99,488.00

An award has been made to Everett Community College to organize a program of
self assessment for life science departments as part of the mission of the
Partnership for Undergraduate Life Science Education (PULSE). In September 2012
the PULSE partners (HHMI, NIH, and NSF) appointed 40 Vision and Change
Leadership Fellows to stimulate transformative changes in undergraduate life
science education as recommended in the Vision and Change report. Fellows were
selected from two-year colleges, liberal arts colleges, comprehensive
universities and research universities. The Fellows have organized into working
groups with the overarching goal of helping departments transform their programs
in a national effort to increase student learning of core concepts, increase
student retention in the sciences, and prepare all students to be more curious
and scientifically literate citizens. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current award is
to begin testing a comprehensive set of rubrics developed by the Taking the
Pulse Working Group. The Vision and Change report contained a number of
recommendations for improving undergraduate life sciences education but did not
furnish an implementation strategy. The rubrics that have been developed will
serve as a blueprint for departments to evaluate their own progress in adopting
recommendations in the areas of curriculum development, faculty support, student
engagement and inclusivity, assessment, infrastructure, and the campus climate
for change. The working group also plans to pilot a certification program to
both motivate departments to adopt Vision and Change recommendations and to
reward departments that have enacted Vision and Change principles. The initial
draft set of rubrics has been posted on the www.pulsecommunity.org website under
the provisional title: Taking the PULSE Vision and Change Rubrics 1.0 and
rubrics will be updated as more departments field-test them at all institution
types. Results from the Taking the PULSE project will be posted on the PULSE
website and shared with the life sciences community at professional meetings.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being funded jointly by the Directorate
for Biological Sciences and the Directorate of Education and Human Resources,
Division of Undergraduate Education as part of their efforts to support Vision
and Change in Undergraduate Biology Education