* 1350752
* CAREER: Sensing as a Service - Architectures for Closed-Loop Sensor Network Virtualization
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2014,02/29/2020
* Michael Zink, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 02/29/2020
* USD 408,745.00

The goal of this project is to demonstrate new cyber-physical architectures that
allow the sharing of closed-loop sensor networks among multiple applications
through the dynamic allocation of sensing, networking, and computing resources.
The sharing of sensor network infrastructures makes the provision of data more
cost efficient and leads to virtual private sensor network (VPSN) architectures
that can dramatically increase the number of sensor networks available for
public use. These cyber infrastructures support a paradigm, called Sensing as a
Service, in which users can obtain sensing and computational resources to
generate the required data for their sensing applications. The challenge in
sharing closed-loop sensor networks is that one application's actuation request
might interfere with another's request. To address this challenge the VPSN
architectures are comprised of three components: 1) a sensor virtualization
layer that ensures that users obtain timely access to sensor data when requested
and isolates their requests from others' through the creation of appropriate
scheduling algorithms; 2) a computation virtualization layer that enables the
allocation of computational resources for real-time data intensive applications
which is closely tied to the sensor virtualization layer; 3) a virtualization
toolkit that supports application developers in their efforts to build
applications for virtualized, closed-loop sensor networks.

The sharing of closed-loop sensor networks leads to substantial savings on
infrastructure and maintenance costs. The proposed VPSN architectures enable
users to create their own applications without having detailed knowledge of
sensing technologies and allows them to focus on the development of
applications. VPSNs will contribute to the creation of a nationwide, shared
sensing cyber infrastructure, which will provide critical information for public
safety and security. VPSNs will also help to revolutionize the way undergraduate
and graduate students from many disciplines perform research. Students will be
shielded from some of the complexities of sensor networks and allowed to focus
on their core research. To prepare students from the Electrical and Computer
Engineering (ECE) department at the University of Massachusetts to perform this
kind of research, new classes in the area of Integrative Systems Engineering and
Sensor Network Virtualization will be offered.