* 1350364
* EAGER: TEACHER: A Pilot Study on Mining the Web for Customized Curriculum Planning
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2015
* Jaime Carbonell, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2015
* USD 265,635.00

With massive quantities of educational materials freely available on the web,
the vision of personalized and readily accessible education appears within our
grasp. General-purpose search engines are insufficient as they do not focus on
educational materials, objectives, pre-requisite relations, etc., nor do they
stitch together multiple sources to create customized curricula for students'
goals and current knowledge. This exploratory project focuses on establishing
fundamental results in: (1) extracting educational units from diverse web sites
and representing them in a large directed graph, whose nodes are content
descriptors and whose edges encode pre-requisite and other relations; (2)
conducting multi-field topic inference via a new family of graphical models to
infer relations among educational units; and (3) automated curricular planning,
focusing on providing sequences of lessons, courses, exercises and other
education units for a student to achieve his or her educational goals,
conditioned on current skills. The objective is to develop a data-driven
course/curriculum planner on demand, based on a graph traversal that is enriched
with alternate paths, reinforcement options, and conditional branches to match
the learner's needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this research is
two-fold: (1) developing methods for mining and traversing web-based educational
materials in general, later generalizing to multi-media lessons and courses; and
(2) individualized curricular planning, so any student anywhere can be provided
with guidance on how to navigate and exploit the vast ocean of massive open
online course (MOOC) materials and other educational texts, exercises, etc. in a
manner customized to the student's learning objective, capabilities and skills.
The resulting system, named TEACHER, can be applied to learning specific job
skills, to reinforce classroom instructions, or as stand-alone academic support
to address, for instance, the huge percentage of students who attempt taking
MOOCs but never complete them due to lack of requisite skills and lack of
guidance on how to acquire them. Project web site
(http://nyc.lti.cs.cmu.edu/teacher/) will be used to disseminate results.