* 1350023
* Renewed Paleoanthropological Research in the Laetoli Area, Tanzania
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2014,02/28/2017
* Terry Harrison, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 02/28/2017
* USD 181,042.00

The paleoanthropological study of human evolution is critical for documenting
the origins and evolutionary steps that gave rise to our own species. This area
of research is of profound interest to the scientific community and to the
general public because of the enduring fascination with human origins. One of
the most significant contributions to understanding human evolution is the
discovery of important new fossils. These provide crucial information to
document the various stages of human evolution, but equally importantly provide
contextual evidence to explain how and why major evolutionary events took place.
This project will renew paleontological and geological investigations at
Laetoli, one of the most important paleoanthropological sites in Africa, with
the goal of contributing new evidence towards a better understanding of the
early stages of human evolution.

The main goal of the research is to address several critical issues in human
evolution: (1) exploration of the Lower Laetolil Beds (3.85 million to older
than 5.0 million years ago) has the potential to yield early hominins (extinct
members of the human evolutionary lineage) that could contribute important new
evidence on the diversity and evolutionary relationships of the earliest
representatives of the human lineage; (2) new hominin fossils from the Upper
Laetolil Beds (3.6-3.85 million years ago) will lead to a better understanding
of the anatomy, paleobiology and relationships of the early hominin species,
Australopithecus afarensis; (3) additional hominins from the Upper Ndolanya Beds
(2.66 million years ago) will add to our limited appreciation of Paranthropus
aethiopicus, the earliest member of an extinct side-branch of the human lineage,
and offer important clues to understanding the timing and environmental factors
associated with the extinction of Australopithecus and the divergence of
Paranthropus and Homo (the genus to which humans belong); and (4) a detailed
assessment of the paleoecology will allow a better understanding of the habitat
preferences and ecological context of the Laetoli hominins, as well as providing
a building block in a broader assessment of habitat diversity and environmental
change in East Africa.

The project provides unique opportunities for paleoanthropological training of
students, research and educational infrastructural support in Tanzania,
important opportunities for US researchers to extend their network of academic
links to scientists and institutions in different disciplines and countries, and
provides a vehicle for the promotion of the study of human evolution to the
broader public.