* 1350107
* CAREER: ECO-EVOLUTIONARY DYNAMICS: WHAT ARE THE CAUSAL LINKS BETWEEN POPULATION DENSITY, NATURAL SELECTION AND PHENOTYPIC CHANGE?
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2014,09/30/2021
* Renee Duckworth, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 09/30/2021
* USD 760,738.00

Fostering the development of early-career teacher-scholars strengthens the
nation's research capacity while contributing to an educated workforce capable
of making complex decisions. This CAREER project integrates interdisciplinary
research and creative educational opportunities to gain novel insights into the
causal links between evolutionary change and population ecology. Natural
selection, phenotypic change, and population size are often related, but we know
little about the causes that underlie these relationships. The research takes
advantage of rapid evolutionary change observed in the invasive western bluebird
to investigate these causal relationships, and engages high school,
undergraduate, and graduate students to think critically in order to solve
problems and answer questions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Western bluebirds depend on
successional habitat and must continually colonize new areas to survive. In
previous work, the investigator discovered rapid shifts in aggression,
population density, and natural selection that accompanied recolonization
cycles. Newly colonized populations have low density, high aggression, and
positive selection on aggression; older populations have high density, low
aggression, and strong negative selection on aggression. These recurring cycles
provide a unique opportunity to investigate the causal links between population
density, natural selection and phenotypic change. The investigator will combine
several approaches to determine these links: experimental manipulation of
population density; observations of how changing density correlates with
aggression; experimental manipulation of food availability and survival to
identify changes in aggression and population size; and estimation of
quantitative genetic parameters related to aggressiveness. Results will be
integrated to resolve the causal links between evolutionary (selection for
aggression) and ecological (population density) changes in these populations.
This system is exceptionally amenable to manipulation of ecological interactions
through the provision of nesting boxes, and the need for western bluebirds to
recolonize new areas requires rapid evolutionary change. The ability to study
populations at different stages of a colonization cycle provides diverse
contexts to examine the links between components of an eco-evolutionary feedback
loop. A particularly novel broader impact of this research is the engagement of
cognitively delayed students to help them gain important life skills. Outreach
to and collaboration with citizen scientists, the Confederated Salish and
Kootenai Tribes, conservation groups, wildlife officials, and landowners will
significantly broaden educational opportunities and the dissemination of
research results.