* 1350060
* CAREER: SusChEM: New organocatalytic approaches to the stereo- and regioselective construction of acetals
* MPS,CHE
* 01/15/2014,12/31/2018
* Pavel Nagorny, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 12/31/2018
* USD 603,207.00

With this award, the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Division of Chemistry
supports the research of Professor Pavel Nagorny of the Department of Chemistry
at the University of Michigan. This research project develops new chiral
catalyst-controlled stereoselective transformations that proceed through highly
reactive oxocarbenium ion intermediates. The chemistry of oxocarbenium ions is
central to the synthesis of acetal-containing compounds such as carbohydrates
and spiroketals, as well as heterocyclic compounds containing tetrahydrofuran
and tetrahydropyran moieties. These functionalities are also present in numerous
bioactive natural products as well as drugs and are often vital to the
biological properties of these compounds. Harnessing the reactivity of
oxocarbenium ions is a long-standing challenge, which is addressed utilizing
chiral phosphoric acid-based catalysts to control the course of important
transformations proceeding through the intermediacy of oxocarbenium ions. This
project is focused on investigating catalyst-controlled stereo- and
regioselective acetalization reactions. New chiral catalysts are synthesized and
examined for the stereoselective/regioselective formation of spiroketals,
acetals and glycosides. Structural and computational studies are performed to
elucidate the mechanism of activation and the origins of selectivity.
Mechanistic studies contribute to fundamental insights into catalyst structure
and function, and provide opportunities for hypothesis-driven catalyst
design.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Professor Nagorny's research efforts revolve
around the development of new chiral phosphoric acid-based transformations
involving oxocarbenium ions and application of these transformations to the
synthesis of bioactive compounds and natural products. These studies will
produce new techniques that will enable the discovery of new small-molecule-
based therapeutic agents and improve the understanding of fundamentally
important chemical and biochemical processes. In addition, these efforts will
advance the field of chemical synthesis and produce new catalysts that will
allow chemists to shorten synthetic sequences, saving time, money and natural
resources. This research is considered sustainable as it uses phosphorus-based
catalysts (organocatalysts) rather than expensive, costly and sometimes toxic
transition metal-based catalysts. In addition to the technical applications of
the research, this project encourages sophomore undergraduate students to
consider the historical, economic, social, psychosocial, societal and legal
issues associated with pharmaceuticals design and production. Students will also
be carefully trained to edit Wikipedia entries in order to learn how to explain
their science to a broad and diverse audience.