* 1350448
* CAREER: Impact of maternal nutrient availability on offspring neuroendocrinology and behavior
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2020
* Erin Rhinehart, Susquehanna University
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 07/31/2020
* USD 550,000.00

Successfully reproducing organisms have evolved mechanisms for optimal
adaptation to their prevailing environment, and some organisms preferentially
exhibit behaviors, such as stockpiling food, that allow them to survive extended
food shortages. For example, hamsters prefer to increase food hoarding rather
than food intake in response to famine. Animals with these adaptations are
likely to have an evolutionary advantage, especially in environments where food
is scarce. In rodents, neural circuits in the brain that control feeding
behavior develop during the last half of gestation, making maternal nutrition
crucial during late pregnancy. In fact, maternal energy availability during
pregnancy directly influences the development of offspring neural and hormonal
machinery. However, we know very little about the mechanisms responsible for
these developmental changes, especially in food hoarding animals. This work will
contribute to the broad understanding about the effects of maternal nutrition on
neural and hormonal mechanisms that regulate feeding, providing insight into
feeding strategies adopted by offspring in response to variations in predicted
postnatal environment. The educational activities integrate research and
teaching efforts, develop a new major program in Neuroscience and provide a
resource website for information about the PI's research and teaching.

This project addresses fundamental questions essential for understanding how
gestational nutrient availability affects offspring ingestive behavior.
Ingestive behavior consists of two phases: 1) the appetitive phase, consisting
of foraging and food hoarding, and 2) the consummatory phase consisting of
actual food ingestion. The consummatory phase (food intake) is well studied in
rats and mice. The appetitive phase, however, has received comparatively little
attention, even though those behaviors are common to most animals including
humans. Unlike rats and mice, hamsters use appetitive behaviors extensively in
their ingestive behavioral repertoire, and they use information about internal
and external sources (i.e. both body fat and food hoards) of metabolic fuels to
maintain energy balance. In addition, hamsters prefer to increase food hoarding
rather than food intake during energetic challenges to maintain homeostasis.
Preliminary data from this model indicate that male hamsters exposed to
gestational nutrient restriction have increased food intake and reduced food
hoarding, along with increases in plasma insulin, abdominal fat and hypothalamic
neuropeptide Y, while females appear to be largely unaffected. These unique
sexually differentiated findings, along with the lack of previous attention to
gestational programming of appetitive ingestive behaviors increase the
likelihood that the proposed experiments will make significant contributions to
the field of behavioral neuroendocrinology. The broader impacts of this project
include enhanced undergraduate student mentoring in research, development of a
new laboratory course that integrates peer review and publication components,
resources for a new Neuroscience major with an integrated K-12 outreach and
development of a website describing the curricular innovations and neuroscience
research at both general and detailed levels