* 1350663
* CAREER: Dynamics, Correlations and Disorder in Topological Matter
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2020
* Babak Seradjeh, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2020
* USD 474,024.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports integrated
theoretical research and education focused on the role of external driving
forces, strong interactions among electrons, and defects and imperfections in
topological states of electronic matter. Topological states are characterized by
properties that in a fundamental sense have a geometric origin and are unchanged
by small changes of the material, and are connected to states around the surface
and edges of the material that can conduct electricity without dissipation, even
when the bulk is insulating. The research thrusts are aimed at formulating
concepts to advance understanding of topological states. They address specific
questions of practical importance by virtue of studying realistic physical
systems and their potential applications. This project may contribute to the
foundations of new technologies such as quantum computation, precision
metrology, energy conversion, and low-power electronic devices. The integrated
education activities will bring recent scientific advances and new concepts to
high school students of diverse socio-economic and ethnic backgrounds.
Educational materials developed will be made publicly available. This effort
will be informed by, and will contribute to, science education research and the
nation's strategic education needs to meet the challenge of finding and
utilizing the materials of future technologies. The Principle Investigator will
also help improve the participation and diversity of students in science through
existing efforts at Indiana
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports the Principle
Investigator's (PI) integrated research, education and outreach activities
focused on the role of non-equilibrium dynamics, correlations and disorder in
topological states of matter, especially in topological insulators and
superconductors, and their potential applications. These activities have three
aims:&lt;br/&gt;1. To study the dynamical properties of topological states, in
particular the realization, detection and manipulation of topological bound
states, such as Majorana fermions, in periodically driven systems.&lt;br/&gt;2.
To study disorder and fluctuations in dynamic and static topological states,
especially their role in the realization of novel correlated topological states
of matter, and the topological protection of quantum information and their
applications.&lt;br/&gt;3. To institute an integrated and broad educational and
outreach effort at K-12, undergraduate and graduate levels that fosters the
students' understanding of organizational principles in condensed matter -
including the role of topology, promotes the diversity of students in science,
and prepares the next generation of scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will
use analytical approaches and numerical simulations combining models of various
levels sophistication to elucidate the conceptual framework as well as the
physically relevant properties and phenomena of real systems. The educational
and outreach activities include the project Forefronts of Research Education
Modules to develop short, inquiry-based units that bring recent advances to high
school physics classrooms as well as summer research experience for
underrepresented students and a seminar series for undergraduate and graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;