* 1350436
* CAREER: A Two-Stage Processing Approach to Shape-Switching Liquid-Crystalline Elastomers for Biomedical Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2020
* Christopher Yakacki, University of Colorado at Denver-Downtown Campus
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 04/30/2020
* USD 584,301.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant will pioneer a novel
approach towards manufacturing tailored liquid-crystalline elastomers (LCEs),
while uncovering fundamental structure-programming-performance relationships
within these materials. LCEs are a class of smart and active polymers that can
reversibly and repeatedly change their shape in response to a stimulus such as
heat. Shape-changing polymers have tremendous potential to produce a variety of
actuator applications such as artificial muscles or minimally invasive
biomedical devices; however, LCEs have yet to be successfully developed into
these applications because of processing limitations. If successful, the
proposed two-stage reaction will overcome current chemistry and manufacturing
barriers by providing explicit control over polymer structure and domain
alignment. This approach will significantly increase the size scale at which
LCEs can be produced, while providing a faster and more repeatable reaction
mechanism compared to traditional approaches. As a result, this research will
uncover the key relationships to enable the design and development of LCEs for a
range of applications. An annual summer workshop series is planned to motivate
and attract high school students to pursue careers in
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the major challenges for LCEs to
perform this shape-switching behavior is that the polymeric chains must be
aligned to form a liquid-crystalline domain. A two-stage chemical reaction will
be developed using functionalized monomers to overcome the chemistry barrier
often associated with the synthesis of these materials. The first stage of the
reaction will create a lightly crosslinked liquid-crystal polymer. The influence
of both initial crosslinks and temperature on maximum achievable stretch will be
investigated in order to optimize the amount of chain alignment. The second
stage of the reaction will use ultraviolet light to further crosslink the
material and keep the polymer chains in their aligned orientation. The influence
of photo-crosslinks will be investigated for the effectiveness of retaining the
aligned shape. Ultimately, crosslinking and stretching conditions will be linked
to shape-switching performance and work capacity of the LCE materials. The
proposed approach utilizes two independent reactions allowing for the initial
synthesis and programming of the aligned material to occur at two distinct time
points, offering the ability for stretching and crosslinking to occur two
separate steps. This feature will not only help promote research collaborations
but would enable manufacturing flexibility once the process is fully realized.