* 1350690
* CAREER: Static Analysis for Dynamic Languages
* CSE,CCF
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2019
* Ben Hardekopf, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 03/31/2019
* USD 512,864.00

Dynamic languages such as JavaScript, Python, and Ruby are ubiquitous; they are
employed in critical infrastructure on clients, servers, and desktops, from
browsers to the operating systems. The security, maintainability, correctness,
and performance of programs written in these languages is becoming increasingly
important. Static analysis is a valuable tool to help achieve these goals.
However, static analysis of dynamic languages is a significant challenge due to
their inherent dynamism, complicated semantics, and obscure corner cases, all of
which conspire to make most static analyses incorrect, intractable, or both. The
objective of this research is to extend the state of the art in terms of
correctness, precision, and performance for static analysis of dynamic
languages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merits of this research involve
novel contributions in three areas: (1) ensuring the correctness of a static
analysis via analysis testing, enabling high correctness assurance with low
cost; (2) exploring the tradeoffs between analysis performance and precision by
a novel framework for tunable analysis sensitivity, enabling empirical
investigation into the most productive forms of static analysis for dynamic
languages; and (3) refinement and parallelization strategies to help optimize
analysis performance and precision, combatting the challenges of dynamic
languages outlined above. Beyond the technical contributions, the broader
impacts of this research are in education, the research community, and in
industry. The insights and artifacts resulting from this research will be used
to create novel curricula for both undergraduate and graduate courses. All of
the research artifacts will be made publicly available under an open license,
and the PI will use his connections to industrial research labs to facilitate
technology transfer to industry.