* 1350753
* CAREER: The energetic costs of active sensory and communication signals: Integrating research and education through organismal, cellular, and molecular approaches
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2014,12/31/2021
* Michael Markham, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Sridhar Raghavachari
* 12/31/2021
* USD 716,823.00

Animals sense the environment using a combination of active and passive sensory
systems in order to detect and respond to external stimuli. Passive sensory
systems such as vision require little energy input from the animal because the
carrier signal (light) comes from the sun. Active sensory and communication
systems such as echolocation in bats are advantageous because they do not
require external energy sources, but these animals must expend energy to produce
the acoustic carrier signal. Managing these energetic demands and responding to
energy shortfalls is essential for their survival and reproductive fitness.
Running out of energy to generate the signal renders the sensory system "blind"
and makes it impossible to find food, respond to threats from competitors, or
attract mates. The energetic demands of sensing and communicating are extreme in
some species of electric fish - animals that generate and sense electric fields
in the surrounding water to image their worlds and communicate in darkness. This
project aims to elucidate the organizing principles that allow animals to manage
and exploit energetically expensive sensory and communication channels. The
investigator will adapt knowledge, software, and technical approaches developed
from this project's research activities to improve science literacy and
education regionally, nationally, and internationally.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will test the hypothesis that energetic
demands are a major force shaping the operation and regulation of active sensing
at the organismal, cellular, and molecular levels using the weakly electric
fish, Eingenmannia viriscens, as a model system. The research plan will study
the electric organ discharge produced by the synchronized action potentials of
specialized electric organ cells called electrocytes to (1) discover how
hormones regulate electric signal intensity under normal conditions and in
response to metabolic stress, (2) discover how the cells that generate the
electric signal increase their energy efficiency and respond to energy
shortfalls, and (3) identify molecular adaptations in the electric organ cells'
ion channels and ion pumps that optimize energy utilization. This project will
integrate research and education through investigating the mechanisms that allow
animals to use metabolically demanding sensory and communication signals. This
project's educational component will achieve four educational goals that extend
the investigator's track record of integrating research and teaching: (1)
expanding and improving the investigator's outreach program, "The Electric Fish
Roadshow", that promotes scientific literacy in settings ranging from grade-
school classrooms to retirement communities [www.markhamlab.com/outreach.html].
(2) extending the scope and distribution of grade-school and middle-school
lesson plans regionally and nationally, as well as international deployment of
educational software for high-school and college neurobiology classes
[www.EOTNprogram.org], (3) transforming the way student scientist-educators are
trained in the investigator's laboratory and, (4) developing an undergraduate
laboratory class in the investigator's department that involves students
directly in high-level research activities related to the project's research
goals.