* 1350802
* CAREER: L-MAP: Pre-service Middle School Teachers' Knowledge of Mathematical Argumentation and Proving
* EHR,DRL
* 07/15/2014,12/31/2020
* Marta Magiera, Marquette University
* Continuing Grant
* Beth Herbel Eisenmann
* 12/31/2020
* USD 791,854.00

The field of mathematics teacher education needs a strong understanding of pre-
service teachers' knowledge about the practice of mathematical argumentation and
proof, including the development of this knowledge, to effectively move pre-
service teachers toward a more sophisticated understanding and enactment of this
practice with their own students. The integrated research and educational
activities will contribute to the knowledge base teacher education programs need
to effectively prepare middle school teachers for meeting the challenges of how
to make reasoning and proof an integral aspect of instructional practice. The
research results have the potential to guide teacher educators and educational
researchers concerned with strengthening pre-service teachers' ability to make
reasoning and proving an integral aspect of school mathematics. Consequently,
pre-service teachers will be better equipped to develop mathematical reasoning
skills in their future students and to support their students in learning
mathematics with understanding. Given this country's growing need for a
competent STEM workforce, helping all students learn mathematics in a way that
supports deeper understanding is a priority. Additionally, the support of early
CAREER scholars in mathematics education will add to the capacity of the country
to address issues in mathematics education in the future. The objective of this
program of research is to examine how middle school pre-service teachers'
knowledge of mathematical argumentation and proving develops in teacher
preparation programs. The project explores the research question: What
conceptions of mathematical reasoning and proving do middle school preservice
teachers hold in situations that foster reasoning about change, proportionality,
and proportional relationships, as they enter their mathematics course sequence
in their teacher preparation program, and how do these conceptions evolve
throughout the program? This development will be studied along three dimensions:
(a) pre-service teachers' own ability to formulate mathematical arguments, (b)
their ability to analyze mathematical arguments, and (c) their ability to
analyze situations that engage students in mathematical argumentation and
proving. Cross-sectional and longitudinal studies of 60 pre-service teachers'
models, or systems of interpretation, of mathematical argumentation and proof in
curricular context that foster reasoning about change, proportionality and
proportional relationships will be conducted to provide an understanding of the
trajectory that captures how pre-service teachers develop their knowledge of
mathematical argumentation and proving throughout their university mathematics
preparation program and into their student teaching.