* 1350345
* CAREER: Problem Solving Skills as Predictors of Success and Persistence in Biology
* EDU,DGE
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2021
* Paula Lemons, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Vinod Lohani
* 06/30/2021
* USD 913,450.00

This CAREER project focuses on understanding problem-solving skills among
biology undergraduates. The goals are to: (1) Investigate the problem solving
steps of beginning and advanced biology students in the domains of protein
structure and function and metabolism; (2) Determine the extent to which the use
of particular problem-solving steps by biology students predicts their success
and persistence in science; and (3) Apply the findings to enhance problem
solving skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Longitudinal data are being collected from
a cohort of biology undergraduates across their undergraduate careers. Data
include students' problem solving steps along with demographic characteristics,
academic characteristics, and career intentions. Problem-solving steps are
analyzed qualitatively. Hierarchical Generalized Linear Modeling and
Hierarchical Linear Modeling are used to determine the extent to which problem-
solving skill predicts success and persistence in science. This project expands
an online problem solving tutorial to enhance supportive problem solving skills
in solving protein structure and function and metabolism problems. Additionally,
biology faculty from the university and local high schools are meeting regularly
to engage in discussion, implementation, and feedback about how to teach problem
solving in biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research in this area is important for
greater understanding of how students solve problems which can help educators
develop targeted course interventions. Targeted course interventions have been
shown to facilitate student success and persistence in science. More widespread
success and persistence in science degree programs is necessary to meet the
predicted demand for more workers in areas such as health care, biomedical
research, and engineering in the United States of America. This project provides
insights for building learning and teaching tools to increase the number of
undergraduates who are prepared for science career paths. In so doing, the
project will contribute to a globally competitive workforce in science in the
United States of America. Additionally, the proposed project will increase our
understanding of some of the factors that may have impact on the full
participation of groups underrepresented in science-related professions.