* 1350114
* CAREER: Nano Electro Mechanical Resonant Sensing Platform for Chip Scale, High Resolution and Ultra-Fast Terahertz Spectroscopy and Imaging
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/15/2014,03/31/2020
* Matteo Rinaldi, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 03/31/2020
* USD 430,000.00

CAREER: Nano Electro Mechanical Resonant Sensing Platform for Chip Scale, High
Resolution and Ultra-Fast Terahertz Spectroscopy and Imaging &lt;br/&gt;Matteo
Rinaldi, Northeastern University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
Terahertz (THz) radiation, which lies in the frequency gap between infrared and
microwaves, has remarkable potential for diagnostic and imaging applications,
among many others. However, inherent technological limitations drastically limit
THz generation and detection, a fundamental challenge known as the "THz gap".
The objective of this CAREER proposal is to develop a groundbreaking long-range,
integrated research and educational program focused on the investigation of new
approaches to chip-scale, high-resolution, ultra-fast THz spectroscopy using a
new generation of Nano-Electro-Mechanical System (NEMS) devices. The proposed
research and educational program will enable the realization of a new class of
high performance NEMS resonant THz detectors based on the integration and co-
design of advanced piezoelectric nanostructures and photonic metamaterials. This
project will address the following: (1) Investigation of innovative efficient
piezoelectric transduction of high-frequency bulk acoustic modes of vibration in
suspended nano-plates with strong and spectrally selective absorption
characteristics to THz radiation. (2) Exploration of the thermal detection
capabilities of such piezoelectric resonant nano-plates. (3) Investigation of
innovative and advanced NEMS structures based on the integration of metamaterial
THz absorbers with Aluminum Nitride (AlN) Nano-Plate Resonators to enable the
implementation of a set of spectrally selective THz NEMS resonant detectors that
can potentially cover the entire THz spectrum of interest. (4) System-level
implementations of chip-scale sensing platforms for THz spectroscopy and imaging
through fundamental innovation in wafer level packaging, circuit design and
differential measurement techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact: This long-range integrated research and educational program will lead to
a transformative NEMS THz detector technology that will enable the use of THz
technologies in a wide variety of applications that could significantly impact
the quality of life in different aspects, such as health, security and
sustainability. Simultaneously, the proposed program will educate a cadre of
experts needed for a full exploitation of these new THz technologies. The
following goals will be targeted through outreach, education and technology
transfer: (1) Bringing awareness to K-12 and undergraduate students, in
collaboration with The Center for STEM Education at Northeastern University,
with the integration of "NanoTech Units" into existing summer programs in which
students will interact closely with the Principle Investigator (PI) and his
graduate research assistants. (2) Hands-on demonstrations at large public
venues. (3) Results dissemination through strategic use of online resources. (4)
Education and training of graduate and undergraduate students in collaboration
with industrial partners on the "Northeastern University Cooperative Education"
basis in order to help the students developing the knowledge, awareness,
perspective, and confidence necessary to bridge academic research and market
needs. (5) Graduate and undergraduate courses development, including topics
relevant to the proposed research.