* 1350764
* WORKSHOP: Computer Supported Cooperative Work 2014 Doctoral Research Colloquium
* CSE,IIS
* 11/01/2013,10/31/2014
* Darren Gergle, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 10/31/2014
* USD 25,049.00

This award supports a research development workshop for promising doctoral
students to be held in conjunction with the 2014 ACM Conference on Computer
Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW 2014). CSCW 2014 will take place in Baltimore,
Maryland, USA on February 15-19, 2014 and will be attended by approximately 500
CSCW professionals from around the world. Research reports published in the CSCW
Conference Proceedings are heavily refereed and widely
cited.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Doctoral Colloquium (DC) is a research-focused
meeting of 12 selected Ph.D. candidates and a panel of 4-6 research mentors.
Prior colloquia have helped launch the careers of many outstanding CSCW
researchers. The colloquium seeks to (a) build a cohort group of new researchers
who will then have a network of colleagues spread out across the world, (b)
guide the work of the new researchers by having the experts in the research
field give advice, (c) encourage and support the selection of CSCW research
topics, (d) enable new entrants to the field to attend a key research
conference, (e) illustrate the interrelationship and diversity of CSCW research,
and (f) make the new entrants' experience at CSCW an intellectually stimulating
and rewarding experience, encouraging them to return and submit papers, panels,
demonstrations, and posters, to the conference. Key efforts of the organizers
will encourage participation from diverse fields and underrepresented
populations and universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary intellectual
contributions of this project lie in close intellectual mentoring of the
selected Ph.D. participants and the development of a cohort of future leaders
within the CSCW community. Furthermore, bringing together these students with
the faculty panel, both during the workshop and during the conference poster
presentations, will support the development of interdisciplinary dialogs,
creating an environment for exchange and conversation that will further enable
progress on every project represented at the DC. The specific projects of
students selected for the DC will generate additional intellectual
contributions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The consortium will have considerable
benefits to society and the CSCW community, both short and long-term. In the
short term, the panelists will provide significant feedback to the students
participating in the DC. In the long-term, the expectation is that students who
have participated in the DC will give back to the community by engaging as
mentors to undergraduate students, and in the future to doctoral students.
Furthermore, these exceptional students are anticipated to be among the future
leaders of the CSCW community, and it is durable long-term benefit to that
community to support them in their early research. These values of continuity
and knowledge community will be explicitly expressed at the consortium.