* 1350954
* CAREER: Exploiting low-dimensional structure in data for more effective, efficient and interactive machine intelligence
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2023
* Christopher Rozell, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 06/30/2023
* USD 506,839.00

The rapid increase in sensor data is revolutionizing many areas of technology,
defense, and scientific discovery. Fortunately, despite data being high-
dimensional, various aspects of the data can frequently be characterized as
having low-dimensional geometric structure. This research project dramatically
improves machine intelligence by exploiting this geometric structure for more
effective, efficient and interactive data analysis systems. Complementary to
these technical objectives, this project also aims to engage, recruit, and
educate a diverse collection of students to STEM careers by developing novel
curricular and outreach materials that illustrate how mathematics can be used in
information systems. The potential benefits of this project are wide ranging in
areas where data plays a fundamental role.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Improving
machine intelligence requires understanding how to best exploit the underlying
low-dimensional structure in data for a given type of task, and this project is
guided by three research objectives toward this goal. The first objective
enhances machine effectiveness by exploiting the fact that multiple observations
of the same phenomenon are often related by movement along a manifold, with a
particular focus on the canonical computer vision problem of invariant object
recognition. The second objective seeks to improve computational efficiency by
developing dimensionality reduction techniques for manifold-modeled data that
preserves information about nonlinear feature-space mappings. The third
objective seeks to leverage interactivity to fully "close the loop" between
between humans and machines while learning low-dimensional information from a
human expert (an extension of the active learning paradigm). The project also
pursues two educational objectives, including developing curriculum modules for
pre-college outreach and integrating neural systems content into the ECE
curriculum to illustrate the connections between quantitative methods and
intelligent systems.