* 1350454
* CAREER: Software Abstractions for Stochastic Embedding in Predictive Simulations on Extreme-Scale Cyberinfrastructure
* CSE,OAC
* 02/01/2014,01/31/2020
* Onkar Sahni, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Alan Sussman
* 01/31/2020
* USD 513,409.00

Computer simulations for scientific problems are now considered as the third
pillar of scientific inquiry, where simulation-based prediction for increasingly
complex real-world problems has been matched with the growth in computing power.
These physical problems can be described mathematically through models that
encompass complex stochastic multiscale systems. In such models several terms
and parameters are uncertain and not accounting for these uncertainties in the
system-level prediction can lead to significant inaccuracies and futile
predictions. For reliable predictions, the uncertainties must be statistically
quantified to understand their effects on quantities being evaluated by the
simulation. This need has given rise to several simulation tools that have been
applied to tackle challenging problems. However, these simulation tools are
often integrated in an ad-hoc fashion leading to under utilization of the
hardware, or limited applicability in terms of the problem at hand, or both.
Therefore, algorithmic and software elements and abstractions are needed that
can re-use existing components, and support creation of new ones, such that they
can be integrated with ease to construct effective tools for stochastic
simulations.

To achieve this goal, this project is investigating novel abstractions based on
a rigorous and systematic approach to stochastic embedding techniques.
Stochastic embedding implies insertion of uncertainty propagation loops/samples
in the calculations within the physics engine. The idea of embedding is to
increase the computational efficiency. With embedding, different software
components become aware of the stochastic discretization and account for it not
only in the underlying floating-point operations but also in parallelization and
communications. The focus of this project is on generalizations that target
different physics analysis codes and a broad range of stochastic discretization
techniques including adaptive collocation, low-rank separated representation,
and stochastic Galerkin. The ultimate goal is to achieve tremendously efficient
and new levels of reliable predictive simulations on next-generation computing
platforms and cyberinfrastructure, where the size of the overall stochastic
problem is enormous (e.g., with many trillions of degrees-of-freedom in the
joint spatiotemporal-stochastic space).

The research goal is to provide remarkable improvements in our ability to
reliably predict and control the performance of complex stochastic multiscale
systems, which in-turn will have great scientific, economic and social impacts
(e.g., in making energy generation and management systems highly efficient and
reliable). The resulting techniques are expected to be applicable to other broad
research areas such as large-scale parametric studies, optimization and inverse
problems. This project builds on a comprehensive three-pronged education plan
that includes K-12, undergraduate and graduate students as well as broader
community (including industry). The idea is to educate and grow the next
generation of researchers focused on advanced computing and computational
science. This will be done through summer camps, courses and workshops. In order
to have the maximum impact, results from this research will be disseminated via
a variety of methods such as conference presentations, journal papers, software
documents, and tutorials.