* 1350707
* CAREER: Projective Reflection: Learning as Identity Exploration within Games for Science
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2020
* Aroutis Foster, Drexel University
* Continuing Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 07/31/2020
* USD 1,004,836.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Education stakeholders from advocates to
developers are increasingly recognizing the potential of science games in
advancing student academic motivation for and interest in science and science
careers. To maximize this potential, the project will use science games (e.g.
Land Science, River City, and EcoMUVE), shown to be enjoyable to students and
proven to promote student learning in science at the middle school level.
Through a two-phase process, games will be used as vehicles for learning about
ways to change how students think about science and potentially STEM careers.
The goal of the intervention is to explore which processes and design features
of science games will actually help students move beyond a temporary identity of
being a scientist or engineer (as portrayed while playing the game) to one where
students began to see themselves in real STEM careers. Students' participation
will be guided by teams of teachers, faculty members, and graduate students from
Drexel University and a local school. All science students attending the local
inner city middle school in Philadelphia, PA, will participate in the
intervention.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using an exploratory mixed-method design, the
first two years of the project will focus on exploring, characterizing, coding,
and analyzing data sets from three large games designed to help students think
about possible careers in science. During year 3, the project will integrate
lessons learned from the first two years into the existing middle school science
curriculum to engage students in a one-year intervention using PCaRD (Play
Curricular activity Reflection Discussion). During the intervention, the PI will
work with experts from Drexel University and a local school to collect data on
the design features of Land Science to capture identity change in the science
identity of the participating students. Throughout the course of year 3, the PI
will observe, video, interview, survey, and use written tasks to uncover if the
Land Science game is influencing students' identity in any way (from a temporary
to a long-term perspective about being a scientist or engineer). Data collected
during three specified waves during the intervention will be compared to
analyses of existing logged data through collaborations with researchers at
Harvard University and the University of Wisconsin-Madison. These comparisons
will focus on similar middle-aged science students who used the same gaming
environments as the students involved in this study. However, the researcher
will intentionally look for characteristics related to motivation, science
knowledge, and science identity change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
integrate research and education to investigate learning as a process of change
in student science identity within situated environmental contexts of digital
science gameplay around curricular and learning activities. This integrated
approach will allow the researcher to explore how gaming is inextricably linked
to the student as an individual while involved in the learning of domain
specific content in science. The collaboration among major university and school
partners; the expertise of the researcher in educational psychology, educational
technology, and science games; and the project's advisory board makes this a
real-life opportunity for the researcher to use information that naturally
exists in games to advance knowledge in the field about the value of gaming to
changing students' science identities. It also responds to reports by the
National Research Council committee on science learning and computer games,
which identifies games as having the potential to catalyze new approaches to
science learning.