* 1350595
* CAREER: Digital Encoding of Information Signals for Security with Limited Resources
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2014,01/31/2020
* Paul Cuff, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 01/31/2020
* USD 450,000.00

Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Information signals are abundant in
modern complex systems, and the encoding needed to provide security during
communication and storage becomes one of many important security concerns. This
research project will develop theory and technology for providing a critical
degree of security to information signals, which will allow an engineer to
optimize the tradeoff between the expense of security resources and the security
guarantees that the system can provide. The underpinnings of this work are
information theoretic in nature. The Pincipal Investigator has demonstrated the
emergence of new theory for understanding partial
secrecy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Much of the focus in secure communication research
is on mechanisms for providing security resources, usually in the form of a
private authenticated channel or an authenticated secret key. This might be
accomplished through cryptography, information theoretic physical layer
security, or quantum key exchange. This project will address the question of how
to efficiently use those resources to protect signals (source coding). Prior
information theory literature on secure source coding typically either is
limited to perfect secrecy or uses normalized mutual information as a metric for
the level of secrecy provided. This project has two key innovations. First,
privacy guarantees come in the form of limits on what an adversary can do with
eavesdropped information. This is measured, for example, by average distortion
or payoff guarantees, analogous to rate-distortion theory. Second, an adversary
is assumed to independently obtain additional information about the signals in
real time, to assist in their attack. These innovations have already lead to
interesting theoretical discoveries as well as unusual encoding and stochastic
decoding mechanisms for efficiently achieving secrecy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
plan for this project involves investigating the theoretical implications of
important practical constraints, such as delay in the communication, delay in
the adversary's information, uncertainty about the information signal, complex
signals, multi-user settings, etc. These theoretical results provide guidelines
for how secrecy should be designed. To bridge theory to application, this
project has two areas of emphasis. The first is a study of the use of
cryptography as the security resource. This involves complexity analyses of the
codecs used as well as a theoretical understanding of the consequences of
differing types of resources (i.e., private channel vs. secret key). The second
is the application of these technologies to secure distributed
control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Significance and
Importance:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Security is relevant to important societal
infrastructure, such as energy, transportation, and communication networks. This
project aims to fill an important gap in information theory and the
understanding of digital communications. Although a rich mathematical theory for
encoding and compression of information is known in the field, the security
counterpart to this theory, which incorporates constraints on security
resources, is conspicuously lacking. This project aims to provide new
fundamental understanding to the field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational
component of this project will engage in the swelling movement of high quality
and freely available education resources. Princeton University has recently
partnered with Coursera, a non-profit organization that collaborates with
research and education institutions to provide open (free) access to high
quality education. This mode of teaching not only increases outreach but enables
innovative teaching features through technology. The P.I. has engaged with
Coursera to create an undergraduate signals and systems course. Additionally, he
will create and teach graduate courses containing research discoveries from this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This funding will support Ph.D. students in their
education and research. The P.I. has a track record of mentoring female students
(two out of six current Ph.D students). Undergraduates are also incorporated
into the discovery process through independent work mentoring.