* 1350206
* CAREER: Leveraging Heterogeneous Manycore Systems for Scalable Modeling, Simulation and Verification of Nanoscale Integrated Circuits
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2014,10/31/2020
* Zhuo Feng, Michigan Technological University
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 10/31/2020
* USD 400,000.00

The goal of this CAREER research project is to best unleash the power of
emerging heterogeneous manycore CPU-GPU computing platforms. This will require
revolutionizing the next-generation Electronic Design Automation (EDA) tools to
deal with unprecedented complexity of circuits involving billions of components,
making possible their modeling, analysis and verification tasks which would be
prohibitively expensive and even intractable with methods in use today. The
experience acquired in this research is also likely to contribute to advances in
the use of computing in other areas of science and engineering, thus impacting
areas such as complex system modeling and simulation, computational fluid
dynamics, social computing, and systems biology. The PI will promote
undergraduate and underrepresented student research, as well as K-12 education
outreach, to motivate students in pursuing advanced engineering education or a
career in STEM areas. Additionally, the PI will integrate the research outcomes
into undergraduate and graduate curriculum development, and leverage
interdisciplinary, industrial and international collaborations to effectively
facilitate the proposed research work and broadly disseminate the results.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Future nanoscale Integrated Circuit (IC)
subsystems, such as clock distributions, power delivery networks, embedded
memory arrays, as well as analog and mixed-signal systems, may reach an
unprecedented complexity involving billions of circuit components, making their
modeling, analysis and verification tasks prohibitively expensive and
intractable with existing EDA tools. On the other hand, emerging heterogeneous
manycore computing systems, such as the manycore CPU-GPU computing platforms
that integrate a few large yet power-consuming general purpose processors with
massive number of much slimmer but more energy-efficient graphics processors,
can theoretically delivery teraflops of computing power. The proposal aims to
accelerate a paradigm shift in EDA research to more energy-efficient
heterogeneous computing regimes. Towards this end, the PI will develop
systematic hardware/software approaches to achieve scalable integrated circuit
modeling, simulation and verifications by inventing heterogeneous CAD algorithms
and data structures, as well as exploiting hardware-specific and domain-specific
runtime performance modeling and optimization approaches.