* 1350178
* CAREER: Towards Synthetic Biology in Human Stem Cells
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2014,08/31/2021
* Krishanu Saha, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 08/31/2021
* USD 462,000.00

CBET-1350178 &lt;br/&gt;Saha, Krishanu&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Human stem cells
provide an attractive, patient-matched source for generating many tissues found
in the body, but controlling stem cells in culture remains a key challenge. To
meet this challenge, this proposal seeks to develop and apply synthetic biology
tools in order to dissect and precisely control the complex molecular signaling
processes that determine stem cell behavior in culture. Synthetic biology is an
emerging biotechnology field that combines elements of engineering, mathematics,
chemistry, and biology to synthesize novel systems from characterized biological
components. Applying new synthetic biology tools in human stem cells to control
cell behavior would enable advanced manufacturing of patient-specific tissues
and cells for disease modeling and drug discovery applications. This proposal
outlines a novel approach to convert natural signaling components in human stem
cells to synthetic, bioorthogonal ones. The approach relies on producing
mutations in cells at defined genomic locations. Such an approach allows for the
formation of libraries of mutant cells that can be selected for particular
functions. The proposal focuses on a fundamental barrier to establishing a
robust stem cell tissue engineering and bioprocessing industry ? manipulating
cell signaling pathways when stem cells grow in culture and come together with
other cells and materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be integrated
into education by developing and disseminating course modules demonstrating the
importance of cross-disciplinary training in stem cell biology, engineering and
bioethics for postgenomic approaches to human biomedicine. The proposal to
incorporate underrepresented students into the research laboratory and to
advance new curriculum will help to develop the next generation of students
trained at the stem cell biology-engineering interface.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Due
to the interdisciplinary nature of the project, this CAREER award by the
Biotechnology, Biochemical, and Biomass Engineering Program of the CBET Division
is co-funded by the Systems and Synthetic Biology Program of the Division of
Molecular and Cellular Biology.