* 1350563
* CAREER: Low-Rank Matrix Modeling for Constrained Reconstruction from Noisy and Sparsely-Sampled Data
* CSE,CCF
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2020
* Justin Haldar, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 03/31/2020
* USD 415,010.00

Sensing systems are found everywhere in the modern world, ranging from the
microphones, video cameras, and antennas found in everyday cellular phones, to
the radar systems used for astronomy, meteorology, archaeology, and defense
applications, to the biomedical imaging systems used to understand the human
body and its diseases. Real-world sensing systems must always strike a practical
balance between the cost of data acquisition and the quality of the measured
data. The costs of acquiring a large amount of high-quality data are prohibitive
for many important applications, and place practical limits our ability to
explore and understand our bodies, our world, and our universe. This effect is
exacerbated as new sensors become increasingly capable of acquiring
multidimensional data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is focused on
exploring the use of parsimonious low-rank signal models to extract information
from incomplete and/or low-quality data. Specifically, the investigators are
developing theory and methods to unify and generalize a range of existing
constrained signal reconstruction methods within a framework based on low-rank
matrix embeddings. While the new theory and methods can be applied in general
sensing applications, the proposed models are being evaluated in the specific
practical context of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), where they can enable
faster MRI experiments and more informative high-dimensional examinations.