* 1350998
* Environmental nitrite and endocrine disruption
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2014,04/30/2019
* Gerald LeBlanc, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 04/30/2019
* USD 603,847.00

Nitrate pollution due to human activities (such as extensive use of fertilizers)
is a global concern in freshwater and marine environments. Some negative impacts
of nitrate pollution are well known--for example, extensive algal blooms or
formation of the oxygen-deprived "dead zones" in nutrient-polluted waters.
However, some of the dangers posed by excess nitrates may be more subtle and
occur at much lower nitrate concentrations. The present study will investigate
such novel mechanism of the impacts of low-level nitrate pollution on freshwater
ecosystems which may be caused by conversion of nitrate into a potent signaling
molecule--nitric oxide--which affects key cellular and physiological functions
in a variety of organisms including humans. The PI will use a common freshwater
organism--a water flea--to determine how nitric oxide derived from the nitrate
found in the environment affects development, growth and reproduction. This
study will provide novel insights into the effects of nitrate pollution on
freshwater ecosystems and can have implications for understanding of the effects
of excessive use of fertilizers on the health of freshwater ecosystems and the
organisms that depend on them (including humans).

Human activities have significantly modified the Earth's nitrogen cycle. The
amount of nitrogen that is biologically available in ecosystems has dramatically
increased through commercial nitrogen fixation for the production of
fertilizers. The benefits associated with increased food production resulting
from the use of synthetic fertilizers have been tempered by nitrogen pollution
resulting in regional loss of water quality and biodiversity. Recent studies
have revealed that levels of nitrates in the environment, previously considered
to be safe, can be converted to the potent signaling molecule, nitric oxide,
which may interfere with processes such as development, growth, and
reproduction. Using state-of-the-art technologies in molecular biology, the
mechanism by which nitric oxide, derived from environmental nitrate, interferes
with embryo development will be established. The study will be conducted using a
model crustacean species, Daphnia pulex; however, the mechanistic information
obtained will be useful for the assessment of hazards associated with low-level
nitrate exposure on other species, including humans. The first aim of this
research will be to determine the molecular mechanism by which environmentally
derived nitric oxide interferes with hormone signaling pathways, and is
specifically focused on the interactions of nitric oxide with two nuclear
receptors. The second aim will be to extend the molecular studies to whole
organism evaluations of the consequences of nitric oxide exposure on specific
aspects of embryo development. The final aim will be to quantify the population-
level consequences of environmentally derived nitric oxide as shown in the
previous aims to interfere with specific aspects of embryo development. Results
from this research will provide a mechanistic understanding of how
environmentally relevant levels of nitrate could result in declines in some
wildlife populations through the dysregulation of molecular signaling processes
critical to population sustainability. This study also will support an ambitious
research-based outreach activity aimed at identifying variables that impact
nitrate levels in the natural environmental. This outreach effort will provide
mentoring training to graduate students and hands-on field and laboratory
research experience for undergraduate students.