* 1350330
* CAREER: Geometric Shape Deformation with Applications in Medicine
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2014,02/29/2016
* Ladislav Kavan, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 02/29/2016
* USD 212,082.00

In spite of significant recent advances 3D computer graphics are still humbled
when confronted with medical-grade requirements, so medical illustrators often
continue to rely on 2D hand drawing. A fundamental challenge is that detailed
geometric models and advanced nonlinear materials increase computational
complexity, making them difficult to apply in real-time interactive
applications. In this research, the PI will investigate an alternative approach
based on geometric shape deformations rather than the processes which created
them. He argues that intuitive shape deformation can be facilitated by
guarantees of basic geometric properties such as smoothness and injectivity (no
self-intersection). The key is to design algorithms that can do this quickly
while providing the user with a small yet expressive set of adjustable controls
to ensure an efficient interactive experience; the task of shape deformation
techniques is to extrapolate this parsimonious, human manageable set of input
controls into a full-scale 3D deformation field in a natural and predictable
way. The PI's hypothesis is that this requirement can be formally expressed in
terms of basic geometric properties. To this end, the PI will explore both
direct (closed-form) and variational methods, because while direct methods excel
in speed variational methods offer stronger guarantees and advanced geometric
properties. In terms of direct methods, the PI will develop new ways to quickly
blend certain groups of 3D transformations (e.g., with the help of new geometric
algebraic structures). Transformation blending will be complemented by advanced
influence weights that allow the user to explicitly control the resulting
sparseness. In terms of variational methods, the PI will study deformation
energies satisfying traditional properties such as rotation invariance but
augmented with higher-order continuity and injectivity; here, the main challenge
will be to find efficient numerical solutions for the underlying optimization
problems. The PI believes it will prove possible to mitigate the inherent
computational complexity of variational methods by suitably combining them with
direct methods so as to cast some of the variational problems as convex
optimizations, thereby opening the door to highly efficient convex solvers.

Broader Impacts: Shape deformation is relevant to architecture, computer aided
design (CAD), and many areas of science and engineering, as well as to the
entertainment industry. But this project has primarily been motivated by medical
applications, inspired by requests from the PI's collaborators at The Children's
Hospital of Philadelphia. Given the right tools, the classical field of hand
drawn medical illustration will evolve into 3D animated medical atlases, setting
new standards in medical education. Shape deformation techniques could
ultimately contribute to clinical praxis, by facilitating diagnosis and pre-
operative planning when treating conditions such as pathological skull
deformities (craniosynostosis). And shape modeling tools in expert hands could
help lower the radiation dose required in CT scanning, by applying new
reconstruction methods that combine user input with template models and accurate
surface scans (obtained with radiation-free methods such as laser scanning). The
PI also will organize seminars and courses that bring together medical and
engineering students, including members of underrepresented groups, thereby
promoting interdisciplinary collaboration in both research and education.