* 1350670
* CAREER: Sketching Algorithms for Massive Data
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Jelani Nelson, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 08/31/2019
* USD 512,818.00

A sketch of a massive dataset is some compression of it which still allows for
answering, sometimes only approximately, some pre-specified types of queries
about the data. For many query types of interest, it turns out that sketches
exist that provide exponentially smaller compressions. This feature has made
sketching methods pervasive in coping with recent trends in data explosion to
reduce both communication bandwidth and required storage capacity. Sketching has
also been applied to obtain algorithmic speedup for certain high-dimensional
problems such as nearest neighbor search, clustering, and low-rank approximation
for large matrices, as well as to enable more efficient signal acquisition in a
field that has come to be known as compressed sensing. This research plans to
further the state of knowledge concerning three intertwined subtopics of
sketching: streaming, dimensionality reduction, and compressed sensing.

A fundamental question the PI will investigate is whether one can design
sketches that are moderately "universal", in that the same sketch can be used to
answer many different types of queries. Dimensionality reduction has been
successfully used to circumvent the so-called "curse of dimensionality" in many
problems, where the best known algorithms have running times that scale poorly
with dimension. This research plans to study the tradeoffs between approximation
quality, number of vectors in the data set, and target dimension, and to close
gaps between known upper and lower bounds. Compressed sensing has found
applications in a diverse range of areas, such as magnetic resonance imaging and
photography. This research plans to investigate more efficient compressed
sensing schemes for providing various types of approximate recovery guarantees.