* 1350344
* CAREER: Static-Analysis-Driven Engineering of Modern Software Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2014,01/31/2020
* Matthew Might, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 01/31/2020
* USD 449,994.00

Users of software are all too familiar with its shortcomings:
software&lt;br/&gt;is slow, software is buggy and software is insecure. When a
complex&lt;br/&gt;software system fails, it is unhelpfully simplistic to blame
the&lt;br/&gt;implementors of the system as incompetent. The truth is that
software&lt;br/&gt;engineers are uniquely disadvantaged among the traditional
engineering&lt;br/&gt;disciplines because they lack a viable predictive model
for the&lt;br/&gt;systems they design and build. That is, a software engineer
cannot&lt;br/&gt;predict the behavior of software in practice in the same way
that a&lt;br/&gt;civil engineer can predict the behavior of a bridge under load.
The&lt;br/&gt;primary intellectual merit of this research is that it lays
the&lt;br/&gt;critical, systematic foundations for the science of prediction
for&lt;br/&gt;software. The broader impacts are to enable engineers to build
better&lt;br/&gt;software with the aid of predictivity. Moreover, this research
also&lt;br/&gt;seeks to develop courses and educational material to train the
next&lt;br/&gt;generation of software engineers in the art of constructing
fast,&lt;br/&gt;safe, reliable and secure software in this fashion. As this
research&lt;br/&gt;transfers into practice and engineers adopt this methodology,
it will&lt;br/&gt;significantly strengthen the foundation of
national&lt;br/&gt;cyberinfrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The core technical
thrust of this research is the development of a&lt;br/&gt;systematic method for
the synthesis of static analyzers for complex,&lt;br/&gt;modern programming
languages. It also explores whether or not this&lt;br/&gt;methodology can be
automated in whole or in part. To motivate the&lt;br/&gt;development of this
method, this research applies the method to the&lt;br/&gt;synthesis of
intensional static analyzers for popular scripting&lt;br/&gt;languages such as
JavaScript, Perl, PHP, Ruby and Python?many of which&lt;br/&gt;happen to be the
languages powering modern, web-based software. The&lt;br/&gt;foundational
technical concept of this research is the systematic&lt;br/&gt;transformation of
small-step interpreters into static analyzers.&lt;br/&gt;Small-step analyzers
promise unique advantages over traditional&lt;br/&gt;techniques, including more
opportunities for optimizing speed and&lt;br/&gt;precision, and clearer, easier
reasoning about the soundness of the&lt;br/&gt;results of the analysis.