* 1350248
* CAREER: Multiscale Modeling, Analysis and Simulation for High-Contrast Media
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2022
* Jiwen He, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2022
* USD 420,000.00

Gorb&lt;br/&gt;DMS-1350248&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Many natural and man-made
materials (e.g. porous media and biological tissues on the one hand, and
composites used in technology on the other) exhibit vast spatial variability in
most of their properties, such as hydraulic and electrical conductivities and
dielectric permeability. These are called high contrast media. Because these
materials are encountered in a wide range of application areas, such as
subsurface flows, bioengineering, suspensions, and medical and geophysical
imaging, they have received increased attention within the mathematical
community in recent years. The investigator studies high contrast composite
materials that exhibit an additional feature, which is of geometric nature,
namely, the heterogeneous domain either has highly concentrated inhomogeneities
or contains multiple scales (that is, its inhomogeneities are very small
compared to some length characteristic of the material). Graduate and
undergraduate students are included in the work of the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Mathematically, high contrast media are described
by partial differential equations with coefficients that take on an extremely
large range of values in the domain. The investigator studies problems of this
type that also have rapidly varying coefficients, meaning that they fluctuate on
a length scale that is much smaller than the size of the domain occupied by the
composite. These problems require special efforts in establishing strategies for
designing multiscale models. Recent advances in the field have led to the
development of many approaches that were designed mostly for problems with
bounded oscillations in problem parameters. However, problems whose coefficients
have high aspect ratio pose additional challenges for developing both analytical
and numerical solution methods. One therefore seeks techniques that are robust
with respect to problem parameters. The investigator develops efficient
analytical and numerical tools for describing strongly heterogeneous flows in
media with large variations in material properties and complex geometry.