* 1350336
* CAREER:   The Delta Connectome: Structure and Transport Dynamic of Delta Networks across Scales and Disciplines
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2020
* Paola Passalacqua, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Richard Yuretich
* 05/31/2020
* USD 532,725.00

Rich in ecosystem diversity and economic resources, deltas host approximately
half a billion people. However, anthropogenic disturbance, natural subsidence,
and eustatic sea-level rise are major causes of threat to deltas and managing
and preserving these dynamic centers of activity is imperative. This CAREER
project creates a research/educational framework, the Delta Connectome, based on
the general idea of a delta as a directed network of connected paths, which
interact continuously at a broad range of spatial and temporal scales that
dictate system response to change. Such relationships have been established in
many fields, from metabolic networks and food webs, to neural interactions, but
similar work on deltaic systems has yet to be developed. The project will use a
network-theoretic framework, incorporating remote sensing data analysis,
numerical modeling, and field observations, to develop software that will
characterize the spatial and temporal variability of deltas and quantify
couplings among variables within these systems. How the system responds to
change and its resilience to natural and anthropogenic perturbations at varying
spatial and temporal scales will then be determined. Specific goals of this
project include: (i) the objective quantification of delta morphologic features
to identify the signature of vegetation, anthropogenic disturbance, and
processes responsible for delta formation and evolution; (ii) the development of
an automatic image processing-based tool for the extraction of relevant
information from remotely sensed data; (iii) the identification of the
environmental controls on channel network and shoreline dynamics through coupled
analysis of extracted features; and (iv) the quantification of strength,
directionality, statistical significance, and scale of couplings among key
variables and the effect of anthropogenic disturbance and change on such
couplings. Ultimately, the software will provide a valuable tool for studying
deltaic systems and informing coastal restoration. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Human-
induced activities and climatic shifts are significantly impacting deltas around
the world. A quantitative description of the form and structure of deltas and
their dynamics is fundamental to address how they react to changes in climatic
forces and human pressure. The project provides an innovative combination of
teaching, training, learning, and dissemination activities to communicate these
impacts to the research community, the public, and future scientists. The tools
developed from the project will be released as open source software through the
Community Surface Dynamics Modeling System (CSDMS) repository and National
Center for Earth-Surface Dynamics (NCED) website. NCED Summer Institutes will
provide annual tutorials on software use and the tools will also be integrated
into courses taught at the University of Texas at Austin (UT-Austin).
Additionally, an Exploration Unit directed to high school students will be
developed for the UTeach Engineering Program at UT-Austin. In this unit, remote
sensing imagery and visual arts will be used to present environmental problems
such as coastal restoration and the effect of humans and climate on the natural
environment.