* 1350580
* CAREER:  Toward an improved understanding of the impact of silicon on arsenic, iron, and carbon biogeochemical cycling in rice paddy soils
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Angelia Seyfferth, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 08/31/2019
* USD 464,742.00

Rice is a staple crop for nearly half of the people on Earth, yet its quality
and quantity are affected by arsenic (As) with consequent impacts on global
human health and food security. Silicon (Si) addition to rice paddy soil has
been proposed as a potential mitigation strategy since the dominant form of As
in rice paddies shares a root-uptake pathway with Si in rice; however, addition
of Si may inadvertently impact other biogeochemical cycles such as iron (Fe) and
carbon (C) in soil, depending on the source of Si used. Thus, before Si addition
can be proposed as a feasible strategy to mitigate arsenic uptake by rice
globally, fundamental scientific questions must be addressed. Accordingly, the
goal of this project is to understand how different sources of Si added to soil
will affect a) As uptake and accumulation in rice, b) Fe plaque formation and
mineralogy (which influences As mobility), and c) carbon dioxide and methane
production and efflux. The outcomes of this work will increase the basic
scientific understanding of altered Si on As, Fe, and C cycling in rice paddies,
and may identify an affordable and practical solution to the arsenic-in-rice
problem with consequent benefits for the global society. Furthermore, the
outcomes of this work have a strong educational component and will be widely
disseminated to rice-growers through partnerships with non-profit organizations,
and to the scientific community through peer-reviewed publications and
conference presentations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will have both
laboratory and field components and the investigations will span the nanometer
to meter-field scale. A major component is the establishment of a new outdoor
research-education laboratory, the Rice Investigation, Communication, and
Education (RICE) Facility. The RICE Facility will be constructed -with ongoing
aid of students in the Landscape Design program- at the University of Delaware
(UD), and will enable field experiments in rice paddy mesocosms during summers
and allow the integration of research with educational outreach objectives. The
overarching educational goal is to increase the representation of
underrepresented groups in (geo)science by providing scholastic opportunities
for female and economically-disadvantaged students. Specifically, a) an annual
1-day summer-camp entitled Soil is Life will be developed at the RICE Facility
for students from the all-female middle-school Serviam Academy, b) a high-school
student from Newark High School will be paid to work on this project at the RICE
Facility annually during summer months, c) a new undergraduate course will be
developed that integrates soils and sustainability, and d) this project will
directly train graduate students on this interfacial field of study. The
proposed research and education will propel the career as a young scientist,
support her continual development into a successful teacher-scholar at
University of Delaware, and support her ongoing commitment and efforts to
increase the integration and representation of underrepresented groups in
(geo)science.