* 1350886
* CAREER: Analyzing Program Changes and Versions for Bug Detection and Diagnosis
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Wei Le, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 05/31/2015
* USD 169,851.00

Software development is inherently incremental. Nowadays, many software
companies adopt an agile process and a shorter release cycle, where software
needs to be delivered faster but with quality assurances, and many versions of
software may co-exist in the field and need to be maintained. While faster
releases do not increase the user's tolerance of bugs, it is challenging to
correctly introduce a change on top of existing programs. In recent studies,
researchers found that when programming a change, the most important information
a developer wants to know is whether this change breaks any code elsewhere, and
in fact, 15-24% of the bug fixes are incorrect. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will develop program analyses to address quality assurance problems
related to program changes and versions, specifically for the three challenges:
efficiently verifying changes for reliable software releases, automatically
diagnosing failures caused by changes, and effectively patching multiple
versions of software. The project will result in tools and techniques
transferable to industry to improve the quality and productivity of software
development. The results will also be disseminated via STEM volunteering, new
course materials, and release of the software and data obtained through this
research.