* 1350823
* CAREER: Algorithms for Risk Mitigation in Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 05/15/2014,04/30/2020
* Evdokia Nikolova, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 04/30/2020
* USD 561,540.00

As the world becomes increasingly connected and embedded in computational
systems, network algorithms have the potential for tremendous impact. A key
challenge is that, despite the enormous progress in computing, connectivity and
data analytics, uncertainty remains pervasive in all aspects of life and we need
a fundamental shift in the definition of what solutions we seek. For example,
what is the optimal route under uncertain traffic? That depends on the risk-
averseness of a user, who would seek to balance minimizing expected delay and
the variability of the route. How can we compute this risk-minimizing route?
More generally, how can we compute risk-minimizing solutions in complex networks
and how is risk defined? Risk has been at the forefront of research and practice
in finance and economics. However, there is still a major need for designing
computational approaches corresponding to these risk models, as well as
developing new risk models and solution techniques that are specific to
networked systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this CAREER project is to
lay the algorithmic foundation of a new area of risk mitigation for networked
systems (such as transportation, telecommunications, energy, etc.) via an
interdisciplinary approach that unifies Computer Science, Operations Research,
Economics and Finance. The technical milestones are to: (1) Develop a
comprehensive theory of risk models for networked systems, in part inspired by
risk models in finance and economics, and in part driven by the specific
requirements of networked systems; (2) Advance the classic theory of algorithms,
in which all input data is available upfront, by integrating uncertainty and
risk---this will be achieved by developing novel techniques for nonlinear and
nonconvex combinatorial optimization; (3) Leverage dynamic data to improve
adaptive decision-making, using and advancing tools from Markov Decision
Processes and developing new tools for approximating the optimal solutions; (4)
Further the theory of online algorithms for repeated decision-making by
developing reductions from nonlinear (risk-averse) formulations to the standard
linear formulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;On a high level, the transformative
potential of the proposed research is to fundamentally shift thinking about
stochastic problems in the field of network algorithms away from expected
performance and instead towards understanding and mitigating risk. The research
is motivated by problems of national importance in transportation,
telecommunications and energy. It has the potential to improve a variety of
applications that involve uncertainty and risk-averse users, for example,
reducing congestion in transportation and telecommunication networks, improving
the operation of the smart grid, etc. The PI will actively work on building
bridges to other disciplines, for example, via organizing interdisciplinary
workshops. The PI will also participate in high-school outreach programs, summer
camps for undergraduates and programs for increasing the participation of women
and underrepresented minorities in computing.