* 1350133
* CAREER: Scaling up Modeling and Statistical Inference for Massive Collections of Time Series
* CSE,IIS
* 06/15/2014,05/31/2021
* Emily Fox, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 05/31/2021
* USD 549,178.00

Consider the task of predicting influenza rates at a very large set of spatial
locations. Modeling each region independently does not leverage the information
from related regions and can lead to poor predictions, especially in the
presence of missing observations. Likewise, imagine estimating the value of
every house in the United States. Capturing trends within a neighborhood is key;
however, each neighborhood only has a few recent house sales. The challenges
presented by these increasingly prevalent massive time series are endemic to a
wide range of applications, from crime modeling for police resource allocation
to forecasting consumer trends and social networks: the individual data streams
often include only infrequent observations such that each alone does not provide
sufficient data for accurate inferences. However, the structured relationships
between them offer an opportunity to share information. A key question is how to
discover these relationships. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project takes a
computationally-driven Bayesian nonparametric approach, trading off flexibility
and scalability, to address the challenges of massive collections of
infrequently observed time series. Our approaches exploit correlation among the
data streams, e.g., among related regions, while enabling data-driven discovery
of sparse dependencies. The multi-resolution and modular forms also allow
incorporation of heterogeneous side information. Key to the success of the
proposed methods is scalable Bayesian posterior inference. We focus on (i)
parallel computations exploiting sparse graph dependencies, (ii) multi-
resolution inference, and (iii) online algorithms for dependent
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project represents an ambitious cross-
disciplinary effort, integrating ideas from machine learning, systems,
engineering, and statistics. The work addresses a largely ignored question in
the discussion on big data: How to cope with modeling and computational issues
when the data has crucial structure across time, especially arising from
individually sparse and disparate measurement sources. The tools developed will
significantly broaden the scope of scientific questions that can be addressed.
Results from this work will be publicly disseminated, including through open
source software, and our industry partners aim to transition the technology into
real-world systems. This project also involves developing (i) exciting and
intensive programs harnessing existing infrastructure, UW DawgBytes, to increase
the exposure of K-12 students, and especially girls, to machine learning; and
(ii) curriculum training students in both statistical and computational
thinking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For further information, see the project website
at http://www.stat.washington.edu/~ebfox/CAREER.html.