* 1350273
* CAREER: Understanding polar surfaces and interfaces using ultra-high resolution electron microscopy and spectroscopy
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2020
* James LeBeau, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 07/31/2020
* USD 500,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: This CAREER award supports an integrated research and
education effort that advances the understanding of material interfaces
essential to enable next generation electronics. Formation of interfaces between
certain dissimilar materials results in unique properties that lead to new
electronic device functionality. The detailed arrangement and bonding of atoms
at these interfaces is intimately linked to the observed behavior. Recent
advancements in electron microscopy have enabled the investigation of these
arrangements at an incredible level. This project employs these state-of-the-art
electron microscopy methods to directly study the interface structure and
bonding to offer a fresh perspective on these phenomena, providing input to
validate theoretical models. To drive student passion in science and
engineering, the project is coupled to a variety of targeted educational
programs. Undergraduate students directly contribute to the project by building
computer programs that facilitate new approaches to microscopy education.
Moreover, because traditional approaches to bring new students into science have
only been partially successful, the centerpiece of the educational outreach
program stimulates interest in science through the combination of microscopy
with the visual arts. For the broadest impact among young students and the
general public, this exhibit is distributed through connections with a local
museum and the NSF Nanoscale Informational Science Education network. This
project stands to increase the U.S. innovation and economic competitiveness in
the area of electroceramics and through advances in characterization
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: This CAREER award addresses
the fundamental nature of structural and electronic reconstructions at the
interface between distinctly different polar materials and their surfaces. In
particular, rock salt oxides are combined with wurtzite nitrides to explore the
details of charge compensation mechanisms at heterogeneous polar interfaces. The
influence of strain and defects on the electronic and atomic structure at the
interface is examined with state-of-the-art electron microscopy tools. Moreover,
in situ electron microscopy is used to study the stability and structure of the
rock salt oxides to provide critical input relevant to growth, integration, and
control of this class of materials. Simultaneously, electron microscopy
capabilities are being developed to fully extract the detailed atomic/electronic
structure and chemistry at the polar interfaces. The results also guide and
validate modeling from ab-initio calculations that lead to transformational
understanding of unique behaviors. Broader impacts and educational outreach are
integral to this effort. Students at the graduate level become skilled experts
of ultra-high resolution electron microscopy and spectroscopy using state-of-
the-art instrumentation. Undergraduate students participate through a
programming project to develop a 'digital' microscope to transform microscopy
education in the age of aberration correction. Working with local museums and
schools, an exhibit communicates advanced electron microscopy and materials
science research through the universal medium of art, highlighting the inherent
beauty of atomic structure symmetries.