* 1350740
* CAREER: Sustaining Moore's Law Through Introspective Computing: A Comprehensive System For Reliability and Energy Optimization in Modern Computing Devices
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2014,01/31/2019
* Timothy Miller, SUNY at Binghamton
* Continuing Grant
* Yuanyuan Yang
* 01/31/2019
* USD 482,000.00

Whether one is concerned about data-center carbon footprint or battery life of
mobile devices, the microprocessor is a dominating consumer of energy.
Transistor technology scaling, whose rate is expressed by Moore?s Law, is a
regular progression of transistor size reductions down to nanometer dimensions.
Historically, this scaling has led to significant improvements in performance
and energy efficiency, but more recently scaling has created severe reliability
challenges due to difficulties in building components at near-atomic scale. To
ensure correctness, chips are operated with static and worst-case safety margins
that account for more than 70% of the total energy used by a CPU. This research
program specifically addresses that energy wastage by intelligently tightening
safety margins and making them dynamic in order to ensure reliable operation
with dramatic reductions in expended energy. The success of this research effort
will lead to substantial reduction in energy wasted by semiconductor devices for
the purpose of improving battery life, environmental impact, and operating
costs. It will also encourage the use of continuous self-adjustment and
adaptation across an array of computing technologies.

In addition to being dependent on the power supply voltage and device
temperature, the power and switching delay of a transistor varies substantially
with random dopant fluctuation and aging. In current practice, the worst-case
combination of factors that affect transistor power consumption and delay are
used to size device geometries and define an operating voltage guard band. This
ensures reliable operation but leads to unnecessary energy wastage, as the
worst-case combinations are unlikely to occur in reality. In this work, machine
learning is used to correlate environmental and controllable factors that affect
circuit delay and power and dynamically predict the minimum safe guard band. If
error-resilient components are used, the guard band can be eliminated entirely.
To realize maximum benefit, the system design is optimized across the boundaries
of circuit, architectural, and software layers. Combining machine learning,
proactive closed-loop control, and a cost/benefit-driven approach to actuator
and on-chip sensor allocation, circuit designers and architects are provided
with a comprehensive methodology for creating introspective computing devices
that dramatically lower energy and adapt automatically to all environmental and
workload conditions.