* 1350541
* CAREER: SusChEM: Copper-Catalyzed Aerobic Dehydrogenative C-C Bond Formation through sp3 C-H Bond Functionalization
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2014,05/31/2020
* Haibo Ge, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Jin Cha
* 05/31/2020
* USD 600,000.00

This project, funded by the NSF Chemical Synthesis Program, supports the
research of Professor Haibo Ge of the Department of Chemistry and Chemical
Biology at Indiana University-Purdue University Indianapolis (IUPUI). Professor
Ge's research involves environmentally-friendly and atom-efficient methods for
preparing important organic molecules. The successful development of this
research has an impact on the fields of synthetic organic, medicinal, and
agricultural chemistries. The training of undergraduate and graduate students
for entry into the workforce is also a key part of this project. A new course
and a new undergraduate laboratory experiment are being developed. These courses
focus on the integration of transition-metal-catalyzed and heterocyclic
chemistry in the curriculum. The summer undergraduate research program improves
retention and engagement among chemistry and biochemistry students at IUPUI, and
facilitates their entry into the job market or graduate/professional
school.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Ge is developing methods for the
conversion of sp3-hybridized carbon-hydrogen bonds into carbon-carbon bonds
using copper-catalyzed reactions conducted under an atmosphere of oxygen. These
direct, catalytic dehydrogenative carbon-carbon bond-forming reactions achieve
the selective oxidation of sp3 carbons adjacent to a heteroatom (nitrogen or
oxygen) or an imino group (carbon-nitrogen double bond) in a variety of starting
substrates. The processes are extended to achieve efficient syntheses of a
variety of heterocyclic compounds. The diastereoselective and enantioselective
(using chiral catalysts) variants of these processes are also being studied.