* 1350146
* RUI-LTREB Renewal: Three decades of coral reef community dynamics in St. John, USVI: 2014-2019
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2020
* Peter Edmunds, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 04/30/2020
* USD 469,686.00

Describing how ecosystems like coral reefs are changing is at the forefront of
efforts to evaluate the biological consequences of global climate change and
ocean acidification. Coral reefs have become the poster child of these efforts.
Amid concern that they could become ecologically extinct within a century,
describing what has been lost, what is left, and what is at risk, is of
paramount importance. This project exploits an unrivalled legacy of information
beginning in 1987 to evaluate the form in which reefs will persist, and the
extent to which they will be able to resist further onslaughts of environmental
challenges. This long-term project continues a 27-year study of Caribbean coral
reefs. The diverse data collected will allow the investigators to determine the
roles of local and global disturbances in reef degradation. The data will also
reveal the structure and function of reefs in a future with more human
disturbances, when corals may no longer dominate tropical reefs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broad societal impacts of this project include
advancing understanding of an ecosystem that has long been held emblematic of
the beauty, diversity, and delicacy of the biological world. Proposed research
will expose new generations of undergraduate and graduate students to natural
history and the quantitative assessment of the ways in which our planet is
changing. This training will lead to a more profound understanding of
contemporary ecology at the same time that it promotes excellence in STEM
careers and supports technology infrastructure in the United States.
Partnerships will be established between universities and high schools to bring
university faculty and students in contact with k-12 educators and their
students, allow teachers to carry out research in inspiring coral reef
locations, and motivate children to pursue STEM careers. Open access to decades
of legacy data will stimulate further research and teaching.