* 1350522
* CAREER: Machine Learning for Complex Health Data Analytics
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Benjamin Marlin, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2019
* USD 536,527.00

The fields of health and behavioral science are currently undergoing a data
revolution. The Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health
act of 2009 has resulted in the wide adoption of electronic health records and
the emergence of increasingly vast stores of heterogeneous clinical data.
Simultaneously, emerging mobile health (mHealth) technologies are enabling the
collection of ever-larger volumes of continuous physiological measurements and
behavioral self-report data in non-clinical settings. Such data sources have the
potential to yield transformative advances in the fundamental understanding of
human behavior and health. They also have the potential to significantly enhance
numerous applications including data-driven clinical decision support and
continuous health monitoring, which will lead to increased efficiency within the
healthcare system and facilitate a transition to patient-centered, personalized
care. The proposed work will address several fundamental sources of complexity
in the analysis of both clinical and mHealth data, enabling researchers in
health and behavioral science to extract more useful knowledge from these data
sources. The software toolboxes that will be developed will have immediate
applications in research conducted by a network of research partners, and will
also be broadly disseminated. The integrated education plan includes the
development of an innovative applied machine learning course that will provide
training in topics like cloud-scale computing that are of direct relevance to
massive health data analytics. The outreach plan involves developing and running
a health data-themed outreach workshop for underrepresented groups to foster
computational thinking and broaden participation in computing.

The ability to learn models from complex data and apply those models to extract
useful knowledge is at the core of machine learning research. This proposal
seeks to significantly expand the frontiers of machine learning by developing
new models and algorithms designed to meet the challenges posed by complex
health data analysis. Key sources of complexity in clinical and mHealth data
include sparse and irregular sampling, incompleteness, noise, non-stationary
temporal dynamics, between-subjects variability, high volume, high velocity and
heterogeneity. The presence of one or more of these factors in a given data
source is often sufficient to render current machine learning methods
ineffective or completely inapplicable. The long-term goal of this research is
the development and validation of customized machine learning models and
algorithms that can respond to all of these challenges. The objective of this
proposal is to develop models and algorithms that address the following specific
problems: (1) How can we extract useful knowledge from sparse and irregularly
sampled clinical time series data? (2) How can we automate feature discovery
from wearable physiological sensor data in the presence of high levels of noise,
significant between subjects variability, and heterogeneous sensing modalities?
(3) How can we make the learning of physiological time series event detection
algorithms robust to event labels that are obtained through self-report
mechanisms with limited reliability and temporal fidelity?