* 1350654
* CAREER: IDBR: Super Resolution Deep Imaging
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2014,09/30/2020
* Peter Kner, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 09/30/2020
* USD 613,647.00

An award is made to the University of Georgia to create a next generation
optical microscope. This microscope will take advantage of advances in
chemistry, astronomy and photonics to achieve unprecedented resolution
throughout large biological samples. By combining a new microscopy approach,
light sheet microscopy, with technology used to look at distant galaxies and
extrasolar planets, our instrument will minimize scattering and aberrations when
imaging into thick samples. Combining recent advances in photochemistry with the
advanced display inside a flat screen television, the instrument will control
the fluorescence to achieve resolutions below the diffraction limit. This will
allow subcellular details to be studied throughout zebrafish, fruit flies,
roundworms and other organisms essential to modern biology research. Examples of
research that will benefit from this instrument include the study of seizures in
zebrafish, neuron firing in fruit flies, eye development in mouse embryos, and
cell division and differentiation in developing C. elegans roundworms. Once
developed, the instrument design will be made available to researchers through
an open-source model to speed its adoption. The design, software and
instructions will be made available on the internet. Ultimately, we plan to
offer a commercial product.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By advancing biological science
and improving the study of organisms that are important models for human
disease, this project has the potential to improve human health. The ability of
this instrument to create high-resolution fluorescence images of entire
multicellular organisms will be transformative in developmental biology and
other areas of biological research in which the behavior of cells throughout
organisms is studied. This project will train the next generation of scientists
in interdisciplinary research through the development of this novel instrument,
as well as through a course in bioimaging taught by biologists, chemists and
engineers. Students from different disciplines will be introduced to all aspects
of bioimaging from preparation and staining of samples to construction of a
microscope.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is being made jointly by two
Programs- (1) Instrument Development for Biological Research, in the Division of
Biological Infrastructure (Biological Sciences Directorate), and (2)
Biophotonics, in the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental and
Transport Systems (Engineering Directorate).