* 1350207
* CAREER: Development and Evolution of Wing Polyphenism in a True Bug
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2019
* David Angelini, Colby College
* Continuing Grant
* Anthea Letsou
* 04/30/2019
* USD 800,000.00

Insect species with wing polyphenism grow to two distinctly different adult wing
sizes, with distinctly different anatomical patterns. Therefore, while humans
have a single developmental pathway to the size and pattern of the adult body
and organs, the developmental process must diverge for different individuals of
polyphenic insects. The importance of growth regulation to human health makes
studies of polyphenic organ size potentially transformative. How is one form
specified and realized in each individual? How does this ability evolve in the
species where it occurs? How can alternate wing sizes affect the spread of
insects into new habitats? This project seeks to understand the cues and
alternative developmental processes that result in differently sized and
patterned wings of a native Florida insect, the red-shouldered soapberry bug
(Jadera haematoloma). This project will use high-throughput sequencing to
compare the expression of genes in bugs of each wing pattern. For selected
genes, functional tests will examine their interactions and roles in regulating
organ size and wing pattern. The evolution of polyphenism will be explored by
laboratory selection on wing size variation in soapberry bugs and in a related
insect, the large milkweed bug (Oncopeltus fasciatus), which normally grows to a
consistent adult wing size and pattern. This work will be conducted largely by
undergraduate students, as part of an integrative curriculum that combines
hands-on work in molecular genetics, evolutionary biology and ecology with
related social science and humanities courses related to urban life and
adaptation to new environments. Public K-12 students and teachers will assist in
field surveys of the bugs to determine how wing sizes correlate with their
northward expansion from Florida up the East Coast. Project personnel and
undergraduates will exchange knowledge and experiences online to illustrate the
process of scientific research to younger students.