* 1350550
* CAREER: More than Words: Advancing Prosodic Analysis
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2014,02/28/2017
* Andrew Rosenberg, CUNY Queens College
* Continuing Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 02/28/2017
* USD 37,741.00

Prosody is an essential component of human speech. Whereas the words are "what
is said", prosody is "how it is said". A wealth of information is communicated
via prosody including information about a speaker's intent and state (speaking-
style and emotion). To advance the capabilities of machines to understand human
speech, this CAREER project develops new representations of prosody and applies
them to a variety of spoken language processing tasks: word recognition,
speaking-style recognition, dialog-act classification and speaker
identification. This project employs and advances semi-supervised and
unsupervised representation learning techniques to characterize prosody. This
project also investigates prosody across multiple languages. Speakers of
multiple languages contribute speech and annotate some basic prosodic phenomena
(phrasing and prominence). The overarching goal is to identify a compact and
universal representation of prosody that will be employed effectively in spoken
language processing tasks across languages. Scientific results, representations
and tools for extraction will be made open-source as will the collected,
annotated multi-lingual data.

Speech recognition is being integrated into our lives through mobile devices and
spoken dialog systems. The next great hurdle in the ability to communicate with
machines via speech is understanding prosody. Taking prosody into account will
result in machines understanding humans better; conversely, automatically
generating adequate prosody to convey intent will allow machines to sound more
human. Both types of improvement are sorely needed as automated conversation
agents and robots are starting to become a part of our everyday lives. Finally,
this project implements an innovative and challenging education plan that is
well-integrated with its research. It includes curricula modules on prosodic
analysis and representation learning to be widely disseminated. Moreover,
undergraduate students who provide and annotate speech samples for the project
will get a hands-on introduction to computer science research, and will be
compensated in part with tuition waivers for introductory courses in computer
science.