* 1350152
* CAREER: Multi-scale modeling and analysis of reactive granulation processes
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2014,06/30/2021
* Rohit Ramachandran, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 06/30/2021
* USD 462,000.00

1350152 - Ramachandran&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this proposal is
to develop an integrated research and educational program centered around the
interface of Particle Technology and Process Systems Engineering (PSE). The
fields of particle technology and PSE are often asynchronous with limited
interactions and inter- facing between them. From a research perspective, this
is evidenced by the application of PSE to primarily only chemical, biological
and energy systems. From an educational perspective, students are typically
trained in either PSE or particle technology with limited overlap in training
between the two fields. These factors motivate the need for a new research and
educational paradigm termed Particulate Process Systems Engineering (PPSE). PPSE
represents a systems engineering approach to the understanding and design of
multi-scale particulate processes for their overall practical application in
particulate-based industries. Within this theme, the overall research objective
of this proposal is to quantitatively understand, design and optimize the
interactions between material properties, process parameters, chemical reaction
and transport phenomena to predict product performance of particulate materials
for a class of reactive-particulate processes known as reactive granulation. The
educational aims are designed to integrate the research findings of this project
to instill a methodology combined with assessment and evaluation to equip
graduating students at the interface of particulate technology and PSE focusing
on 1) incorporating aspects of PPSE in the senior design course and 2) raising
awareness of PPSE via outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merits: The
proposal is aimed at studying the challenging multi-scale aspects of reactive
granulation processes and is synergistically integrated with high-performance
computing and optimization strategies to enable the multi-scale model to be
practically utilized by industrial companies for granulation process design and
optimization at scale-up. The project should result in better scientific
understanding of the coupling between chemical reaction and particle-wetting,
and the systematic integration of different models and model forms across
multiple lengths and time scales. The work should also lead to a quantitative
methodology to optimally operate industrial granulation processes at scale-up.
The PI expects this project to yield key advances that bridge the gap between
PSE and particle technology, resulting in new knowledge and methodologies
applicable to other particulate-based multi-scale systems (e.g. crystallization,
polymerization), enabling the advancement of scientific understanding in other
particulate-based industrial manufacturing operations.&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts: These research findings could be used to enhance the efficiency,
profitability and sustainability of many industries (e.g. food, pharmaceutical,
consumer goods) that deal with granulation processes to manufacture their
products, thus directly impacting the U.S. economy. Codes and a library of
solutions to problems developed during the project will be made available for
other researchers in the field to use (and improve upon) via the ERC-SOPs
pharmaHUB Engineering Virtual Organization for Pharmaceutical Engineering and
Science, which has an easy-to-use interface for resource sharing. Research
findings will also be integrated into the senior design course creating a PPSE
track to better train graduating students in process design and optimization of
particulate processes. This is in addition to pre-college (DSI/GSET RU programs)
and freshman (RU Byrne?s seminar series) outreach by the PI using his research
findings to create a pipeline in place to motivate students to do an honors
thesis (RU Slades scholars program) in their sophomore to senior year, thus
benefiting the numerous particulate-based industries in the NJ vicinity, as the
students graduate with enhanced skills in this field. This will be combined with
assessment and evaluation via the RU Center for Teaching Advancement and
Assessment to monitor student, program and employer outcomes, for continued
improvement of proposed educational initiatives. Proposed international
collaboration with The University of Sheffield, UK, (which is internationally
renowned in particle technology) will also benefit graduate students involved in
this project as they interact with academics and industrial experts and have
direct access to state-of-the-art large-scale equipment. Longer term societal
benefits relate to enhanced manufacturing operations that lower costs of
particulate-based medicinal drugs and consumer goods.