* 1350197
* CAREER: Scalable Fabrication of Nanodiamond Patch Platforms for Sustained Drug Release
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/31/2012,12/31/2014
* Dean Ho, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 12/31/2014
* USD 172,637.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project
is to utilize nanomanufacturing strategies to develop a nanodiamond-embedded
patch device for cancer drug delivery. Nanodiamonds are carbon-based platform
materials that can be linked with nearly any type of drug for cancer treatment.
Furthermore, they are scalable, meaning they can be economically synthesized in
large quantities. The envisioned device will possess minimally-invasive
dimensions (20-30 microns thick). Furthermore, due to the high surface area-to-
volume ratio of the nanodiamonds, a large amount of drug can be loaded into the
device while maintaining its extremely thin properties. The nanodiamond device
will be engineered for multi-drug release, and as such, will pre-deliver an
anti-inflammatory drug (Dexamethasone) which will be followed by the release of
a potent cancer drug (Doxorubicin). As sequential drug release has been shown to
improve cancer cell treatment, this strategy will simultaneously address the
treatment of cancer cells and any complications that (e.g. inflammation) are
associated with chemotherapy.

The optimized treatment of cancer represents one of the major biological
challenges of this generation. Current needs require the implementation of
localized and sustained drug delivery technologies. The proposed device
harnesses the slow drug release properties of the nanodiamonds which can meet
these requirements. Educational efforts directed towards the realization of the
research objectives will include the development of nano-drug delivery based
teaching modules that are being developed by graduate students for the K-12
environment. Furthermore, experimental kits that integrate concepts from
manufacturing, materials science, biology, among other domains will provide a
hands-on, multidisciplinary environment to train the next generation of
science/engineering leadership.