* 1350165
* CAREER:  Global analysis of in vivo protein folding efficiencies by mass spectrometry
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2019
* Sina Ghaemmaghami, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 12/31/2019
* USD 952,315.00

Proteins are initially synthesized as linear polymers and must subsequently fold
into precise three-dimensional structures. Within a cell, this folding reaction
is often error prone and can lead to misfolded and nonfunctional proteins. The
cell contains a number of quality control mechanisms for degrading misfolded and
nonfunctional proteins. In this project, Dr. Ghaemmaghami?s laboratory will
develop a novel technique for measuring the fraction of proteins that
successfully fold within the cell after synthesis. Using this technique, Dr.
Ghaemmaghami will study variations in the folding efficiencies of several
proteins. The results will elucidate relationships between physical properties
of proteins and their propensity to fold successfully within a cell. On the
whole, this research will establish novel techniques that will facilitate
investigations of protein folding inside cells and lead to a greater
understanding of factors that influence protein
homeostasis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts. Integrated educational
activities of the proposal include creating an interactive, web-based teaching
module that introduces students and the public to theoretical and practical
aspects of modern proteomics. Additionally, a number of research opportunities
will be provided to high school and undergraduate students. The
multidisciplinary nature of the project (encompassing protein biochemistry, cell
biology, analytical chemistry, physical chemistry and quantitative biology) will
provide cross-departmental research opportunities to graduate students. The
research will lead to the development of mass spectrometry related protocols and
novel analysis software and will facilitate proteomic research at the University
of Rochester. It will also provide a foundation for cross-departmental
collaborative research. The software will be made freely available to the
research community and could be widely used by researchers interested in dynamic
proteomics.