* 1350995
* CAREER: Measuring and Reducing Cybersickness in Virtual Reality Physical Rehabilitation
* CSE,IIS
* 02/15/2014,01/31/2020
* John Quarles, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 01/31/2020
* USD 542,308.00

The effects of cybersickness (i.e., motion sickness caused by immersive
simulation, such as virtual reality) on healthy users has been one of the
fundamental research areas in virtual reality (VR) for many years, but its
impact on persons with physical disabilities is still unknown, even though it
could have a significant an impact on VR-based physical rehabilitation for this
population. This project investigates cybersickness for persons with
disabilities, specifically for persons with multiple sclerosis with a moderate
level of mobility impairment and no cognitive impairment. The expected outcome
of this research is to minimize the negative effects of cybersickness for people
with disabilities, and to thereby significantly improve the effectiveness of VR-
based physical rehabilitation and the quality of life for people with motor
impairments.

The first objective of this project is to determine the best way to measure
cybersickness in people with disabilities, and the second is to then figure out
the main factors that contribute to cybersickness in persons with disabilities,
specifically for people with proprioceptive and balance deficits (e.g., due to
neurological, vestibular, balance issues). Based on preliminary data, the
central hypothesis is that VR-induced cybersickness will be magnified for
persons with disabilities as compared to persons without disabilities because of
differences in balance and proprioception abilities. To test this hypothesis,
the project will (a) determine how disability correlates with VR-induced
cybersickness, (b) determine the most effective objective measures of VR-induced
cybersickness for people with disabilities, (c) determine the main contributing
aspects of VR design that affect cybersickness in people with disabilities and
(d) create, disseminate, and maintain an open database of (anonymized)
cybersickness data from people with disabilities.

Broader Impacts: The project will take a critical step towards the challenge of
universal usability in VR and offer a deeper understanding of the effectiveness
of VR as a medium for rehabilitation. The project will impact the way that
people with disabilities are able to engage in VR-based rehabilitation and
exercises, which could potentially have long term impact on the effectiveness
and efficacy of the rehabilitation and ultimately the quality of life for these
people. The project will actively engage graduate and undergraduate students in
research, integrate results from research into a novel course on accessible user
interfaces and universal usability, and collaborate with national advocacy
societies for persons with disabilities to promote education and motivation for
VR-based rehabilitation.