* 1350342
* CAREER:  Advancing Secondary Mathematics Teachers' Quantitative Reasoning
* EHR,DRL
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2021
* Kevin Moore, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Ochsendorf
* 06/30/2021
* USD 741,491.00

Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics [STEM] and STEM education
researchers and policy documents have directed mathematics educators at all
levels to increase emphasis on quantitative reasoning so that students are
prepared for continued studies in mathematics and other STEM fields. Often,
teachers are not sufficiently prepared to support their students' quantitative
reasoning. The products generated by this project fill a need for concrete
materials at the pre-service level that embody research-based knowledge in the
area of quantitative reasoning. The accessible collection of research and
educational products provides a model program for changing prospective
mathematics teachers' quantitative reasoning that is adoptable at other
institutions across the nation. Additionally, the support of early CAREER
scholars in mathematics education will add to the capacity of the country to
address issues in mathematics education in the future.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advancing Reasoning addresses the lack of materials for
teacher education by investigating pre-service secondary mathematics teachers'
quantitative reasoning in the context of secondary mathematics concepts
including function and algebra. The project extends prior research in
quantitative reasoning to develop differentiated instructional experiences and
curriculum that support prospective teachers' quantitative reasoning and produce
shifts in their knowledge. Three interrelated research questions guide the
project: (i) What aspects of quantitative reasoning provide support for
prospective teachers' understanding of major secondary mathematics concepts such
as function and algebra? (ii) How can instruction support prospective teachers'
quantitative reasoning in the context of the teaching and learning of major
secondary mathematics concepts such as function and algebra? (iii) How do the
understandings prospective teachers hold upon entering a pre-service program
support or inhibit their quantitative reasoning? Advancing Reasoning addresses
these questions by enacting an iterative, multi-phase study with 200 prospective
teachers enrolled in a secondary mathematics education content course over 5
years. The main phase of the study implements a series of classroom design
experiments to produce knowledge on central aspects of prospective teachers'
quantitative reasoning and the instructional experiences that support such
reasoning. By drawing this knowledge from a classroom setting, Advancing
Reasoning contributes research-based and practice-driven deliverables that
improve the teaching and learning of mathematics.