* 1350659
* CAREER: The Versatility of microRNA Regulation
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2019
* Xiling Shen, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 03/31/2019
* USD 400,000.00

1350659 &lt;br/&gt;Shen, Xiling &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MicroRNAs are small non-
coding RNAs that bind and inactivate target messenger RNAs (mRNAs). While the
extensive roles of microRNAs in regulating cellular processes have been
appreciated by now, the questions emerge as why many critical hubs in the
regulatory network rely on microRNA rather than protein, and how such microRNAs
manage to properly regulate genes of drastically different dynamic properties.
The purpose of microRNA is often thought to fine-tune gene expression. However,
a recent study has demonstrated that microRNAs can also form a binary switch to
determine cell fate asymmetry, which suggests that microRNA regulation is more
versatile than it was previously given credit for. This project will investigate
how microRNA versatility contributes to the overall performance of the
regulatory network in terms of robustness, programmability and speed. The
proposed study will combine computational modeling and quantitative experiments
to approach these questions from three angles: (i) Do microRNAs and proteins
form specific regulatory motifs to enhance regulation dynamics? (ii) Do
microRNAs target specific sets of genes for binary instead of modulatory
regulation? (iii) Is microRNA regulation capable of filtering extrinsic and
intrinsic cellular noise?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Found in plants and animals,
microRNAs add an extra layer of complexity to regulatory networks and play
critical roles in development, oncogenesis, aging, etc. The proposed study will
reveal the versatility of microRNAs and how they contribute to the performance
of the regulatory network. This may provide an explanation as to why certain
microRNAs serve as regulatory hubs while others do not. The study may also
reveal the underlying mechanism that allows microRNAs to be programmable by
evolution and help improve future microRNA-dependent diagnostics and
therapies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Due to the interdisciplinary nature of the
project, this CAREER award by the Biotechnology, Biochemical, and Biomass
Engineering Program of the CBET Division is co-funded by the Systems and
Synthetic Biology Program of the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biology.