* 1350281
* CAREER: Leveraging Contrasting Cases to Investigate Integer Understanding
* EHR,DRL
* 05/15/2014,04/30/2022
* Laura Bofferding, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* M. Alejandra Sorto
* 04/30/2022
* USD 720,450.00

DRL #1350281&lt;br/&gt;PI: Laura
Bofferding&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Currently, most
students learn about negative numbers long after they have learned about
positive numbers, and they have little time or opportunity to build on their
prior understanding by contrasting the two concepts. Therefore, they struggle to
make sense of negative integer concepts, which appear to conflict with their
current understanding. The purpose of this CAREER project is to identify
language factors and instructional sequences that contribute to improving
elementary students' understanding of addition and subtraction problems
involving negative integers. A second objective is to identify how elementary
teachers interpret their students' integer understanding and use research
findings to support their teaching of these concepts. This project is expected
to contribute to theories regarding the development of integer understanding as
well as what makes a useful contrasting case when learning new, related
concepts. Moreover, the results of this project can contribute to our
understanding of how to build on students? prior number knowledge rather than
contradict it.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal investigator will conduct a
series of four experimental studies involving a preparation for learning
component with students randomly assigned to treatment or control groups. Study
1 will involve second and fourth graders and will test the language factors that
support students' understanding of integers. Studies 2-4 will involve second and
fifth graders and will test the optimal order in which integer addition and
subtraction problems are presented in contrast with each other versus
sequentially without contrasts. Using items that measure students? understanding
of integers and integer operations, the PI will compare students' gains from
pre-tests to post-tests between groups. Further, the investigator will
qualitatively code students? solution strategies based on follow-up interviews
and written work for additional information on the differences between groups.
Following the experimental studies, the PI will work with elementary teachers
over three lesson study cycles, during which teachers will implement instruction
based on the prior studies? results. The PI will compare the performance of
students who participate in the lesson study unit versus control classrooms to
measure impact of the unit. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Videos of the lesson study
unit, as well as the negative integer lesson plans will be made available for
other teachers and teacher educators to use. Further, the investigator will
incorporate the research results into an undergraduate mathematics methods
course. To ensure that the results of this research reach a wider audience, the
investigator will create an integer game and storybook, illustrating key
concepts identified through the research, that parents can explore together with
their children during family math nights and at home. On a broader scale, this
project has the potential to illuminate ways to develop more coherence in the
sequencing of mathematics topics to more effectively build on students? current
understanding.