* 1350874
* CAREER: genetic approach to identifying proteins necessary for division plane orientation during plant development
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2014,01/31/2020
* Kent Chapman, University of North Texas
* Continuing Grant
* Anne W. Sylvester
* 01/31/2020
* USD 560,107.00

Amanda Joy Wright IOS-1350874 CAREER: A genetic approach to identifying proteins
necessary for division plane orientation during plant development

During plant development, cells divide and grow creating the tissues and organs
that make up the adult plant. The process of cell division produces new cells by
the cleavage of a pre-existing cell called a mother cell. Mother cells undergo
cell divisions with different orientations such as longitudinal or transverse
and equal or unequal. Since plant cells are surrounded by rigid cell walls, once
they are generated, plant cells are unable to adjust their position relative to
neighboring cells. Thus, ensuring that the mother cell undergoes a cell division
in the correct orientation is critical for normal plant growth. To fully
understand cell division orientation, this proposal lays out a plan to identify
the proteins that regulate and execute this process. This research will be
conducted in Zea mays (corn), an agriculturally important crop plant. The
results of this project will allow for more effective engineering of crops for
maximum growth and yield in addition to advancing understanding of a fundamental
cellular process. Importantly, previous research has shown that many factors
needed for plant cell division are also needed for animal cell division meaning
this research is likely to advance our understanding of cell division in many
organisms. Finally, during the course of this project, a Cell Biology lab module
that allows every biology major at the University of North Texas to participate
in a novel scientific investigation will be implemented and evaluated for
effectiveness at promoting student learning.

The final output of this project will be the identification and
characterization of proteins needed for normal plant growth and development. The
first objective of the proposal is to characterize the protein disrupted in the
Zea mays dcd2 mutant. In this maize mutant, the partitioning cell wall that
forms during critical cell divisions in the leaf is misoriented resulting in
abnormal cell shapes. The methods that will be used to identify the causative
mutation include a combination of positional cloning and RNA-seq while the
localization of the DCD2 protein and further characterization of the phenotype
will be accomplished by observing fluorescent fusion proteins and
immunolocalization. The second objective is to isolate additional maize mutants
that form abnormal division planes, roughly map five of the new mutants, and
determine the causative mutation in two mutants. The methods that will be used
to accomplish this objective include conducting a genetic screen, using RNA-seq
to identify the position of the mutations within the genome, and characterizing
the mutant phenotype by observing fluorescent fusion proteins and
immunolocalization. The third objective is to integrate improvements in science
education at the University of North Texas with further characterization of the
proteins needed for division plane orientation in plants. To accomplish this
objective, students in the Cell Biology Lab will conduct novel research in a
classroom setting by conducting a yeast two-hybrid screen to identify proteins
that interact with the proteins identified during first two objectives of the
project.