* 1350122
* CAREER: Correlated States in the Surface of Kondo Insulators
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2020
* Jing Xia, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 06/30/2020
* USD 712,449.00

Non-technical abstract: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Highly useful and sometimes exotic
functional materials often emerge from solids where electrons interact strongly
with each other. The properties of these so-called "strongly correlated
materials" cannot be directly inferred from the detailed knowledge of individual
electrons, and therefore often give us pleasant surprises: high temperature
superconductors for MRI diagnosis, giant magneto-resistance materials inside
iPods, just to name a few. This project aims at exploring and understanding
novel quantum states in the surface of a class of correlated materials called
"Kondo insulators". One such material SmB6 has already been found, in part by
our research team, to host an exotic metallic surface that surrounds the truly
insulating bulk and is protected by time-reversal symmetry. This CAREER grant
allows crystal growth, measurements and device fabrications on several Kondo
insulators in order to unveil the nature of the surface state. By extension
their unusual electronic and thermal properties can be exploited for
technological applications such as fault-tolerant quantum computing, bio-
inspired information processing and quantum metrology. Several educational
components are integrated into this project, consisting of course developments,
middle school outreach and scientific trainings for students. In particular, the
scientific involvements by high school volunteers from disadvantaged regions in
Santa Ana, as well as undergraduate researcher from UC Irvine's California
Alliance for Minority Participation program are expected to generate interest
and prepare them for careers in science and technology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical abstract: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER
grant funds the fabrication and experimental investigation of surface states in
strongly correlated Kondo insulators. A current focus of condensed matter
physics is to understand what electron correlation will bring to topologically
ordered materials. Kondo insulators, in particular SmB6 are prototypical
strongly correlated materials featuring f-electron physics and some quite
unusual electronic properties. Recently the theory of topological Kondo
insulator has predicted in some of these materials the existence of a
topological nontrivial surface state. Subsequent experiments including our own
have demonstrated in SmB6 the metallic surface state and its consistency with
the topological picture. Questions remain about the exact nature of the surface
state, and its unusual properties due to interactions within the surface state
and between the surface and bulk. This project aims at answering some of these
questions as well as using Kondo insulators as a platform for exploring unusual
quantum phases with electron correlation, heavy Fermion physics and topological
order. A systematic approach incorporating crystal growth, transport, optical,
thermal and force measurements is used to unveil the kinetics and energetics of
surface electrons, to understand the thermal properties of the surface, and to
investigate the possible quantum phase transitions by chemical doping, magnetic
field, strain and pressure. Integrated into this project are several important
educational components. The grant allows the development of a graduate physics
course, in-lab middle school outreach activities, and the training of students
at various stages of their career. The crystal growth can be learnt and
performed in part by high school volunteers from disadvantaged regions in Santa
Ana even without advanced knowledge of physics. Some of the device fabrication
is performed by undergraduate researches from California Alliance for Minority
Participation program at UC Irvine, after receiving nano-fabrication trainings
in our Integrated Nanosystems Research Facility. Through this project, a gradate
student receives broad but integrated trainings on low temperature physics,
crystal growth and high precision optical instrumentation, which will prepare
him/her for sophisticated academic or industry jobs in the future.