* 1350601
* CAREER: Unraveling homeostatic mechanisms in gene expression regulation: Integrating research and scientific communication
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2020
* Arjun Raj, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 06/30/2020
* USD 590,694.00

Cells are the fundamental units of life and although they come in a wide range
of shapes and sizes, each cell of an organism contains the same number of genes
in the cellular DNA. This DNA contains the code for important building blocks of
the cell (RNA and protein), and because larger cells require more of these
blocks than smaller cells, the DNA must receive information about the number of
blocks to generate. This project aims to understand, by experiment, the nature
of this exchange of information between DNA and other molecules within the cell.
These experiments will reveal whether there are particular genes for which the
cell is especially careful about how many building blocks it produces. This
project will yield a fundamental quantitative understanding of how cells are
able to function despite large differences in size, and will build a connection
between the physical context of the cell and the biochemical regulation of the
amounts of RNA generated from genes. In addition to training graduate students
this project will engage graduate and high-school students to help reimagine how
we disseminate scientific information. Web-based technologies will be used in
educational outreach as a means to make scientific projects and their results
more accessible to both other scientists as well as the general public.
Collaborative pairs of graduate students and high school students will transform
scientific papers into a series of videos and associated frequently asked
questions (FAQs) aimed at making their content more readily understandable. This
program will help graduate students develop the skills necessary to present
their work, and will encourage high school students to engage with scientific
projects at the leading edge of the field. Cells vary in size throughout the
cell cycle, during which they also duplicate their DNA. How do they regulate the
concentration of their components in the face of such variability in both cell
size and DNA content This project will focus on transcriptional control
mechanisms that allow cells to maintain a constant concentration of RNA despite
this variability. Cellular volume, cell cycle state, and mRNA abundance will be
measured simultaneously in single cells for a panel of endogenous genes using
RNA fluorescence in situ hybridization (RNA FISH). For many genes mRNA
concentration remains relatively constant regardless of cell cycle and six-fold
variations in cellular volume, demonstrating the existence of homeostatic
mechanisms in gene expression. It will be determined whether this compensation
arises from the control of transcription or of mRNA degradation by using
perturbations to transcriptional activity. The nature of the homeostatic
mechanisms at work will be characterized in terms of the exact nature of
transcriptional changes in different phases of the cell cycle and in cells of
different sizes. Cell fusion experiments will be used to test whether cell
volume itself can influence gene expression. We will build mathematical models
to contextualize and understand our results, in particular focusing on
connecting transcriptional parameters to our experimental results. Our results
will require a reinterpretation of single cell expression variability and
development of new definitions of this transcriptional "noise", and will
generate and use deep-sequencing data to provide genome-wide predictions of
"noisy" vs. "non-noisy" genes.

This award is supported jointly by the Cellular Dynamics and Function Cluster in
the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences and by the Biotechnology,
Biochemical and Biomass Engineering Program in the Division of Chemical,
Bioengineering, Environmental and Transport Systems.