* 1350680
* CAREER: Opportunistic Through-Silicon-Via Utilization: Device, Circuit and Design Automation Perspectives
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2014,10/31/2015
* Yiyu Shi, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 10/31/2015
* USD 176,540.00

The three-dimensional integrated circuit (3D IC) stacks multiple dies in the
vertical dimension using Through-Silicon-Vias (TSVs), which results in
significantly reduced footprint, power and latency. While many challenges still
exist related to 3D ICs, this project targets the one challenge that will become
increasingly important in the next 5 to 10 years and may potentially end the
production of 3D ICs: TSVs are quite large in size, yet their diameters do not
scale with the devices due to the limitations of wafer handling and aspect
ratios. On the other hand, a large number of TSVs are needed to deliver signal
and power, to dissipate heat, and to provide redundancy. Moreover, foundries
impose a minimum TSV density rule to maintain the planarity of the wafer during
chemical and mechanical polishing (CMP). This project tackles the challenge by
reconfiguring idle TSVs as devices for various circuits and systems. An
opportunistic computer-aided design (CAD) framework will also be put forward for
optimum utilization of the TSV devices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research will pioneer a new and transformative direction for the advancement of
3D ICs at all the design levels - devices, circuits and CAD - with no change
required in current semiconductor processes. The PI will also leverage the
collaboration with Industrial Technology Research Institute to set up an
extensive international internship program for U.S. undergraduates and
graduates, which will benefit the general 3D IC research community. In addition,
the PI will develop various activities for undergraduates and underrepresented
minorities within the research framework, full-filled 3D Tetris contests for
Rolla local high school students, and a web 2.0-based 3D forum for collaborative
research in the 3D IC community.