* 1350709
* CAREER: High Equivalence Ratio Partial Oxidation of Liquid Fuels by Reactive Volatilization
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2019
* William Northrop, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 05/31/2019
* USD 447,950.00

This proposal aims to use recirculated exhaust gas to reform a portion of the
primary fuel can enable clean, high efficiency premixed combustion modes in
diesel engines using a single stored fuel, with the benefits of extremely low
tailpipe emissions of traditional pollutants. A novel thermo-chemical
recuperation process is proposed where liquid fuels like diesel are vaporized
and partially oxidized at high global equivalence ratio in a flameless
environment. Such an operation is advantageous since less of the initial fuel?s
heating value is consumed leading to more partially oxidized hydrocarbons that
are useful for reactivity-controlled compression ignition combustion in diesel
engines. The work experimentally and numerically examines counter-flow partial
oxidation where fuel undergoes reactive volatilization forced by heat transfer
from heterogeneous combustion sustained on a porous catalytic screen. The
flameless environment ensures that thermal gradients and residence times do not
favor soot production. It will further understanding of chemical kinetics, phase
change, mass transport and heat transfer processes in in fuel-rich oxidative
environments. It also explores underlying processes governing soot formation and
kinetics of catalytic combustion over supported precious metal
catalysts.&lt;br/&gt;The research will also explore the key mechanisms governing
partial oxidation and reformation by reactive volatilization by using high-
throughput fuel atomization, and determine the efficacy of using reformed gas
products for modulating fuel reactivity. Knowledge in basic mechanisms involved
in reactive volatilization of fuels where the onset temperature of pyrolysis is
below the boiling point. It will also examine the sparsely investigated regime
of high-equivalence-ratio partial oxidation for generation of non-equilibrium
reforming products resulting from dehydrogenation and thermal decomposition
reactions. &lt;br/&gt;The results of this research could lead to significant
improvements in internal combustion engine efficiency through the implementation
of thermo-chemical recuperation and high-equivalence-ratio partial oxidation.
Products of high-equivalence-ratio reforming such as light olefins and
oxygenates also have benefit for a number of industrial petrochemical processes.
Broader outreach objectives of the project include merging the research
activities with two STEM programs for K-8 students. These include an exhibit at
a children?s museum and direct engagement with middle school students,
introducing them to combustion science and engineering.