* 1350789
* CAREER: Bacterial adaptation mechanism to chronic exposure to nanoparticles and its implications to nanomanufacturing and public health
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2021
* Vinka Craver, University of Rhode Island
* Continuing Grant
* Nora Savage
* 04/30/2021
* USD 489,200.00

Craver&lt;br/&gt;1350789&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: The overall
goal of this research is to elucidate the phenotypic and genomic changes that
bacteria can present due to chronic exposure to metal nanoparticles and their
implications to the manufacture of nano-based products and public health. The
proposed project focuses on filling the gap regarding the need to: i) determine
if bacteria can adapt to chronic exposure to metal&lt;br/&gt;nanoparticles and
simultaneously develop resistance to pharmaceuticals of importance to public
health and ii) to elucidate the impact of the bacterial physiological stage on
the stress-response to metal nanoparticles. Both of these aspects have important
implications for nano-manufacturing and public health. Metal- and metal oxide-
based nanoparticles, such as silver, zinc oxide, and titanium dioxide, currently
are being used extensively in industrial and consumer products for applications
that range from cosmetics to water treatment. Also, due to the optimization of
extraction procedures, the use of rare earth elements has increased sharply due
to their unique paramagnetic properties, and the production of REE-based
nanoparticles and nano-based products is one of the most attractive uses of
these materials. This project proposes to elucidate whether bacterial adaption
to metal nanoparticles depends on the composition of the metal nanoparticles,
physicochemical properties, and/or the physiological stage of the cells. The
physiological stage will be tested using batch and continuous culture tests.
High-throughput batch tests will be used to screen a wide range of
physicochemical and environmental conditions that could lead to bacterial
adaptation to metal nanoparticles. Adaptation will be determined using kinetic,
phenotypic, and genomic parameters. However, in batch systems, both the
concentration of the substrate and the physiological state of the cells change
as a function of time, therefore the impact of the physiological stage of the
bacteria in the adaptation response cannot be assessed properly with this type
of approach. To overcome these limitations, a second experimental phase is
proposed in which a continuous culture will be used. In the continuous culture,
an equilibrium concentration of the growth-controlling substrate is established,
and this concentration is independent of the density of the culture and time. A
continuous culture can provide more precise and reproducible data than those
obtained from batch cultures. Chemostats have been used&lt;br/&gt;extensively to
study the stress response and bacteria's development of resistance to
antibiotics; however, to the best knowledge of the PI, no study has
systematically evaluated the adaptation of bacteria to nanoparticles using this
approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project will generate
experiential learning opportunities to a wide audience, consisting on K-12
teachers and students, undergraduate students, graduate students and users of
metal nanoparticle-based products. Through the activities, the PI seeks to
achieve an integrative development of her academic career while contributing to
scientific discovery, education, and societal prosperity. This study also is
likely to determine unintended impacts, such as resistance to antibiotics, which
can have a significant impact on public health. This effort will impact the
current protocols used to assess the toxicological response of nanoparticles on
microorganisms and provide important information to managers of wastewater
treatment facilities concerning the health impacts of nanoparticles that reach
their facilities. The proposed activities will provide important knowledge to
non-profit organizations and stakeholders who are deploying or may deploy point-
of-use water treatment technologies containing nanoparticles in rural,
developing communities; this will minimize potential negative effects on human
health and the environment. Activities from this project will engage and inspire
students to pursue STEM careers while being environmental stewards at the same
time. Student success cannot be achieved without the right professional skill
set. This proposal seeks to promote information on nanotoxicology and the
stress-response of bacterial populations due to chronic exposure to
nanoparticles. Activities from this project will engage and inspire people with
diverse educational and experiential backgrounds. The PI will elaborate a series
of opportunities for teachers and&lt;br/&gt;students to understand the benefit
and concerns about the use metal nanoparticles in consumer products. Finally,
the PI is committed to distributing the results obtained in the project in the
fastest manner possible, through publications, conferences, and the public
media.