* 1350397
* CAREER: Theoretical and practical aspects of quantum communication protocols
* CSE,CCF
* 05/15/2014,08/31/2019
* Mark Wilde, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Dmitri Maslov
* 08/31/2019
* USD 500,000.00

This NSF award aims to further our understanding of quantum information theory
and quantum communication. All of the work proposed is theoretical in nature,
but some of the threads are practical and may find future application in quantum
communication systems. At the same time, there is a strong educational component
to this award in line with the vision of the PI to establish Louisiana State
University as a leading center for quantum information research and
study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award first seeks to sharpen our understanding
of the limitations on communication using quantum-mechanical systems as the
carriers of information. The PI will do so by proving so-called "strong
converse" theorems for various communication capacities of quantum channels. The
quantum information community now understands the communication capacities of
several channels well, but what is lacking in some cases is a strong converse
theorem. These theorems are conceptually rich, and they also find application in
proving the security of particular models of cryptography. The PI will also
investigate areas such as lossy quantum data compression theory and quantum
communication over networked systems. Both topics are foundational in the
subject and will likely underly future quantum technologies. The important
theoretical questions in these respective fields are still left unanswered and
the research conducted on behalf of this award will offer several ways of
addressing them. The PI also will consider new exciting communication capacity
questions to consider, such as the "locking capacity" of a quantum channel for
sending data securely. The PI also seeks to improve the understanding of the
practically relevant class of optical communication channels, which underly
free-space or fiber-optic communication technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader significance of this award is in line with the NSF Mission "to promote
the progress of science; to advance the national health, prosperity, and
welfare; to secure the national defense; and for other purposes." Indeed,
research at the intersection of physics, information theory, computer science,
and mathematics has advanced science in remarkable ways, pushing the limits of
what is possible experimentally and what is possible in principle. Research in
quantum communication is critical to national defense as well, given the
important application of quantum secured communication. The PI will be advising
and teaching several graduate students in the quantum science and technologies
group at Louisiana State University.