* 1350237
* CAREER: Strange Metal Properties and Superconductvity in Heavy Fermion Materials: Realistic Band Theory Meets Model Hamiltonian Approach
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Andriy Nevidomskyy, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2019
* USD 468,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This CAREER award supports theoretical and computational research and education,
aimed at advancing the understanding of emergent quantum phenomena in materials
with strongly interacting electrons. Strongly correlated metals behave
differently from ordinary metals such as aluminum or copper because the
electrically charged mobile particles of which they consist are unlike ordinary
electrons. When an electric current or thermal heat flow travels through an
ordinary metal, to a first approximation the electrons can be treated as moving
independently and interacting only very weakly with each other. However, when a
current travels through a strongly correlated metal, the electrons lose their
individuality and form collective excitations. Accordingly, researchers call
such strongly correlated metals "strange metals." A classical analogy of a
collective behavior is the complex pattern of a flying flock of birds, seemingly
behaving as one unit despite comprising thousands of individual birds.

A fascinating class of strange metals is harbored by the so-called "heavy
fermion" materials, in which the interactions between the constituent particles
are so strong that they acquire a very heavy mass, sometimes several hundred
times greater than that of a bare electron. As a result of this heaviness, many
material properties, including electrical and thermal conductivity, are
profoundly affected. Unfortunately, the very feature that makes these materials
so interesting - strong interactions between electrons - also makes them very
challenging to study. This research activity is aimed at developing new,
innovative theoretical and computational methods to study the electronic
properties of the heavy fermion materials. In addition, the PI will combine
existing methods of quantum chemistry with the state-of-the-art computational
techniques to capture the salient features of these materials, in particular the
interplay between magnetic and various interesting quantum mechanical properties
such as the ability of materials to conduct electricity without any loss of
power, called superconductivity.

This award will allow the PI to integrate educational and outreach activities
with the fundamental research. The educational component will include
participation in a continuing education course for in-service teachers, with the
ultimate goal of helping enrich the middle- and high-school curricula with
modern physics content, centered on the concepts of magnetism and
superconductivity that are central to this research. This award will also
support the education of a graduate student and a postdoctoral research
associate at the frontiers of condensed matter theory. It will partially support
a broad outreach effort aimed at showcasing the role of electromagnetic forces
in modern physics. It will reach out to the general public and schoolchildren
with the goal of popularizing science and increasing public awareness of its
importance.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This CAREER award supports theoretical research in the so-called strange metal
(non-Fermi liquid) behavior in heavy fermion materials, in particular close to
quantum phase transition from a magnet to an ordinary metal. Recent experimental
advances have identified a number of materials in which the quantum criticality
cannot be understood in terms of the established Hertz-Millis theory. In
addition, new quantum phases often emerge in the vicinity of a quantum
transition, such as unconventional superconductivity whose mechanism is not
completely understood. These problems will be studied in the present research
program, whose objectives are fourfold:

(1) To analyze the nature of the strange metal state in heavy fermion materials
by using a combination of quantum chemistry and existing state-of-the-art
techniques to capture strong electron interactions.

(2) To develop novel methods to treat strong electron correlations, in
particular in proximity to quantum criticality. One promising approach that the
PI will develop is the large-N slave-fermion approach using SU(N) Schwinger
boson representation for localized moments. This approach has been demonstrated
to perform well for a single Kondo impurity and the ultimate goal is to make it
work for a dense Kondo lattice, which describes the low-energy sector of heavy-
fermion materials.

(3) To address new quantum phenomena emerging from this proximity, in particular
the unconventional superconductivity and its interplay with magnetism. The PI
will employ the variational cluser approximation, which is particularly well
suited to study ordered phases. The large-N slave-fermion approach, to be
developed in (2) will also be used. The results of various methodologies will be
compared to experiment.

(4) Qualitatively, the heavy fermion systems can be understood in terms of the
so-called Doniach phase diagram, describing the suppression of magnetic
Ruderman-Kittel-Kasuya-Yosida interaction between localized moments by the Kondo
screening. At the same time, it has long been known that magnetic frustrations
can also destroy long-range magnetic order. Recently, several researchers,
including the PI, have proposed to combine these two mechanisms into a
generalized phase diagram, pertinent to a number of recently discovered heavy
fermion materials. The PI will study the interplay between magnetic frustrations
and the Kondo effect using a variety of approaches, including the aforementioned
large-N slave-fermion method.

This award will allow the PI to integrate educational and outreach activities
with the fundamental research. The educational component will include
participation in a continuing education course for in-service teachers, with the
ultimate goal of helping enrich the middle- and high-school curricula with
modern physics content, centered on the concepts of magnetism and
superconductivity that are central to this research. This award will also
support the education of a graduate student and a postdoctoral research
associate at the frontiers of condensed matter theory. It will partially support
a broad outreach effort aimed at showcasing the role of electromagnetic forces
in modern physics. This will reach out to the general public and schoolchildren
with the goal of popularizing science and increasing public awareness of its
importance.