* 1350044
* CAREER: Free Surface Mobility and its Role in the Formation of Exceptionally Stable Glasses
* MPS,DMR
* 03/15/2014,02/28/2019
* Zahra Fakhraai, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Catherine Oertel
* 02/28/2019
* USD 575,000.00

Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;Molecular glasses with high densities and
exceptional kinetic stabilities have been recently produced by means of physical
vapor deposition (PVD). In these experiments, the substrate temperature was held
at a temperature below the glass transition temperature, Tg, where the bulk
relaxation dynamics are extremely slow. In order for these PVD glasses to
overcome the kinetic barriers preventing bulk glasses from reaching such near-
equilibrium states at low temperatures, molecules must have access to enhanced
mobility during vapor deposition. It is hypothesized that this enhanced mobility
is caused by a layer of increased mobility close to the air interface. With
support from the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program in the Division of
Materials Research, this hypothesis will be tested by studying the dynamical
properties of the surface of organic molecular glasses using a nanoparticle
probe technique developed by the PI and others. The proposed improvements to
this technique will allow simultaneous studies of the properties of the bulk
glass and its free surface, making it an ideal method for investigating the
correlation between surface properties and stable glass formation. This
technique will be applied on a broad range of organic molecules to investigate
whether this phenomena is universal for all glasses, or a chemical effect
specific to particular molecular structures. These studies will be important in
advancing our fundamental understanding of the glass transition phenomena.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical Summary: &lt;br/&gt;Glasses, out of
equilibrium solids with structures that resemble that of equilibrium liquids,
are ubiquitous in our daily life, and are widely used in the electronic and
medical industries. Despite this, developing new useful glassy materials, or
improving the properties of known glassy materials has proven to be difficult
due to extremely slow molecular motion within the glass. For example, in order
to make high-density glasses via aging, the process by which a glass naturally
becomes more dense, one would have to wait a few hundred thousand years. A
recent discovery, however, shows that glasses with highly desirable properties,
such as increased density and stability, can be produced in a few hours. It is
hypothesized that this is caused by the presence of a layer at the air/glass
surface of most organic and polymeric glasses that is a few nanometers thick and
behaves like a liquid rather than an out of equilibrium solid. Our proposed
studies aim at understanding the origins of the liquid-layer and its effect on
the structure of glasses. Understating the properties of the liquid-layer can
help design and produce materials with improved properties for organic
electronic, pharmaceutical, lubrication and coating technologies. Furthermore,
we will combine these studies with educational efforts aimed at introducing
concepts of glassy polymer dynamics and structure to a wide audience. Polymers
are widely used in everyday life. Products such as bullet proof glass, silly
putty and tires are examples of materials with similar design concepts, but
widely varying properties. We will design experimental modules to highlight the
importance of chemical composition, structure and dynamics on the final
properties of a polymeric system. These experiments will be presented with
adjustable levels of technical detail so that students of all backgrounds can
learn from them. The PI will also work closely with institutions at the
University of Pennsylvania and science teachers from elementary and high schools
in the Philadelphia area to develop, implement, and disseminate these modules.
To reach an even larger audience, videos of these modules will be made available
online.