* 1350420
* CAREER: Robustness Guided Testing and Verification for Cyber-Physical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2020
* Georgios Fainekos, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* David Corman
* 07/31/2020
* USD 447,379.00

This project develops a theoretical framework as well as software tools to
support testing and verification of a Cyber-Physical System (CPS) within a
Model-Based Design (MBD) process. The theoretical bases of the framework are
stochastic optimization methods, and robustness notions of formal specification
languages. The project's research comprises three components: development of
conditions on the algorithms and on the structure of the CPS for inferring
finite-time guarantees on the randomized testing process; the study of testing
methods that can support modular and compositional system design; and
investigation of appropriate notions of conformance between two system models
and between a model and its implementation on a computational platform. All of
these components are needed to support testing and verification in all the
stages of an MBD process as well as to support component reuse, incremental
system improvements and modular design. The evaluation of the framework is
driven by the problems of verifying automotive control systems and medical
devices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As safety-critical CPS become ubiquitous, the
need for design methods that guarantee correct system functionality and
performance becomes more urgent. Certification and government agencies need
dependable testing and verification tools to incorporate in certification
standards and procedures. The concrete benefits to the society are both in terms
of reduced catastrophic design errors in new products and in terms of reduced
economic costs for new product development. The former increases the confidence
in new technologies while the latter improves the competitiveness of the
companies that utilize such technologies. The theoretical results of this
project are being incorporated into software tools for testing, verification and
validation of complex CPS. The evaluation focus of the project on verifying
infusion pumps and automotive control software ultimately helps in avoiding
harmful losses due to errors in these safety-critical systems. The use of any
software tool that is based on formal or semi-formal methods requires engineers
with solid training on these technologies. This proposal puts forward an
education curriculum for developing new courses that introduce formal and semi-
formal methods for CPS at all levels of higher education, i.e., undergraduate,
graduate and continuing education. Particular attention is devoted into on-line
continuing education of practicing engineers who must acquire new MBD skills.