* 1350002
* CAREER: Emergent Quantum Spin-Liquid in Yb-Pyrochlores and Yb-Spinels
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2014,01/31/2021
* Haidong Zhou, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Tom Oder
* 01/31/2021
* USD 700,000.00

Technical Abstract Amongst the celebrated exotic phases of condensed matter, of
particular recent interest are the quantum spin liquids (QSLs). It is widely
believed that extreme quantum entanglement and geometrical frustration lead to
QSLs' defining properties: strong spin correlations, the absence of static
magnetic moments, and unbroken crystalline symmetry. Despite the intensive
studies on QSLs, the response of the QSL state to various perturbations, such as
chemical pressure, site disorder, and extra magnetic interactions, has not been
thoroughly studied. Moreover, one main obstacle for QSL studies is the shortage
of the examples. This award supports an experimental approach for studying the
correlations between the local structural variations of the Yb3+ ions and both
the perturbation effects on the QSL state in different Yb-pyrochlores and the
exotic magnetism of various Yb-spinels. In both cases the geometrically
frustrated corner-shared tetrahedral Yb3+-network strongly influences their
magnetic properties. The investigator will synthesize, and grow crystals of new
Yb-pyrochlores and new Yb-spinels and study two important physical aspects: (i)
the nature of their magnetic ground states by using AC susceptibility
measurements and neutron scattering; (ii) the local structural variations of the
Yb3+ magnetic ions by using the pair distribution function technique. The
program will train two graduate students; and aims to attract undergraduate and
high school students, particularly minority students, to motivate and expose to
the real world of science and technology. This will be acheived in collaboration
with the Educational Advanced Program (EAP) and the Tennessee Louis Stokes
Alliance for Minority Participation (TLSAMP) program at the University of
Tennessee. The investigator will also provide crystals and offer services for
training students on crystal growth and crystal processing to a broader
scientific community.

Non-Technical Abstract The understandings of the physical properties of quantum
matters have been at the forefront of modern condensed matter physics research.
One recent example is quantum spin liquids (QSLs): a unique state with strong
spin correlations but without static magnetic order. The geometrical
arrangements of the magnetic atoms prevent them to direct their magnetic moment,
the materials are magnetically frustrated. The exotic properties of QSLs appear
only at extremely low temperatures, and are expected to be sensitive to various
perturbations. Moreover, one main obstacle for QSL studies is the shortage of
examples. This program will explore new QSL materials and study the perturbation
effects on them. Single crystals of the QSL candidates will be grown in the
investigator's laboratory and then will be studied by various methods under low
temperatures and high magnetic fields. The program will train two graduate
students; and aims to attract undergraduate and high school students,
particularly minority students, to motivate and expose them to the real world of
science and technology. This will be acheived in collaboration with the
Educational Advanced Program (EAP) and the Tennessee Louis Stokes Alliance for
Minority Participation (TLSAMP) program at the University of Tennessee. The
investigator will also provide crystals and offer services for training students
on crystal growth and crystal processing to a broader scientific community.