* 1350070
* CAREER: Physiological Trade-offs in Ecoimmunology: Costs for Individuals and Populations
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/2014,01/31/2020
* Susannah French, Utah State University
* Continuing Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 01/31/2020
* USD 862,562.00

The immune system is important for health and survival in all organisms,
including humans. The proposed research seeks to answer the question, "What are
the costs of immunity?" This is a central question in the field of ecological
immunology. A simplifying assumption is often made that a greater or longer-
lasting immune response is advantageous. However, the costs of a more robust
immune response may negatively affect other energy intensive processes such as
reproduction. Currently, much of immunology research focuses on specific,
isolated cellular components of the immune system. Although this level of
understanding is important, it is also critical to comprehend how an overall
immune response can affect the condition of an individual, including other vital
physiological systems. Furthermore, it is presently unclear how individual
measures, such as immunity, affect population changes over time. Understanding
the link between individuals and populations will allow us to monitor more
effectively the health and viability of natural populations, many of which are
susceptible to an ever-changing landscape and climate. To address these
knowledge gaps the proposed work will test (1) the energetic costs of immunity;
(2) the effects of the immune system on other key physiological processes,
notably reproduction; and (3) the links between individual immunity and natural
populations. Finally, embedded within the research program is a research-based
training initiative for future educators, which will incorporate those educators
into the proposed scientific research. By providing opportunities for future
educators to ?do science,? this research will enhance the educational
experiences and understanding of the scientific process for educators and for
their students. The impacts of this educational program even in its initial
stages will be broad, because there is an inherent multiplier effect. In sum,
the proposed research and educational program has the capability to transform
the principles underlying immunological research and to enhance the science
education curriculum both for future instructors and for their students.