* 1350896
* CAREER: Design Decision Patterns for Visualizing Multivariate Graphs
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2020
* Miriah Meyer, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 06/30/2020
* USD 500,000.00

Multivariate graphs, or datasets that link together entities that are associated
with multiple different variables, occur in a broad range of problems. For
example, the dataset could be geospatial locations that include socio-economic
statistics, linked together through a public transportation system. These
multivariate graphs are notoriously difficult to visualize because the number of
data variables exceeds the number of available visual cues - these cues include
color, size, position, etc. The goal of this project is to establish a set of
validated and generalizable techniques for visualizing and interacting with
multivariate graphs. Three target application areas will drive the
investigations: one in cancer biology, a second in urban transportation, and a
third in particle physics. These areas were chosen to represent a wide spectrum
of possible applications in which multivariate graphs play a central role, thus
fostering generalizable results. The multidisciplinary nature of the research
and the close collaboration with domain experts in our target application areas
will provide a unique educational environment for undergraduate and graduate
students, while also broadening the participation in computer science beyond
traditional boundaries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is the first systematic,
problem-driven effort to consider the visualization of multivariate graphs using
a diverse set of application areas, with the goal of developing a generalizable
set of techniques and principles for supporting a broad range of visualization
and data analysis tasks. The research will be conducted with domain experts
using a design study methodology, which is a deeply collaborative and user-
centered approach to visualization research. The primary impact of this work
will be validated visualization design decision patterns for effective visual
representation and user-driven exploration of complex multivariate graphs,
resulting in a more comprehensive foundation of techniques for visualizing this
increasingly important data type. The resulting design decision patterns will
support ongoing research and discovery in our target application areas, as well
generalize to a broad class of real-world problems. Furthermore, these patterns
will form the foundation of software tools for visualizing multivariate graphs
that effectively support exploration and sense-making of these complex data
types by taking into account the varied relationships embedded within. Results
and software will be disseminated to both the research communities of our target
application areas, but also more broadly through the project website at
http://mvgraphs.sci.utah.edu.