* 1350553
* CAREER: Holistic Scene Understanding with Multiple Hypotheses from Vision Modules
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2014,05/31/2017
* Dhruv Batra, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jie Yang
* 05/31/2017
* USD 289,196.00

This project develops algorithms and techniques for holistic scene understanding
from images. The key barrier to building the next generation of vision systems
is ambiguity. For example, a patch from an image may look like a face but may
simply be an incidental arrangement of tree branches and shadows. Thus, a vision
module operating in isolation often produces nonsensical results, such as
hallucinating faces floating in thin air. This project develops a visual system
that jointly reasons about multiple plausible hypotheses from different vision
modules such as 3D scene layout, object layout, and pose estimation. The
developed technologies have the potential to improve vision systems and make
fundamental impact - from self-driving cars bringing mobility to the physically
impaired, to unmanned aircrafts helping law enforcement with search and rescue
in disasters. The project involves research tightly integrated with education
and outreach to train the next generation of young scientists and researchers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research addresses the fundamental challenge in joint
reasoning by extracting and leveraging a small set of diverse plausible
hypotheses or guesses from computer vision modules (e.g. a patch may be a {sky
or a vertical surface} x {face or tree branches}). This project generates new
knowledge and techniques for (1) generating a small set of diverse plausible
hypotheses from different vision modules, (2) joint reasoning over all modules
to pick a single hypothesis from each module, and (3) reducing human annotation
effort by actively soliciting user feedback only on the small set of plausible
hypotheses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project Webpage:
http://computing.ece.vt.edu/~dbatra