* 1350180
* CAREER: Conformal Symmetry in Theoretical Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2019
* David Poland, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 05/31/2019
* USD 480,000.00

This CAREER award is for an integrated program of research, education, and
outreach focusing on quantum field theories with conformal symmetry (CFTs). The
primary goals are: 1) To further our knowledge of how conformal symmetry
constrains correlation functions in CFTs. While the forms of 2-point and 3-point
functions are fixed by conformal symmetry, 4-point functions are not completely
determined, and can in general be expanded into a basis of functions called
conformal blocks. Knowing how to perform these expansions explicitly is
extremely important for formulating basic consistency conditions (called
crossing symmetry) in any field theory with conformal symmetry. The PI will
develop the theory of conformal blocks, focusing on situations (e.g.,
correlation functions of operators with spin and CFTs in odd dimensions) where
these decompositions are poorly understood. 2) To perform detailed analytical
and numerical studies of the implications of crossing symmetry and unitarity
(the conformal bootstrap) in CFTs. These studies will produce general rigorous
bounds on physical observables (operator dimensions) and develop techniques to
predict their values in a wide variety of physically relevant theories. By
pursuing these studies, the PI is seeking to map out the space of CFTs, identify
new CFTs and learn about known ones, make quantitative predictions for
experimentally realizable condensed matter systems, explore the validity of
ideas in physics beyond the standard model, and test and formulate new
theoretical conjectures related to the AdS/CFT correspondence and quantum
gravity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Conformal invariance is a generalization of scale
invariance that only requires that the angles between corresponding curves do
not change. Conformal field theories (CFT) lie at the heart of theoretical
physics, linking all the fields of physics represented within the Physics
Division as well as other programs in other Divisions in NSF. They are
ubiquitous in the space of quantum field theories; they holographically describe
(connect properties in a volume to the information encoded in the surface of
that volume) consistent theories of quantum gravity; they are realized in a wide
variety of real-world condensed matter systems such as the critical three-
dimensional Ising model of ferromagnetism in terms of the coupling between spins
of neighboring atoms; and they may even play an important role in physics beyond
the Standard Model, the concept that accurately describes the known elementary
particles in terms of quarks, leptons and gauge fields. There are wide classes
of physically relevant CFTs where conventional field theory techniques such as
perturbation theory and large-N expansions cannot be used. The recursive
conformal bootstrap approach is currently underdeveloped and appears to be an
extremely promising way of making quantitative predictions for physical
observables in these otherwise intractable
theories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts : The education and outreach
component of this program will introduce students at all education levels to the
power of symmetry in physics. 1) The PI is developing a series of hands-on
demonstrations illustrating principles of symmetry in physics, being made
available to middle and high school students in racially diverse and high
poverty school districts through Yale's "Math Mornings" lecture series and
during a "Theoretical Physics Day" hosted by the PI. 2) The PI is developing a
public lecture on "Symmetries in Physics" to be given in multiple venues. 3) The
PI is developing and teaching two distinct 3-day Modules for Yale's Pathways
Science Collaborative Hands-On Learning and Research (SCHOLAR) program, one
focusing on symmetries of space and time and one focusing on exploring scale
invariance and extra dimensions. 4) The PI is actively involving Yale
undergraduates in his research as well as including their participation in
outreach activities. 5) The PI is developing a new graduate level course on
"Conformal Field Theories", introducing Yale students to modern research topics,
giving them opportunities to develop their oral presentation skills, and
producing a set of lecture notes that will be disseminated publicly.