* 1350370
* CAREER:  Shape Responses of Ultrathin Hydrogel Microcapsules
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Eugenia Kharlampieva, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 08/31/2019
* USD 540,600.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this CAREER proposal is to
develop a novel class of shape-adaptable materials using pH-sensitive hollow
hydrogel microparticles (capsules) of specific shapes, and to gain a fundamental
understanding of pH-induced capsule shape transformations. To date,
environmental control over materials shape remains a major challenge due to
experimental difficulties that hinder integration of stimuli-responsiveness into
shaped structures. The key task in this work is to understand how shape
responses can be controlled by varying capsule geometry, dimensions, chemical
structure, and thickness of hydrogel wall. The objectives of this project are:
(i) to develop synthesis of hydrogel capsules of various shapes using a layer-
by-layer approach; (ii) to explore pH-triggered dimensional and shape
transformations in the shaped capsules; and (iii) to investigate pH-triggered
changes in capsule mechanical properties and permeability. In this project a
series of pH-sensitive anionic and cationic copolymers bearing cross-linkable
amino groups will be synthesized and assembled into ultrathin hydrogel films and
shape-specific hydrogel capsules. The effects of hydrogel composition,
thickness, and stiffness as well as capsule geometry and dimensions on pH-
triggered volume transitions and on the related capsule physical properties,
including wall swelling/shrinkage, capsule size/shape transformations,
mechanical properties, and permeability will be studied. Fundamental correlation
between complex shapes and physical and chemical properties will be explored
using a combination of in situ techniques such as ATR-FTIR, scattering
techniques, ellipsometry, optical and electron microscopy, and nanoindentation.
The knowledge obtained in the proposal can be used in controlling size- and
shape-transition phenomena in microgels and multilayer capsules.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
on creation of shape-transformable hollow particles (capsules) offers prospects
for developing materials with novel actuation characteristics having
applications for controlled drug delivery, tissue engineering, and pH-regulating
transport in microfluidic devices. These structures may have unique properties
as compared to simple spheres including shape-guided interactions, a greater
stability in flow, and shape-directed flow behavior and cellular uptake. The
educational aspect of this project is to develop a polymer sciences program at
U. Alabama Birmingham (UAB) promoting learning and research opportunities from
the high school through the graduate level. The program will combine elements of
traditional polymer chemistry with developing awareness of the needs of the UAB
biomedical research community for specialized polymers. The program will have a
strong influence on education in the field in the Southeast, with potentially
significant social and economic impact. High school, undergraduate, and graduate
students including underrepresented minorities will be trained in modern aspects
of polymer science including state-of-the-art synthetic and analytical methods
and intensive multidisciplinary collaborations throughout and beyond UAB.
Educational and outreach activities involve developing new B.S. and Ph.D.
programs in polymer science at UAB and creating "PolymerBridge" to enhance the
impact on and to increase the opportunities for underrepresented minorities in
polymer science. "PolymerBridge I" will be designed for 11-12th graders with
instructor-developed demonstrations and include hands-on lab work, while
"PolymerBridge II" will target high school science and chemistry teachers.