* 1350648
* CAREER: A low cost, label-free, multiplexable optical cavity biosensor with high sensitivity, high selectivity, and a large dynamic range using chained differential detection
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2014,12/31/2016
* Seunghyun Kim, LeTourneau University
* Continuing Grant
* Rajakkannu Mutharasan
* 12/31/2016
* USD 271,309.00

1350648 - Kim&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
early detection of diseases is the key to improving survival rates of patients
and reducing economic impacts. Point of care diagnosis is the time critical
solution for the early detection of diseases accomplished by staging effective
diagnosis tools near the patient, either at the patient?s bedside or at a
physician?s office, to monitor and diagnose the patient?s health and wellness
without the costly and time-consuming processes necessary when using centralized
laboratories. The objective of this proposed research is to develop a novel
optical cavity biosensor using chained differential detection for the purpose of
point of care diagnosis. Optical cavity based biosensors are by nature very
promising for point of care diagnosis due to their label-free operation, low
cost, high sensitivity, and high selectivity. On top of the intrinsic benefits
of optical cavity based biosensors, the team introduces (1) a three laser diode
system to accomplish multiplexability, (2) a differential detection method to
enhance its sensitivity, (3) a chained mechanism to increase the linear dynamic
range significantly, and (4) a simple cavity structure which is easy to
integrate with a sample handling system such as microfluidics. Successful
completion of the proposed research project will result in a promising platform
for a point of care biosensor that can be used for early detection of diseases
and possibly create a new paradigm of medical
diagnosis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For general public:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this research is to develop a low cost and highly sensitive device which
will test for multiple diseases using a small amount of a biological sample,
usually blood. The design is composed of a biosensor with simple two reflecting
mirror structure (optical resonance cavity), constructed using well known
fabrication processes. The simple design of the device ensures that it will be
low cost, thus making it accessible to patients in both developed and developing
countries. Since the early detection of diseases is the key to treating them
effectively, it is crucial for patients to be tested regularly. This device will
enable tests to be conducted by the patient in the home or at a physician?s
office, in lieu of extensive and time consuming tests, allowing the patient to
regularly monitor for the presence of multiple diseases. Enabling the patient to
test his/herself regularly will allow diseases to be discovered early and allow
for more effective and less expensive treatments.