* 1350984
* CAREER: Efficient Learning of Personalized Strategies
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2014,12/31/2017
* Emma Brunskill, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* James Donlon
* 12/31/2017
* USD 680,210.00

Online retailers frequently provide tailored product or movie recommendations.
But the power of automated personalization, driven by data and statistics, could
be far greater: imagine the impact on poverty reduction if all children had a
personalized, self-improving tutoring system as part of their education. To
realize this vision requires personalization systems that reason about both the
immediate impact of a recommended item (e.g. will a learner immediately learn
from a video lecture) as well as its longer term impact. For example, a
recommended item or intervention may cause a user to change his/her preferences,
state of knowledge, or reveal information about the user that was previously
unknown. This requires methods for creating personalized strategies: adaptive
rules about what decisions to make (whether or which ad to show, which
pedagogical activity to provide) in which circumstances to maximize for long
term outcomes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research involves developing new data-
driven, machine learning approaches to construct such personalized strategies
for related individuals, and using them towards improving the effectiveness of
online mathematics educational systems. The project frames personalized strategy
creation as sequential decision making under uncertainty research. Though there
have been many advances in sequential decision making under uncertainty,
existing approaches have focused primarily on other application areas, like
robotics, and fail to account or leverage for some of the special features that
arise when interacting with people. These include that accurate simulation of
people is difficult but prior data is often available, and that individuals are
often related. This project contributes algorithms for mining existing datasets
to create and precisely bound the expected performance of new high-quality
strategies and for online policy learning across a series of similar sequential
decision making tasks.