* 1350766
* CAREER: Hardware Error Resilient Virtualization Infrastructure
* CSE,CNS
* 01/15/2014,12/31/2019
* H. Howie Huang, George Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 12/31/2019
* USD 390,717.00

Cloud data centers have become an important cyber-infrastructure vital to our
society and economy, yet the virtualization infrastructure is prone to many
reliability challenges. In a cloud, the virtualization infrastructure presents
an abstraction layer on top of commodity hardware components and manages the
execution of guest virtual machines (VMs). However, commodity computer systems
are susceptible to hardware errors and expected to experience high error rates
in the near future. Notably, a hardware error in a virtualized system can
potentially result in a system crash, breaking the assumption of VM fault
isolation. This reliability risk is further compounded by the massive scale of
data centers hosting hundreds of thousands of servers as well as the pursuit of
aggressive server consolidation that aims to host hundreds of VMs on each single
server for high resource utilization. Traditional VM fault tolerant solutions
are inadequate to address this challenge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
proposes a hardware error resilient virtualization infrastructure that provides
high-performance virtualization during error free execution while offering
strong protection against hardware errors. This research will advance our
understanding of hardware error behaviors in virtualized environments and
develop virtualization-aware techniques that provide robust error detection,
recovery, and protection. The proposed hardware error resilient virtualization
infrastructure will offer a low-cost full system solution by taking advantage of
the characteristics of virtualized systems and providing resource management
mechanisms for balanced performance and reliability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed virtualization infrastructure, if successful, will bring substantial
benefits to cloud providers in delivering reliable services to millions of
users. Education will also be an integral part of the project. This project will
develop educational materials for the undergraduate and graduate curriculum,
recruit and mentor under-represented students, and carry out a number of unique
outreach activities that benefit K-12, undergraduate, and graduate students.