* 1350068
* CAREER: Algebraic Knowledge for Teaching: A Cross-cultural Perspective
* EHR,DRL
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2020
* Meixia Ding, Temple University
* Continuing Grant
* Julie Johnson
* 07/31/2020
* USD 588,864.00

What content knowledge is needed for the teaching of mathematics? What practices
are more effective for realizing student success? These questions have received
considerable attention in the mathematics education community. The goal of this
CAREER program of research is to identify, from a cross-cultural perspective,
essential Algebraic Knowledge for Teaching (AKT) that will enable elementary
teachers to better develop students' algebraic thinking. Focusing on two
fundamental mathematical ideas recently emphasized by the Common Core State
Standards - inverse relations and properties of operations - this study explores
AKT based on integrated insights of the U.S. and Chinese expert teachers'
classroom performance. It will be focused on three objectives: (1) identify AKT
that facilitates algebraic thinking and develop preliminary findings into
teaching materials; (2) refine research-based teaching materials based on the
evaluative data; and (3) integrate research with education through course
development at Temple University and teacher outreach in Philadelphia.

The model underlying this research program is that improved pedagogy will
improve student learning, both directly and indirectly. A design-based research
method will be used to accomplish objectives #1 and #2. Cross-cultural
videotaped lessons will be first analyzed to identify AKT, focusing on teachers'
use of worked examples, representations, and deep questions. This initial set of
findings will then be developed into teaching materials. The U.S. and Chinese
expert teachers will re-teach the lessons as part of the refinement process.
Data sources will include: baseline and updated survey data (control, context,
and process variables), observation, documents, videos, and interviews. The
statistical techniques will include descriptive and inferential statistics and
HLM will to address the hierarchical nature of the data.

This project involves students and teachers at various levels (elementary,
undergraduate, and graduate) at Temple University and the School District of
Philadelphia (SDP) in the U.S. and Nanjing Normal University and Nantong School
District in China. A total of 600 current and future elementary teachers and
many of their students will benefit directly or indirectly from this project.
Project findings will be disseminated through various venues. Activities of the
project will promote school district-university collaboration, a novice-expert
teacher network, and cross-disciplinary and international collaboration. It is
anticipated that the videos of expert teaching will also be useful future
research by cognitive researchers studying ways to improve mathematics learning.