* 1350605
* CAREER: Non-traditional Materials Application for Seismic and Wind Loads
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2014,08/31/2020
* Jason McCormick, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Caglar Oskay
* 08/31/2020
* USD 400,000.00

The objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program award is
to pursue applications of non-traditional civil engineering materials to enhance
passive damping in steel structures spanning from low-rise systems to tall
buildings. This work will allow for customized and controlled energy dissipation
throughout the structure leading to safety and serviceability of buildings
subjected to wind and seismic loads. Non-traditional materials to be considered
are metal foam, rubber, and others filled in the gaps between flanges of steel
beams and as filler in tubular sections. The application of non-traditional
materials to multiple loading scenarios can lead to long-term welfare, economic
prosperity, and safety of communities. The results will be a more homogenized
design of structures that provides an optimal performance regardless of the
loading or building configuration. The cross-disciplinary nature of this concept
also provides a unique opportunity to increase awareness of the science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics fields in young, diverse, and
impressionable elementary school students. The elementary school teachers are
targeted to increase understanding of science and mathematics concepts for
buildings. The project will promote creativity in engineering students and to
influence practitioners in future design of
buildings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dynamic loads acting on steel structures, such
as those caused by earthquake or wind events, have caused significant structural
and/or non-structural damage bringing into question the resiliency and
robustness of these structures. Under seismic loads, steel structures are
designed to dissipate input energy through the formation of 'plastic hinges'
resulting in permanent deformation in buildings, while the repeated wind loads
on tall buildings can result in large drifts and accelerations leading to damage
to nonstructural elements and the perception of motion by building occupants.
The specific goal of this project is to address these concerns of the resiliency
and robustness of steel structures. To achieve this goal, the behavior of non-
traditional materials such as metal foam and rubber will be characterized under
a variety of loading scenarios typically caused by seismic and wind events.
Finite element models that are calibrated to the material characterization
findings will be used to evaluate potential placement strategies of these high
damping materials to best utilize their inherent properties. Full-scale sub-
assemblies containing the damping materials will be experimentally tested to
evaluate the performance of the applications in a variety of structural
configurations under both seismic and wind loads. These findings will allow for
the development of models to evaluate the performance of the mitigation
strategies in reducing the response of various structural configurations.
Education modules will be developed by and for elementary school teachers to
help them educate students. Education of university students will be achieved
through experiences as research assistants and incorporation of research
findings in the curriculum.