* 1350346
* CAREER: Flexibility, constraints, and selection in repeated ear loss and regain in toads
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2021
* Kim Hoke, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 06/30/2021
* USD 809,235.00

Most frogs and toads vocalize to communicate, and females typically use hearing
to locate mates. Despite how essential tympanic ears are for hearing sound in
air, outer and middle ear structures have been lost and regained many times in
frogs and toads. This project integrates anatomy, physiology, development, and
phylogenetic analyses to investigate the independent gains and losses of ear
structures. Relating ear morphology to hearing ability will reveal novel
mechanisms of hearing and will characterize the costs and benefits of various
anatomical features for hearing low and high pitch sounds. Because the
development of ear structures is linked to the development of other skull
features, this project will identify changes in the size and shape of skull
bones that accompany changes in ear structures. Moreover, developmental analyses
will determine specific genetic and cellular changes that cause the loss of
outer and middle ear structures, a type of ear defect that is a common cause of
human deafness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Integrative analyses of skull features will
assess whether associated changes in skulls facilitate the diversity of ear
structures, with data publicly available at Digimorph
(http://www.digimorph.org/) and the CSU Digital Repository
(http://lib.colostate.edu/repository/). The research in this proposal includes
natural opportunities to better educate the general public and university
students about hearing, biodiversity, and conservation. Within the US, this
proposal will be integrated into undergraduate classes as part of a new
laboratory approach to teach students to conduct and interpret statistical
analyses. In addition, US undergraduates will participate in the research
efforts and participate in developing a bilingual museum exhibition about frogs
that will be displayed at one or more US science museums. The Ecuadorian toad
breeding program and a related Ecuadorian museum exhibition will contribute to
amphibian conservation at a key moment when road-building and resource
extraction threaten to have major impacts on wildlife in Ecuador.