* 1350696
* CAREER: Canonical metrics and stability in complex geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2020
* Gabor Szekelyhidi, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2020
* USD 442,789.00

Abstract

Award: DMS 1350696, Principal Investigator: Gabor Szekelyhidi

Geometric partial differential equations govern much of the physical world. For
example solutions of Einstein's equations are intimately related to our
understanding of the universe. The proposed research studies differential
equations related to Einstein's equations and the key question is how the global
structure of a space influences the local, analytic properties, such as
singularities of the solutions of such equations. Understanding this phenomenon
will have applications in physics and the sciences in general. In addition the
principal investigator proposes integrated research and educational programs.
These programs will raise interest in high school students towards mathematics,
and it will encourage undergraduate students to pursue K-12 STEM education.

The principal investigator's proposed research is concerned with the study of
canonical Kahler metrics on algebraic varieties, in particular the extremal
metrics introduced by Calabi in the 1980's, and questions related to the J-flow
introduced by Donaldson. The main conjecture in the field relates the existence
of extremal metrics to the stability of the variety in the sense of geometric
invariant theory, and the PI proposes an analogous conjecture for the J-flow. A
particular feature of the proposal is a focus on situations when no extremal
metric exists. On the algebro-geometric side the goal is to construct canonical
degenerations of the variety and the PI's proposal is to use filtrations of the
homogeneous coordinate ring, in analogy with Harder-Narasimhan filtrations of
unstable vector bundles. On the differential geometric side one needs to
understand the possible limiting behavior of families of extremal metrics. In
general this is much more intricate than the much more thoroughly understood
case of Kahler-Einstein metrics, and the PI proposes to first restrict attention
to metrics with bounded curvature, and to relate the limiting behavior to
filtrations. In the proposal a special emphasis is placed on the construction of
new examples of extremal metrics, and the applications of these ideas to other
problems in Kahler geometry.