* 1350034
* CAREER: Microscale Magnetic Devices for Next Generation Coherent X-Ray Sources
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2014,01/31/2020
* Robert Candler, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 01/31/2020
* USD 445,584.00

Overview:&lt;br/&gt;This research will explore novel microscale magnetic
undulators and quadrupole focusing magnets, enabling unprecedented scaling of
x-ray free electron lasers (XFELs). XFELs accelerate a beam of electrons, focus
the electron beam using quadrupoles, and convert the electron energy into
coherent radiation using the magnetic field of an undulator. Coherent x-rays are
used in phase contrast imaging, which offers 1000x better resolution compared to
conventional x-ray imaging. Currently, there is only one XFEL in the United
States. As such, only a handful of scientists can access it, and potentially
high-impact experiments languish as they wait in line for access. Success of
this project will lead to broadly accessible XFELs capable of atomic resolution
imaging of non-crystalline samples and femtosecond imaging of dynamic processes.
In this CAREER project, the PI plans to advance recent innovation in 3D micro-
magnet fabrication that his group has pioneered to introduce a new generation of
XFELs. To accomplish this overarching goal, the CAREER program will focus on
achieving the following goals: (1) Investigate micro-electromagnet quadrupoles
that push the limits of focusing for the electron beams used in XFELs. (2)
Explore tunable microscale undulators that leverage scaling laws of their
sinusoidal magnetic field to create high energy photons from lower energy
electron beams. (3) Introduce a lab-scale XFEL that is 1000x smaller than
existing XFELs and &gt; 1,000,000 times brighter than other coherent x-ray
sources of its size.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit :&lt;br/&gt;This
research will investigate the fundamental limits of electron beam focusing and
high-energy photon generation. Conventional quadrupole focusing magnets and
undulators are centimeter-scale and individually machined, often by hand. Recent
advances in fabrication of 3D electromagnets enable parallel fabrication of
large arrays of microscale quadrupoles and undulators. Design optimization
techniques will be used to explore novel designs of quadrupoles that focus an
electron beam even as the quadrupole is scaled to the limit of the electron beam
spot size. Micro-undulators, smaller than any previously built, will access an
operating regime where wakefield effects emerge, effects that have not been yet
experimentally studied at this scale. If successful, this research will create a
new state of the art in high-strength quadrupoles and intense-field, short-
period undulators, which will be used to create an XFEL with unmatched
brightness among small-scale light sources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts
:&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research lays the foundation for a new generation of
coherent x-ray sources that would revolutionize access to high-speed coherent
x-ray imaging for science and medicine. For scientists, intense, ultra-short
x-ray pulses have the potential to expand high-speed imaging of biological
structure and processes. Imaging of protein structure would become possible for
the 40% of proteins that cannot be crystallized, and dynamic processes at the
scale of atomic motion could be understood. Also, a 1000x reduction in x-ray
dosage made possible by XFELs would diminish concerns about the health effects
of medical x-rays, such as for the nearly 40 million mammograms performed in the
US each year. The PI plans to create an integrated research, education, and
outreach program with the mission of recruiting and retaining underrepresented
students in STEM. In collaboration with the CEED diversity center at UCLA, The
PI will create a summer design challenge called "Design It, Print It!". In this
6-week design challenge, underrepresented (UR) K-12 students will design, 3D
print, and test components to align quadrupoles and undulators. The K-12
students will be guided by an UR undergraduate engineering student, who will
also participate in a paid research project during the school year. Four K-12
students and one undergraduate will participate per year, providing an in-depth
research experience for twenty K-12 students and five undergraduates during the
project. Each year, the PI and undergraduate will also visit the high schools of
the K-12 participants to describe their work in 3D printing, reaching ~750
students over the life of the project.