* 1350741
* CAREER: Dissecting the Role of Mechanical Forces in the Regulation of Cytoskeletal Dynamics during Mitosis
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2014,02/28/2019
* Melissa Gardner, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 02/28/2019
* USD 400,005.00

1350741&lt;br/&gt;Gardner&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The biomechanical properties of
cellular proteins and nucleic acids at the nanoscale are critical for regulating
key cellular processes, including cell division. In particular, the centromeres
on sister chromosomes are stretched apart during mitosis, and this stretching
generates a tension force, which is important for ensuring proper chromosome
segregation into two daughter cells. However, an integrated mechanistic
understanding for how mitotic centromere stretching tension is established and
maintained is lacking. The overall objective of the proposed work is to study
how mitotic&lt;br/&gt;microtubule dynamics generate and respond to tension
forces during mitosis, and to begin to dissect the role of tension forces in
establishing kinetochore and chromosome positioning during mammalian cell
mitosis. This work will ultimately lead to a better understanding of how
proteins and nucleic acids work as a nanomechanical system to mediate proper
chromosome segregation during cell division. The overarching hypothesis to be
tested is that microtubules, which are the cellular cytoskeletal polymers
responsible for aligning and segregating duplicated chromosomes during mitosis,
can self-regulate their dynamics by both generating and responding to tension
forces. The hypothesis and overall objective will be addressed by pursuing the
following specific aims.&lt;br/&gt;Aim 1: Determine whether in vivo tension
forces regulate kinetochore microtubule dynamics to control chromosome alignment
during budding yeast mitosis; Aim 2: Determine whether tension generated by
purified in vitro microtubules can intrinsically self-regulate microtubule
dynamics; and Aim 3: Distinguish important anti-poleward forces in mammalian
cell mitosis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The proposed research
will develop tools to better understand the origin and role of internally
generated mitotic spindle forces during cell division. Specifically,
microtubules are a key element in the mitotic spindle, and are thus responsible
for generating and responding to forces which regulate the proper progression of
cell division. Because uncontrolled cell division is a hallmark of cancer, and
many cancer therapeutic interventions work by disrupting microtubule dynamics,
dissection of the relationship between force and microtubule dynamics has the
potential to lead to more rational approaches in cancer treatment. The proposed
research will make use of physical principles and advanced microscopy to
evaluate forces inside of living cells, and then use these methods to dissect
the relationship between these forces and microtubule-based chromosome
segregation during mitosis. In addition, biophysical reconstitution and
computational modeling at both cellular and molecular scales will be used to
directly test the hypotheses, and to provide a framework for interpreting
experimental results. The generated results are expected to be applicable both
in better understanding the fundamental biophysics of cell division, and in
providing quantitative data on potential cancer
therapies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The proposed work has
significant broader impacts on advancing the quantitative understanding of the
role of molecular forces during cell mitosis, which has substantial implications
in cell biology and cancer research. The integration of quantitative engineering
methods, computer programming, and physical principles into the study of
fundamental problems in biology has been demonstrated to increase the
productivity and insights available to researchers in the life sciences. A
strong thrust of this proposal is aimed at instilling quantitative engineering
approaches into Cell Biology education and research, at both the undergraduate
and graduate levels, which will contribute to development of a diverse, globally
competitive STEM workforce. In particular, the education aims are integrated
with the research proposal to (1) introduce quantitative engineering approaches
to cell biology graduate students at the earliest point in their graduate
careers; (2) build coursework and research opportunities for both graduate and
undergraduate biology students to implement quantitative engineering methods
into their current studies, and subsequently into their future careers; and (3)
fund undergraduate and underrepresented minority students to perform
quantitative research projects in Cell Biology or Biomedical Engineering
laboratories.