* 1350589
* CAREER: Accidental Knowledge: Using Accidents and other Systems Engineering Failures to Inform Research and Education in Systems Engineering
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2019
* Karen Marais, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Rob Stone
* 12/31/2019
* USD 408,025.00

The objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program research
project is to explore the causes of systems engineering failures in large
projects in a three-step process: (1) Detailed analysis of past system
engineering failures to identify deficiencies in systems engineering; (2)
Investigations of systems engineering in practice at industry and government
organizations to challenge or validate these findings; and (3) Use of these
findings to improve systems engineering curricula and delivery methods. Despite
best efforts, projects fail in ways that systems engineering is intended to
prevent. The rate of failures shows no sign of decreasing. Therefore, current
approaches based on methods, tools and processes are not working. We need to do
more than propose better processes -- we need a foundational basis that is
informative and can be adapted to a broad range of circumstances and industries,
such as mining, oil and gas, chemical, and aerospace, to guide design and
operational choices that prevent or mitigate failures.

If successful, this research will contribute to reducing failures of engineering
projects and form the basis for sound, data-informed improvments to the
fundamentals of systems engineering. The educational component of this work
combines research-based course improvements with rigorous assessments of actual
student learning (as opposed to self-reported data) across a longitudinal set of
courses. The findings will be used to improve the systems engineering curricula
and delivery methods.