* 1350733
* CAREER: Centralized Authorities in Internet Security: Risk Assessment, Mitigation, and New Architectures
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2020
* Sharon Goldberg, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 05/31/2020
* USD 588,472.00

In response to serious vulnerabilities that plague many of the Internet's core
protocols, the last two decades have seen various security infrastructures
layered on top of originally insecure protocols (DNSSEC on top of the domain
name system, SSL and its public key infrastructure on top of TCP, the RPKI on
top of interdomain routing). The security of each is derived from centralized
authorities that are trusted to provide information about cryptographic keys or
identities. When authorities behave correctly, each security infrastructure
protects the underlying insecure system from attack. However, what happens if an
authority abuses its power, or experiences a malfunction, misconfiguration, or a
compromise by an external attacker?

This project is predicated on the observation that the scope, impact, and
visibility of abuse by compromised authorities is determined by the architecture
of a security infrastructure (e.g., the presence or absence of hierarchy, the
scope of an authority's power, etc.). The project finds new ways to balance
between the need to provide strong security guarantees for a vulnerable insecure
system, and the need to limit the control that a centralized authority can
exercise over that system. To do this, the project will use cryptography and
mechanism design to design architectures that make abuse easier to detect, or
harder to execute. The project has implications on the security of some of the
Internet's most crucial systems, and also involves technology transfer to the
practitioners involved in the standardization and adoption of Internet systems.