* 1350721
* CAREER: Legged Locomotion Across Scales: Closing the Loop Between Task Planning and Motion Control
* CSE,IIS
* 03/15/2014,02/28/2021
* Ioannis Poulakakis, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Erion Plaku
* 02/28/2021
* USD 437,808.00

This award seeks to introduce tightly integrated locomotion control and motion
planning strategies for agile, highly-mobile legged robots with radically
different sizes and morphologies. To realize the potential of these machines in
real-world applications, basic movements must be composed to synthesize more
complex locomotion behaviors that achieve desirable high-level planning
objectives. As dynamic legged robots are becoming increasingly more capable, the
need for hierarchically consistent locomotion planning strategies that translate
descending task-level commands to suitable low-level control actions that
harness the platform's locomotion capabilities becomes pressing. To address this
need, this effort pursues new directions (i) in dynamic legged locomotion, by
offering a portable library of locomotion primitives; (ii) in robot control, by
providing constructive feedback reduction strategies and stochastic data-driven
methods that map complex legged robot platforms to behavior-encoding target
models; and (iii) in hybrid systems, by introducing a framework for complexity
reduction through multiple layers of information processing and control action.
This research effort seeks to enable legged machines to perform real-world tasks
reliably and efficiently. This way, it promotes many different applications,
including industrial, agricultural, and emergency response applications that
require highly mobile and versatile robots. This effort also includes
substantial educational and community outreach components, aiming at attracting
underrepresented groups to science, technology, engineering, and mathematics. In
addition, by pairing high-school teachers with graduate students, this effort
addresses the critical need for K-12 teachers to stay current and articulate
their teaching with the demands of college courses.