* 1350858
* CAREER: Non-Commutative Cryptography from Hard Learning Problems: Theory and Practice
* CSE,CNS
* 04/15/2014,03/31/2022
* Antonio Nicolosi, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 03/31/2022
* USD 482,312.00

The resiliency of much of the modern information technology ecosystem is
predicated on the strength of the cryptographic constructions at its core.
Uncovering new intractable problems suitable for cryptosystem design enhances
the robustness of the overall infrastructure to breakthroughs like the
development of quantum computers or unforeseen cryptanalytic advances against
any specific computational problem. This project develops the theory and
practice of a novel approach to cryptography based on a class of learning
problems over non-commutative groups, known collectively as Learning
Homomorphisms with Noise (LHN). The appeal of non-commutative groups as a source
of cryptographic hardness, due in part to the absence of significant quantum
algorithms for this setting, has long been recognized, but isolating suitable
intractability assumptions has proven elusive.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
explores four main threads: (1) designing efficient cryptographic constructions
based on the hardness of LHN; (2) establishing evidence of the intractability of
the underlying learning problems, especially against quantum computing; (3)
building a software library to manipulate instances of these learning problems
efficiently, and evaluating the performance of learning-based non-commutative
cryptography; and (4) exploring additional LHN variants to overcome any
limitation encountered in the execution of the other threads. By diversifying
the premises on which to base cryptography and creating training opportunities
in information security for tomorrow's workforce, this project will strengthen a
critical part of the modern information technology infrastructure.