* 1350926
* CAREER: Genetic Dissection of Developmental Evolution in a Poecilogonous Polychaete
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2019
* Matthew Rockman, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Klein
* 03/31/2019
* USD 606,241.00

The spectacular diversity we observe among animals extends to their earliest
developmental stages, including eggs, embryos, and larvae. The molecular and
genetic mechanisms that give rise to this developmental diversity are poorly
understood and have been difficult to study. This project is building tools to
facilitate genetic analysis of developmental variation in a marine worm,
Streblospio benedicti, whose unique attributes make it ideal for addressing
developmental diversity. These animals, which are abundant in intertidal and
subtidal mud along the Atlantic and Pacific coasts of the United States, are all
very similar as adults but exhibit two very different modes of development.
Individuals with different developmental modes are nevertheless capable of
interbreeding, allowing for the genetic analysis of their eggs, embryos, and
larvae. A freely accessible panel of genetically recombinant strains of S.
benedicti, complemented by its genome sequence and genetic map, will enable
researchers to discover the molecular mechanisms responsible for variation in
animal development. These studies address many longstanding questions about the
evolutionary origins of animal diversity, questions that have previously been
out of reach of experimental investigations. The genomic tools will also fuel
further research into the molecular and cellular biology of a poorly studied
group of organisms, and methods for experimental manipulation of these animals
will be developed. The research is coupled to the creation of an undergraduate
course devoted to building knowledge of animal diversity, and high-school
teachers and teachers-in-training will participate in the laboratory research to
further national goals of specialized disciplinary expertise for STEM educators.