* 1350264
* CAREER: Smart Monitoring and Inspection with Unmanned Aerial Vehicles
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2014,01/31/2020
* Usman Khan, Tufts University
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 01/31/2020
* USD 482,692.00

Wireless Sensor Networks (WSNs) are being envisioned to monitor health and
vitals of the nation?s critical infrastructure, e.g. bridges, roads, and
buildings. Other applications include monitoring remote space stations and off-
earth structures, e.g. the inflatable lunar habitats. A significant challenge in
making remote monitoring a reality is data collection from the sensors, as their
batteries do not allow long-range transmission. This research enables data
collection and inspection via Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs), invoking
subsequent investigation in dynamic task allocation, distributed path planning,
and collaborative navigation in GPS-denied/indoor settings. In particular, this
study develops the theoretical foundations for autonomous monitoring and
inspection, where WSNs operate in a complete harmony with a network of UAVs. The
WSN provides intelligible information to the UAVs for responsive and diagnostic
actions; while the UAVs coordinate (and may also bring outside directives) to
adapt the WSN to the environment and application demands.

To undertake this effort, this research casts the predominantly nonlinear UAV
control, navigation, and planning problems in a completely linear framework. The
linearity of the underlying dynamics builds upon some of the classical work in
convex geometry and Euclidean metrics. Subsequently, the distributed control
problem is formulated using structured systems theory, by which efficient graph-
theoretic controllability and actuation methods are developed. These features
play a significant role in establishing rigorous analytical arguments and in
implementing a fully functional remote monitoring and inspection prototype. The
transformative approach adapts to the application needs and is robust to
imperfections in the underlying communication and environment uncertainties. The
study further involves several outreach efforts via social coding platforms and
workshops for minority, women in engineering, and K-12 students.