* 1350314
* CAREER: Towards Green Communications Using an Information-Lens: Foundations of the Joint Design of Communication Strategies and Circuits
* CSE,CCF
* 01/15/2014,12/31/2018
* Pulkit Grover, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 12/31/2018
* USD 612,000.00

This research project aims to develop a system-level theory of energy efficient
communication that incorporates the energy consumed in transmission as well as
in the supporting transmitter/receiver circuitry. The existing theoretical
foundation that guides the design of practical communication systems --
traditional information theory -- focuses almost exclusively on the transmit
energy. For many modern short-distance communication systems, however, the
energy consumed in the processing circuitry dominates over the transmit energy.
The proposed research will advance the existing theory and practice by examining
flows of information in the supporting circuitry in order to obtain a
fundamental understanding of total (transmit + circuit) energy. A three-layer
approach will be adopted to reduce energy consumption: (i) The Foundational
Layer for expanding the frontiers of traditional information theory by
incorporating processing energy at the transmitting and receiving ends; (ii) The
Design Layer for novel designs of strategies including error-correcting codes
that minimize the total energy; and (iii) The Validation Layer for assessing the
energy reductions for various applications through strategies proposed in the
Design Layer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Applications ranging from education,
healthcare, manufacturing, and commerce today rely on uninterrupted and
ubiquitous connectivity. Consequently, it has become increasingly important to
keep the energy consumed in communication networks low, both for improving
battery life of wireless devices and for sustainability of high-energy wired
communication (such as ethernet links in data centers). Broadly speaking, the
traditional design approach follows a "division-of-labor": the transmission
strategy is first chosen to best approach the information-theoretic limits on
minimum transmit energy, and then the most energy-efficient circuits are built
to support the chosen strategy. The proposed research rethinks this division-of-
labor by jointly designing the transmission strategy and circuits to maximize
system-level energy efficiency. This research necessitates simplification and
synthesis of concepts in communication, computation, and circuits. The project
incorporates several educational and outreach efforts, including organizing
interactive workshops for K-12 students and developing new material for both
theoretical and experimental classes towards educating cross-disciplinary
leaders not just in research, but also in industry where such education is
essential for increased innovation.