* 1350885
* CAREER: High Performance Spatial Queries and Analytics for Spatial Big Data
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2014,07/31/2015
* Fusheng Wang, Emory University
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 07/31/2015
* USD 86,627.00

The rise of big data is changing our way of thinking about the world by
providing new insights and creating new forms of value. The challenges for big
data come not only from the volume but also the complexity, such as the multi-
dimensional nature of spatial data. In this CAREER project, we will deliver a
scalable and efficient spatial big data processing system that can take
advantage of fast increasing processing power of computers and their latest
supporting programming environments. This software can be used for a variety of
applications in medical image processing and in GIS (Geographical Information
Systems), e.g., for city planning, transportation planning, disaster response,
military planning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fundamental goal of this CAREER
project is to address the research challenges for delivering a high performance
software system for spatial queries and analytics of spatial big data on
MapReduce and CPU-GPU hybrid platforms, promote the use of the created open
source software to support problem solving in multiple disciplines, and educate
the next generation workforce in big data. Specifically, the following research
aims will be pursued in this project: 1) Create new spatial data processing
methods and pipelines with spatial partition level parallelism through MapReduce
and propose multi-level indexing methods to accelerate spatial data processing;
2) Research two critical components to enable data parallelism: effective and
scalable spatial partitioning in MapReduce, and query normalization methods for
partition effect; 3) Research efficient GPU-based spatial operations to support
object level and intra-object level parallelism, and integrate them into
MapReduce pipelines; 4) Investigate optimization methods for data processing
pipelines, data skew mitigation, and CPU/GPU resource coordination in MapReduce;
and 5) Provide declarative spatial queries and create a query translator to
automatically translate the queries into MapReduce
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will provide a high performance
scalable spatial computing infrastructure to be deployed by researchers and
application users world-wide from various disciplines, and the source codes will
be made open source and fully available. The project will provide a strong
foundation to solve spatial big data problems such as location based services,
remote sensing based applications, and map based applications. It will also
enable the fast solving of scientific problems such as pathology imaging at
large scale. The education activities include a revised undergraduate course
with a new spatial big data theme, a revised graduate course with a focus on big
data management, involvement of undergraduate, graduate and underrepresented
students in research, symposia and science projects for K-12 students, and a
software infrastructure to support the education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For
further information see the project web site: http://fushengwang.net/hadoop-
gis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Keywords: spatial big data, MapReduce, CPU-GPU, spatial
queries, spatial analytics