* 1350731
* CAREER: Understanding Nanoprecipitation - Scalable Production of Polymeric Nanoparticles Encapsulating Hydrophobic Compounds
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/15/2014,12/31/2019
* Ying Liu, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 12/31/2019
* USD 527,479.00

This Early Faculty Career Development (CAREER) Program award provides funding to
achieve a comprehensive understanding of the competitive kinetics required to
reproducibly generate polymeric nanoparticles encapsulating hydrophobic drugs
with optimized physicochemical properties. Polymeric nanoparticles as drug
carriers can dramatically increase the solubility and bioavailability of
hydrophobic compounds due to their large surface to volume ratio. The major
challenge of developing polymeric nanoparticles for clinical applications is the
production at larger scale while maintaining consistent nanoparticle properties.
Due to the complexity of the process, purely empirical optimization is
infeasible and quantitative prediction by a judicious interplay of simulations
and experiments is essential. Time-resolved small-angle X-ray scattering
integrated with a microfluidic device will be employed to experimentally observe
nanoparticle structural evolution in situ. Computational fluid dynamics modeling
together with population balance equations will be developed to numerically
understand the coupling of mixing with precipitation. Iteration between modeling
and experiments will lead to a fundamental understanding of how nanoparticle
systems form, thus making it possible to efficiently design, optimize, and scale
up nanoparticle production. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, a scalable
method of nanoparticle production will have been developed, which will lead to
rapid clinical translation of a variety of nanocarrier systems to deliver
hydrophobic drugs and to detect and treat complex diseases. The experimental and
numerical methods can be used as a platform to optimize conditions for dispersed
multi-phase reactions in general. The state-of-the-art experimental observation
of nanoparticle structural evolution with sub-second time resolution will
greatly enhance our understanding of precipitation kinetics and nanoparticle
production. The study will be integrated into the courses developed by the PI as
well as into various educational activities targeting graduate, undergraduate,
and 6-12 students in an interdisciplinary setting. The highly visual nature of
the experimental and theoretical results and the societal relevance of the
biomedical applications represent a natural draw for recruiting students to
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Math (STEM) disciplines.