* 1350901
* CAREER: Filling the Gaps in Domain-Specific Functional-Based Solutions for High-Performance Execution
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2021
* Andrew Gill, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 05/31/2021
* USD 553,182.00

Physicists, meteorologists, and other users of high-performance computing want
to write large and complicated models and systems that execute correctly and
quickly. These models and systems are allowing us to understand our world
better, and explore solutions to hard problems. Unfortunately, to make efficient
use of computing resources, a non-computing specialist needs to, for all intents
and purposes, become a proficient computer scientist. The fundamental problem is
that a non-computing specialist is not necessarily aware of available options
for optimizing their model. Domain Specific Languages (DSLs) are one possible
solution to this knowledge gap, because DSLs can encode the necessary knowledge
required to map programs onto high-performance targets, at the same time to
provide a customized environment in the parlance of the domain specialist. By
utilizing a DSL, the non-specialist does not need to worry about performance at
the outset; it is the responsibility of the DSL compiler to map the model onto
the high-performance target. This research will produce new DSL techniques and
technologies that will substantially lower the cost of developing such high-
performance DSLs, as well as improve the performance opportunities offered to
users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the five-year span of the project, two specific
high-performance parallel platforms (GPGPUs and FPGAs) will be made more
accessible. A resource-aware DSL will allow a broad range of parallel
programming idioms to be directly expressed. This resource-aware DSL will also
work in combination with existing DSLs. With the use of rewriting technologies,
the resource-aware DSL will act as an expressive common medium for exploring
design tradeoffs before, during and after the commitment to specific
implementation technologies. A set of custom compiler plugins will allow
translation into existing development environments and tools for GPGPUs and
FPGAs. As programming continues to migrate from being the task of the general
programmer into the hands of domain specialists, the broader impact of this
research is lowering the performance-related knowledge burden on the domain
specialist, and more generally, supporting the use of specialists by pushing the
state-of-the-art in DSL design and implementation. The principal intellectual
merit of this research is the challenge of creating the generic DSL that
supports post-hoc and resource-aware on-the-fly refactoring on user models. This
new DSL will inform future high-performance DSL compilers, and open
opportunities for customized DSLs and the domain specialist working together to
find implementations that execute correctly and quickly.