* 1350904
* CAREER: Controlling Ecologically Destructive Processes with a Network of Intelligent Robotic Agents
* CSE,IIS
* 03/15/2014,09/30/2016
* Mac Schwager, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Reid Simmons
* 09/30/2016
* USD 286,141.00

This project aims to control destructive environmental processes such as forest
fires, oil spills, and agricultural pest infestations through the intelligent,
coordinated intervention of a group of robots. This requires the development of
fundamentally new control theoretic and algorithmic tools to drive the robots to
take control actions to regulate the environmental process. The robots' control
actions close a large-scale feedback loop around the robots and the environment,
giving rise to complex dynamical phenomena. The project proposes control
strategies for this coupled robot-environment system in three different
timescale regimes: (i) the environment changes slowly compared to the robots'
dynamics, (ii) the environment and robot dynamics are on the same timescale and
immediate control effect is sought, and (iii) the environment and robot dynamics
are on the same timescale and long-term control effect is sought. Three
different optimization based techniques are proposed to generate decentralized
control strategies for each regime. Stability, convergence, and optimality
properties of the robot-environment system under these strategies are studied.
Furthermore, experiments with a network of quadrotor aerial robots, both in the
lab and outdoors, demonstrate the practicality of the control strategies. The
project also incorporates a comprehensive education and outreach program using
quadrotor robots as teaching tools to reach students from diverse backgrounds at
all grade levels. Ultimately, the project seeks to alleviate the economic,
social, and ecological damage caused by oil and other chemical spills, forest
fires, pest infestations, and other ecologically destructive phenomena by laying
the foundations of a new robotic technology.