* 1350438
* CAREER: Scaling Up Mobile Accessibility Through Touchscreen Personalization
* CSE,IIS
* 02/15/2014,01/31/2018
* Leah Findlater, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 01/31/2018
* USD 436,173.00

Touchscreen interfaces are becoming increasingly prevalent as the interface with
which people interact with computers and yet, for people with motor impairments,
many touchscreen commands are difficult or impossible to execute. With the
increased deployment of touchscreen interfaces, it becomes critically important
for hardware and software developers to ensure that such devices are accessible
to a broad range of users. While these challenges can be partially offset by
multimodal (speech) input, touch and gesture remain necessary for fully
functional, efficient, and socially acceptable use of many touchscreen devices.
This is a serious concern for the almost 20 million people in the U.S. who have
motor impairments that affect their upper body, a number that will only rise
with the unprecedented increase in America's senior
population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project pursues a research program to
advance a fundamental understanding of how decreased motor ability impacts
touchscreen interaction and, in turn, how touchscreen interactions can be
personalized to support each user's abilities. While substantial user-interface-
development effort has focused on personalizing content, personalized-
interaction interfaces, such as to alter the means of issuing the taps, swipes,
and clicks that underlie the use of touchscreen devices, have received much less
attention. The increased use of touchscreens presents a tremendous opportunity
for software-based modifications because the entire interactive surface is
software-controlled, an advantage that this researcher has already leveraged to
adapt touchscreen keyboards to how motor abilities for people without
disabilities change in some situations such as while walking. This project goes
far beyond this preliminary work to provide great benefits to people with
permanent motor impairments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project consists of two
complementary major activities. The first major activity employs large-scale
studies to reliably assess and predict the impact of motor abilities on
touchscreen interaction. By developing new methods to leverage user-generated
content (e.g., videos, tweets) and by employing large-scale online
experimentation, the large-scale studies will provide a more in-depth and
ecologically valid characterization of how motor ability impacts touchscreen use
than has been previously possible. The second major activity of the project
builds on findings from the first major activity to design and evaluate new
approaches for personalizing touchscreen interaction. The second activity will
contribute new techniques for personalizing mobile interactions, generate new
algorithms and predictive models of touchscreen performance, and identify design
guidelines for personalizing mobile interaction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: This work will transform mobile accessibility for people with motor
impairments. Enabling mobile access can lead to greater empowerment and
independence for people with disabilities. Many of the proposed techniques will
also likely benefit users more broadly. This work also has implications for the
accessible design of the next generation of mobile devices, including wearables
and 3D-gesture interfaces. Many of the techniques should be applicable in a
commercial context, which is important to insure that new commercial interfaces
are accessible to all users. Education plans include two courses related to
accessibility, one of which establishes a partnership with the DC Public Library
on touchscreen training for people with disabilities.