* 1351959
* CAREER: Synthesis and Studies of One-Dimensional Magnets Supported by Bulky, Redox-Active Benzoquinonoid Bridging Ligands
* MPS,DMR
* 03/15/2014,08/31/2019
* David Harris, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 08/31/2019
* USD 575,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt; With support from the Solid State and Materials
Chemistry program in the Division of Materials Research, this project will
employ coordination chemistry approaches to (1) synthesize new classes of one-
dimensional coordination magnets, or single-chain magnets (SCMs), that exhibit
magnetic coupling of unprecedented strength and to (2) carry out fundamental
studies to better understand how to control spin relaxation barrier in these
materials. These two objectives will be pursued in parallel, with results from
each helping to inform the next steps of the other. More specifically, this
research plan sets out to synthesize and study SCMs comprised of high-spin,
high-magnetic anisotropy metal ions connected by redox-active benzoquinonoid
ligands. The ability to engender and stabilize unpaired electrons on these
bridging ligands will lead to extremely strong magnetic coupling interactions
between ligand- and metal-based spin carriers along the chain. These
interactions, in conjunction with magnetic anisotropy of the metal ions, will
lead to chain compounds that exhibit classical magnet-like behavior at
unprecedented high temperatures. Compounds such as those synthesized and studied
during the course of this work may find utility in practical applications such
as high-density, spin-based information storage and processing, quantum
computing, and spintronics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt; The design and understanding of new magnetic materials is
more important to society than ever before. These materials are the foundation
of data storage and processing technology, and the demand for more efficient
devices is rapidly growing. Indeed, the requirements of current data centers,
such as electricity consumption and cooling technology, are not sustainable.
Addressing these problems requires fundamental scientific research focused on
the development of new paradigms for materials in magnet-based data storage and
manipulation. One such line of research focuses on the creation of new one-
dimensional magnetic materials, the topic of this proposal. Here, the ability to
design, understand, and ultimately implement one-dimensional materials will
enable dramatic advances in storage capacity over the current three-dimensional
material-based technology. In addition, the education plan of this proposal will
establish connections between fundamental molecular magnetism and real world
applications in a group who is often deprived of science education yet hungry to
learn more: older adults. Integrating the education and research plans will not
only educate older adults about the wonders and societal importance of magnetic
materials, but it will also demonstrate to them that the need for scientific
innovation and discovery in today's world is more critical than ever before.