* 1351386
* CAREER: Synthesis of Bulk Nanostructured Materials from Semiconductor Quantum Dots
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2019
* Lorenzo Mangolini, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 12/31/2019
* USD 400,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program grant provides funding to
investigate new manufacturing approaches for the fabrication of bulk-scale
materials with precisely controlled structure at the nanometer length scale.
While nanostructured materials have been intensively investigated from the
theoretical and thermal transport points of view, limitations in their
processing science have impeded their commercial use. This project aims at
overcoming these limitations. Advanced gas-phase techniques will be used to
synthesize nanopowders with precisely controlled properties. Ultrafine particles
with arbitrary size, size distribution, composition and surface chemistry will
be produced and then sintered to yield bulk samples with tunable structural
details. The precise control of the nanoparticle properties will translate into
the realization of bulk nanostructured samples with an unprecedented degree of
freedom in the design of their nanostructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
characterization of bulk samples with arbitrarily designed nanostructure will
advance the scientific understanding of transport of heat and charge carriers in
such systems. A precise description of the role of grain size distribution,
porosity and local structure of grain boundaries on transport properties will be
achieved. This knowledge will be transferrable to other material systems and
valuable to the scientific community. Moreover, the project specifically focuses
on earth-abundant materials and on synthesis and processing techniques that are
scalable to high production rates, thus representing a step towards the large-
scale utilization of materials with good thermal-to-electrical, and vice versa,
energy conversion efficiency. This is critical for applications such as waste
heat recovery, solid state cooling, and in general, for achieving a more
effective utilization of our energy resources. Finally, students from local high
schools, college students from underrepresented minorities and veterans from the
US military who are continuing their educations will be directly involved in
these research activities to enhance their education in the strategically
important areas of materials, manufacturing and energy.