* 1351947
* CAREER:Engineering Three-Dimensional Environments for the Generation of Functional Aortic Heart Valve Tissue
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2014,09/30/2020
* Elizabeth Dirk, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 09/30/2020
* USD 400,000.00

1351947&lt;br/&gt;Dirk, Elizabeth &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will
provide missing knowledge needed for the rational design of synthetic polymer
environments to promote the production of functional aortic heart valve tissue.
The community outreach focuses on biomedical engineering education from K-12
through graduate school. The research group assists in the exposure to and
understanding of biomedical engineering to both teachers and students at a local
minority-majority high school through talks, mentoring of problem based learning
activities, and laboratory experiences. At the college level, a new educational
track in biomechanics, biomaterials, and tissue engineering is being developed
at the PhD level. This program will be the first university program with this
focus in the state, and should lead to interest in this area of study for
students in New Mexico.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tissue engineering holds tremendous
potential for regenerating aortic heart valve tissue for use in place of
artificial materials during valve replacement. A number of existing natural and
synthetic materials have been examined for use as the biodegradable scaffolds
for the in vitro generation of aortic valve tissue. However, none have been
truly successful due to an incomplete understanding of the resident cell
population, valvular interstitial cells (VICs). To that end, the objective is to
systematically examine the effects of biomaterial chemical functionality on VIC
attachment, growth, and tissue formation in three-dimensional environments, both
alone and in co-culture systems with valvular endothelial cells. The research
will provide missing knowledge needed for the rational design of synthetic
polymer environments to promote the production of functional aortic heart valve
tissue. Once tissue engineered valves become available, there is promise that
complications associated with current valve replacements could be overcome.
Additionally, a greater understanding of VIC behavior and regulation could lead
to the elucidation of the initiating events of valve pathologies associated with
overproduction of extra-cellular matrix (ECM). Thus, the work may lead to
important advances in long-term therapies for heart valve dysfunction. It is
also anticipated that the generated knowledge will be equally applicable to
understanding and preventing the onset of valve disease.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award by the Biotechnology, Biochemical, and
Biomass Engineering Program of the CBET Division is co-funded by the
Biomaterials Program of the Division of Materials Research and by the Office of
the Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).