* 1351342
* CAREER: Thixotropic Yield Stress Fluids - Splashing, Spreading, Sticking
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2022
* Randy Ewoldt, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 04/30/2022
* USD 487,862.00

PI: Ewoldt, Randy&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1351342&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed CAREER project is focused on understanding the splashing of drops and
jets of fluids that are rheologically complex, i.e., they behave differently
than Newtonian fluids such as water. The goal of the PI is to design new fluid
materials with desirable properties when the fluid impacts on a solid. Important
applications of this research are fighting fires and manufacturing that involves
coating technologies.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;While yield stress
fluids are non-Newtonian fluids with very useful functionalities, thixotropic,
time-dependent yield stress fluids are still not systematically understood in
the way that polymer melts and solutions are. The main objective of this
proposal is to cover some of this white space by understanding the detailed
phenomena that occur when droplets of thixotropic yield stress fluids impact on
solids. An experimental study is proposed that will analyze droplet and jet
impact experiments on dry and coated surfaces as a function of yield stress,
flow viscosity, thixotropic timescales, and flow history using high-speed
imaging and rheological characterization of complex thixotropic behavior. The
goal is to use a deeper understanding of phenomena like splash regimes,
spreading dynamics, and the material deposition pattern on the substrate, in
order to meet design objectives for new fluid materials to fight fires and to
develop novel manufacturing technologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to fundamental knowledge on the
dynamics of complex fluids, understanding the process of splashing of
thixotropic fluids can lead to practical applications with significant impact on
society, for example in the manufacturing of coatings and on designing new
materials to be used as additives in firefighting and fire prevention. The
results can also have potential impacts to inkjet printing and agricultural
spraying technologies.&lt;br/&gt;The educational aspect of the proposal includes
educational activities that aim to engage students from the high school level
and above. It is proposed to develop the "Rheology Zoo", a collection of
learning modules that will be developed to connect human perception to
rheological properties of fluid materials. The Rheology Zoo will target
engineering undergraduates and graduate students, undergraduate Art+Design
students, and high school students. The proposal here will establish The Zoo and
build up the outreach pieces, starting at the home-campus of the PI, and work
toward a sustainable and replicable outreach effort for other universities and
geographical regions. This will occur through coursework, undergraduate honors
credit, high school outreach, web videos, and do-it-yourself instructions for
broad dissemination.