* 1351657
* CAREER: Understanding Directionally Templated Interphase Processing-Structure Development and Relationships in Polymer Nano-Composite Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2019
* Marilyn Minus, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 06/30/2019
* USD 400,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant provides funding for the
development of a new manufacturing process that will be used to tailor polymer
molecular architectures in nano-composite materials. The primary goal of this
research is to apply a nano-scale templating method to the broad field of
polymer-based nano-composite materials processing in order to solve key issues
regarding alignment of flexible molecules by rigid nano-bodies. To understand
the key scientific questions regarding how and why templating occurs, the
experimental platforms of this research will focus on understanding the
fundamental mechanisms associated with inducing templated structures in polymers
by the nano-materials. Control of the polymer molecular alignment and shape in
the composite by templating processes will also provide insight toward achieving
multi-scale structural registry in the final material using a top-down
processing approach. This is an issue that needs to be addressed in many fields
where the material structure-property relationship is key.

If successful, the results of this research will lead to new processing
approaches that can be used to control structural development in materials in
order to tailor its performance. These results will also provide understanding
about role of rigid nano-bodies as templates for flexible molecules in order to
affect architectural control of macromolecules for materials design. This
processing approach will affect materials development in many industrial areas
including transportation, health care, aviation, aerospace, structural building
materials, pharmaceuticals, and even sporting equipment. It will also enable
fabrication of designer materials using common (i.e., cheaper) as well as more
sophisticated constituents providing a new array of more affordable materials,
which will in turn facilitate new technologies to be incorporated into many
applications at a swifter pace.