* 1351443
* CAREER: Revisiting the Central Dogma at the Genome Scale and in Single Cells
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2020
* Rong Fan, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 03/31/2020
* USD 400,000.00

1351443&lt;br/&gt;Fan, Rong &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ultimate objective of this
research project is to develop a microdevice platform that can enable the
measurement of a single cell simultaneously for genomic, transcriptomic,
proteomic and phenotypic parameters, in other words, at all the levels of the
Central Dogma(DNA to RNA to protein to phenotype). Specifically, the PI will
develop a microfluidic device for reliably separating cytoplasmic and nuclear
contents from the same single cells followed by whole-pool amplification of
genomic DNAs and messenger RNAs. The amplified products will be retrieved and
analyzed using state-of-the-art genomics technology to link single-cell genetic
variation to the expression of affected genes across the whole genome. Single-
cell, multiplex protein assay and quantitative analysis of cellular behaviors
(phenotype) can be integrated within this microdevice to further correlate
genes, transcripts to the levels of proteins and cellular functions. The PI will
apply this platform to investigating stem cell differentiation and potentially
provide new insights needed for understanding how gene expression is regulated
to determine stem cell fate and diversity. Such analysis is critical to fully
addresse a range of fundamental biological questions such as embryonic
development, cancer and immune cell diversity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project also acts as a backbone for the integration of research and educational
activities spanning from K12 through graduate training, from Yale University
through the local community. Integrating microtechnology into biology represents
an urgent requirement of expertise for the future health science researchers and
medical practitioners. The synergy of research and education will result in the
development of a virtual micro-physiologic system lab for demonstration to not
only Yale College students but also to the general public, and increase the
participation of minorities and under-represented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Due to the interdisciplinary nature of the project,
this CAREER award by the Biotechnology, Biochemical, and Biomass Engineering
Program of the CBET Division is co-funded by the Systems and Synthetic Biology
Program of the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biology.