* 1351742
* CAREER: Predictive Analysis of Stability-Critical Structures: an Uncertainty-Informed Path from Measurements to Theory
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,09/30/2020
* Mazdak Tootkaboni, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Standard Grant
* Gianluca Cusatis
* 09/30/2020
* USD 400,000.00

The underlying theme of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program
award is the development of a unified predictive analysis framework that will
significantly improves the state of analysis-based design for stability-critical
structures. The framework crosses disciplinary boundaries by bringing together
data mining, information theory and statistical inference techniques from data
sciences and high fidelity stochastic nonlinear solvers that are based on
embedded nonlinear predictors into incremental-iterative path following
techniques from computational sciences. Thin-wall structural components such as
cold-formed steel members and thin wall cylindrical structures are extremely
sensitive to material and fabrication imperfections because they fail in
buckling mode when subjected to compressive stresses. The buckling/stability
failure mode makes it difficult to predict collapse loads. The challenge in
devising predictive analysis framework for components is that a slight deviation
from perfection dramatically affects their response to loads. The result is a
large scatter in results especially when the response up to collapse load is of
interest. Realistic input models for observable and unobservable uncertainties
that are adaptable to both global and local scales as well as to stochastic and
deterministic methods will be a unique feature of the proposed framework. The
goal is to develop analytical non-linear computational model that includes all
variables, to integrate research in to curriculum and to provide outreach to
community college and high school students. The computational model will be
validated with experimental data that is already
available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The methodologies developed in this project will
advance the state of the art in computational modeling of stability-critical
structures and will create a leap towards moderating large safety factors
involved in designing these structures. A new course in probabilistic methods in
structural stability will be developed for the PhD curriculum.