* 1351212
* CAREER: Implementing and Assessing Inexpensive, Effective Methods of Exploring Virtual Environments
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2020
* Betsy Sanders, Rhodes College
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 06/30/2020
* USD 551,747.00

Virtual environments (VEs) are computer-generated depictions of three-
dimensional worlds in which humans can navigate to explore. VEs have been shown
to be effective in a wide variety of applications and disciplines such as to
train miners on safety procedures, educate doctors and nurses, provide therapy
for post-traumatic stress disorder, and treat children with autism. Despite the
abundance of research that shows their usefulness, however, VEs are not widely
used. This is largely due to the fact that current VE systems remain expensive
and complex to operate. However, with recent improvements in the fidelity and
accuracy of relatively low-cost consumer-grade sensors and head-mounted displays
(HMDs), it is now increasingly possible to create high-fidelity and yet low-cost
immersive virtual reality systems. It should now be possible to make VEs useful
to the general public to an extent that was not previously attainable. However,
significant challenges remain, such as how to give a person a means of moving
around and navigating in a VE, especially when the person needs to move in all
possible directions including up and down, such as when exploring a virtual
model of a molecule or the solar system. Another challenge is to better
understand the capabilities and limitations of VEs as general learning
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will make it more feasible to
create VE systems that are both high-fidelity and cost-effective, which will
make it easier for educators, researchers, workers in many fields, and the
general public, to use VEs to improve knowledge and livelihood. The project will
make it more practical to use VEs for applications such as to assess the
evacuation plans of a building before it is built, provide therapy for post-
traumatic stress disorder, or teach children about topics such as molecular
biology or planetary phenomena. It has been shown that skills or knowledge
acquired in a VE transfers to the real world if the experience closely mimics
the real world situation; this project creates a general purpose inexpensive VE
in which the perceived experience mimics a similar real world experience as
closely as possible, but using cost-effective computer systems. This project
take place at a small liberal arts undergraduate college and will offer a number
of opportunities for undergraduate student involvement in the
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research outlined in this proposal enables
both undergraduates and researchers to contribute to the body of knowledge in
computer science, human-computer interaction, virtual reality, cognitive
science, perceptual psychology, and education. The project will expand and
extend the frontiers of the foundational science needed to conduct science and
solve practical problems using VEs. Specific project activities include: (a)
Explore how human spatial orientation in VEs is both similar and different
relative to the real world, by conducting a series of user experiments, in
different environmental contexts, where the primary experimental condition is VE
versus real world. These experiments will fill in a missing gap in the existing
knowledge of VE spatial orientation. (b) Develop and evaluate techniques for
navigation and exploration within a VE. The project will systematically build
and evaluate different navigation methods in both human-scaled virtual
environments as well as multi-scale environments. Multi-scale virtual
environments encompass virtual models that have no natural human scale, such as
a model of a molecule or the entire solar system. The project will
systematically evaluate navigation techniques for this type of VE. (c) Evaluate
the human perceptual implications of the specific type of VE hardware (motion
trackers and visual displays) that are used, specifically by comparing
inexpensive commodity hardware and to expensive specialized high-end hardware.
The goal is to allow the navigation techniques developed earlier in the project
to be implemented on commodity devices. (d) Apply the VE navigation system to an
intelligent tutoring system. The project will build a virtual front-end to an
existing intelligent tutoring system that covers an entire first-year college
biology sequence, and evaluate the extent to which the resulting system permits
students to learn biology concepts such as by interacting with 3D DNA molecules
in a VE.