* 1351785
* CAREER: Ultrasensitive Solution-Processed Inverted Infrared Polymer Photodetectors
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/15/2014,02/29/2020
* Xiong Gong, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 02/29/2020
* USD 408,000.00

The objective of this program is to design, fabricate and optimize
ultrasensitive solution-processed polymer photodetectors with spectral responses
ranging from 350 to 2600 nm that operate at room temperature. The objective will
be accomplished by tuning the electronic functionality of the materials and
optimizing the inverted device performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit includes the development of ultrasensitive inverted infrared
polymer photodetectors that possess significant advantages over state-of-the-art
inorganic photodetectors. These advantages include solution processing methods
for device fabrication and energy savings from ambient temperature operation.
Polymer photodetectors that do not require cooling to obtain high detectivity
would be a transformative breakthrough. Moreover, low-cost multi-color, high
sensitivity and high-speed response over a broad spectral range would have a
number of applications across multiple technology platforms. This program will
advance the fundamental understanding about the chemical and morphological
properties of the electronic materials and the inverted device architecture in
the enhancement of device performance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts
of this program are found in the development of ultrasensitive inverted infrared
photodetectors, which offer resolutions and sensitivities currently
unachievable. The development of this technology at The University of Akron will
increase the participation of the students in science, technology, engineering
and mathematics disciplines by engaging K-12, high school and undergraduate
students using inquiry-based methods. Hands on learning activities including
Science Olympiad rocket design and "plastic" electronics modules mimic the
proposed research outcomes. The highly interdisciplinary research provides a
stimulating environment ideally suited for the education and training of
graduate students, undergraduate students and high-school students.