* 1351892
* CAREER: Characterizing Object Recognition Machinery in a Newborn Visual System
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2014,03/31/2019
* Justin Wood, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Peter Vishton
* 03/31/2019
* USD 559,086.00

How does early experience shape how we process and interpret visual information?
Two major limitations have made this question difficult to answer. First,
researchers can typically collect only a few data points from newborns, which
prevents precise measurement of the infants' visual cognitive abilities. Second,
human infants cannot ethically be raised in controlled environments from birth,
which prevents researchers from studying how specific experiences shape the
newborn mind. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To overcome these limitations, Dr. Wood has
developed a new controlled-rearing method using a non-human animal model. This
method can be used to measure all of a newborn's behavior (24 hours/day, 7
days/week) with high precision (9 samples/second) within strictly controlled
environments. With support from this NSF CAREER award, Dr. Wood will use the new
controlled-rearing method to characterize how newborns recognize objects at the
onset of visual object experience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Wood's laboratory
will use a two-pronged approach. First, the lab will perform a series of
controlled-rearing experiments with newborn chickens. Studies of chickens can
inform human cognitive development because chickens and humans have similar
neural processing systems for sensory information. These controlled-rearing
experiments will reveal how specific visual experiences shape newborns' object
recognition abilities. The findings will provide the foundation for a new,
publicly-accessible database that describes how specific sensory experiences
relate to specific behaviors in a newborn organism.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Second, the lab will build biologically-inspired
computational models of newborns' object recognition behavior, using state-of-
the-art techniques from artificial intelligence. These models will make
predictions that can be compared to the data from the controlled-rearing
experiments. This will help identify how the visual system processes objects.
This approach integrates ideas from developmental psychology, vision science,
and computational neuroscience, providing a unified framework for studying the
origins of object recognition and other visual cognitive abilities.