* 1351322
* CAREER: Gliding Flight in Snakes: How Wingless Gliders Produce Force, Maintain Stability, and Maneuver
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2021
* John Socha, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 08/31/2021
* USD 749,999.00

Flying snakes of the genus Chrysopelea glide like no other animal. Without
appendages or membranes to use as lift-generating surfaces, flying snakes
flatten from head to tail and glide using the body as a single "wing". In the
air, the snakes simultaneously send traveling waves down the body while
oscillating in the vertical plane, a flight behavior unlike any other found in
the natural or engineering world. This project aims to understand the mechanisms
that explain the unique flight abilities of flying snakes. Gliding in live
snakes will be recorded to determine their detailed body movements and sectional
shapes, including experiments to understand how snakes remain stable and
maneuver in the air. Physical and computational models will be used to
understand how the snake's shape and continuously changing body posture
contribute to the production of aerodynamic forces for weight support and
stability. Additional theoretical and physical models will be developed to
investigate the requirements for producing snake-like locomotion in the air.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The subject of this study is an exciting topic for
students and the broader public, and the proposed research will additionally
serve as a springboard for new initiatives that integrate physics, biology, and
engineering into novel educational programming. Animal groups that fly have been
tremendously successful in the biological world, and yet no clear picture has
emerged to explain how powered flight has evolved from terrestrial species. In
particular, we lack an understanding of how species have transitioned from
static gliding to active flapping flight. The undulating movements of the
gliding snake, which can be considered as a continuously morphing wing, present
characteristics that bridge from passive gliding to powered flight. The flying
snake is an active glider, representing the only functional intermediate across
the spectrum of gliding to flapping flight. Understanding the mechanics of
gliding flight in snakes will therefore lend insight into how one group of
species has successfully overcome the biomechanical challenges resulting from
shifting forces and rotational torques on the body, a similar problem associated
with active flapping flight. Additionally, the aerodynamics of flight at low
Reynolds number has received far less attention than the flight dynamics of
larger engineered flyers, and this project will elucidate how a craft with
symmetrical airfoil shape, but asymmetrical and dynamic body posture, can be
physically advantageous. Specifically, the unexpected aerodynamic performance of
the snake may originate in its ability to "surf" on its own wake. The
determination of muscle activity patterns during perturbation and turning trials
will provide the first evidence of the neuromuscular control system required for
this type of undulating flyer. In combination, the proposed research to
understand how snakes glide will provide contributions across disciplines and
will potentially lead to the development of novel micro-air vehicles.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Gliding flight in snakes is perhaps one of the most
spectacular behaviors in the natural world, and has the potential to inspire new
generations of students to take interest in STEM fields. This project taps into
the natural appeal of this animal to develop new educational content for
teachers and the public. Two major synergistic initiatives will be launched
based on flying snake research. The first creates exciting, web-based multi-
media material that can be easily adapted and used by teachers across
educational levels. The new material will include informative video developed in
collaboration with a professional television producer with years of experience
creating programs for the National Geographic Channel. The second effort will
use research in this project to create a new museum exhibit on flying snakes at
the Science Museum of Western Virginia, with assistance from a public school
teacher to help translate research into pedagogy. This exhibit will be offered
for adaptation at museums worldwide, including the integration into a new
exhibit on biomechanics at the Field Museum in Chicago. In addition to the
global reach of these efforts, the appeal of flying snakes will be used as a
mechanism to recruit underrepresented students into research at the
undergraduate and graduate levels through targeted recruiting and visits to
local universities with traditionally underserved student populations.