* 1351896
* CAREER:Optical Coherence Engineering
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2019
* Laura Waller, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Ruyan Guo
* 05/31/2019
* USD 400,000.00

Most light that people observe (e.g. light bulbs, sun light) is only partially
coherent, whereas light from a laser is coherent. This project aims to design
and build optical systems for imaging partially coherent light. If successful,
this research will lead to novel cameras with the ability to digitally refocus
and remove aberrations in images. It would also make possible to synthetically
propagate light through any optical system (e.g. a microscope or camera) and
replace many optical elements via computation. The knowledge developed by this
work will lead to new imaging techniques for commercial products and research
instrumentation tools. Research results from this project will be used to teach
optics and coherence theory to a broad audience through a collection of demos
that will be disseminated at outreach events and on popular websites. The long-
term educational goals of the PI include promoting hands-on science experience
to the next generation of scientists and
engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to
build experimental and computational schemes for imaging four-dimensional (4D)
partially spatially coherent light. The approach is to use computational
imaging, whereby hardware and post-processing algorithms are designed
simultaneously within the framework of phase space optics. Smart coding
strategies will be developed for imaging systems based on spatial light
modulators, in order to enable fast capture of high-resolution coherence
information in 4D. Since partially coherent light beams have many more degrees-
of-freedom, there is an opportunity for encoding and decoding greater amounts of
information. This will lead to the ability to digitally focus images taken with
lens-less cameras, digitally remove aberrations, and digitally filter images to
extract new information in post-processing. This project will benefit scientific
discovery by providing simple imaging systems for visualizing coherence, an
invisible quantity of fundamental importance in optical sciences.