* 1351992
* CAREER: Quantitative Imaging of Tissue Oxygenation
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2014,03/31/2019
* Vikram Kodibagkar, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Stephanie George
* 03/31/2019
* USD 440,000.00

PI: Kodibagkar, Vikram &lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
1351992&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Oxygen is the most important nutrient for life and
its deficiency can cause loss of cell viability and organ function.
Additionally, oxygen is challenging to deliver in vivo due to its low solubility
in water. Therefore, the opportunity to assess hypoxia non-invasively may be
significant in understanding mechanisms of tissue function and in clinical
prognosis of various diseases, such as cancer and stroke. The overall goal of
this proposal is to develop and use quantitative methods employing Magnetic
Resonance Imaging (MRI) to measure, non-invasively, oxygen levels in vivo.
Besides advancing our fundamental understanding of tissue oxygenation under
different physiologic conditions, this capability could also directly impact the
development, screening and use of novel therapeutic agents that target hypoxia
either for promoting it, as would be desirable with cancer, or for alleviating
it, as would be the case in myocardial infarction and stroke. Findings could
impact future patients by aiding the design and development of personalized
therapy for cancer and by improving how radiotherapy is planned and delivered in
the clinic. Educational activities integrate research with education at three
different levels (high-school, undergraduate, and graduate), and multiple
organizations (ASU, local high schools and foreign universities). A Hands-on
Summer Program in Imaging Technology (HoSPIT) will increase awareness in the
capabilities and limitations of Medical Imaging and will prepare students for
the next steps in their educational paths and towards professional
employment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two approaches will be investigated. The first
is based on the binding of an MRI contrast agent in regions that are deficient
in oxygen; and the second relies on the change in the MRI properties of a
nanoprobe depending on the surrounding oxygen levels. In both cases, a
comprehensive pharmacokinetic framework will be used to describe the delivery
and distribution of the reporter probe and to relate the observed MRI parameters
to tissue oxygenation. Three specific objectives will be pursued: the
development of a theoretical model for systemic delivery of MRI-based oxygen
imaging probes for dynamic measurement of tissue oxygenation and related
parameters; the design and construction of an MRI-compatible tissue simulating
phantom with tunable oxygenation and metabolic status for in vitro testing of
the theoretical model; and the application of theoretical model for measurement
of tissue oxygenation and related parameters to in vivo data. The proposed work
is expected to advance the capability of developing three-dimensional images of
tissue oxygenation in high resolution under both physiological and pathological
conditions and under various pharmacological interventions.