* 1351506
* CAREER: Topological Vortex Dynamics
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2020
* William Irvine, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 03/31/2020
* USD 649,949.00

Non-Technical abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Complex fluid flows are ubiquitous,
from the air flowing around an airplane or a car, to the turbulent build up of
storms, to the intricate flows of charged particles in the Sun, or in plasmas
used in attempts to generate electricity by nuclear fusion. Despite its
importance, our understanding of fluid flow is far from complete. Theory
suggests that understanding the Topological Vortex Dynamics or the "knottedness"
of a flow can provide profound new understanding of complex flow. Building on
the principal investigator's recent success in generating knotted vortex loops
-- akin to smoke rings tied into knots -- and utilizing advances in 3D printing,
ultrahigh speed imaging, and high performance computing, this Career Development
Award will, for the first time, examine vortices and knottedness in fluids
experimentally. If this project is successful, its results will provide a basis
upon which to build ways of better understanding or controlling fluid flow. The
educational component will leverage concepts from the study of topological
structures in knotted physical fields to incorporate modern theoretical and
experimental approaches within "classical physics" courses; communicate the joy
and importance of science to the public; and, train high school, undergraduate,
and graduate students in research especially persons who are underrepresented in
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Faculty Early Career Award funds a project that will probe the physics of
knotted vortex loops in a fluid, for the first time in experiment. Building on
our recent demonstration that it is possible to generate knotted vortex loops --
akin to smoke rings tied into knots -- we aim to establish the physics of
topological flows in experiment, from the dynamics and rules of topology
changing events to probing helicity as a conserved quantity in complex vertical
flows. The point of view of a "topological vorticity designer" taken in this
research constitutes a new approach to the experimental study of fluid mechanics
and provides a rare opportunity to probe the dynamics of topological fields in a
real physical system whose structure can be directly imaged. The general
interplay between knots and fields has already had a profound impact on our
understanding of modern topology and promises to provide additional insights -
including new conservation laws - on physical processes in a broad range of
systems including quantum fields, classical and superfluid turbulence, and
excitations in condensed matter. The educational component will combine
contemporary concepts from the study of topological structures in knotted
physical fields with the visually striking realization of these concepts in
experiment to modernize the experimental and instructional curriculum at the
University of Chicago and beyond.