* 1351575
* CAREER: Globalizing Nuclear Emergency Response: Challenges for Interdisciplinary Engagement and International Expertise
* SBE,SES
* 06/15/2014,08/31/2020
* Sonja Schmid, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2020
* USD 413,659.00

Over the course of this five-year, young investigator award, the PI will
investigate the prospects and problems of creating a global nuclear emergency
response through an integrated research, education, and outreach program. The PI
will generate a comprehensive map of existing nuclear disaster response experts
and will bring these experts into conversation with each other through an
international workshop and a cycle of interrelated graduate seminars. The PI
will also investigate the historical dimensions of nuclear emergency expertise,
to formulate and disseminate conclusions about what policies work (or don't),
and to discover what types of expertise were used, needed, and valued in actual
emergencies. This goal synthesizes lessons from past nuclear incidents and
disasters, Cold War civil defense, and homeland security preparations for "dirty
bombs." Under her supervision, students will engage in an oral history project
with nuclear emergency responders to preserve a record of their
experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will contribute to
upper division undergraduate and graduate curriculum for nuclear engineering and
graduate work in Science and Technology Studies whereby students will engage in
policy-relevant research and active, reflexive learning, including developing
publicly accessible web resources.