* 1351665
* CAREER:Toward Grid-Interactive Converters with Diagnostic, Remedial, and Lifetime Prognostic Features for the Next Generation of Power Grids
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/15/2014,01/31/2020
* Behrooz Mirafzal, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 01/31/2020
* USD 405,250.00

Recent investments in sustainable energy resource integration with the energy
infrastructure are invariably resulting in the adoption of additional solid-
state converters in the power grid. These converters have short operational
lifespans compared to other power grid components, but they possess attractive
unrealized capabilities for the smart grid concept, including real-time
diagnosis and self-healing, which is a long-term research plan of U.S. energy
sectors. Thus, basic research to (i) advance reliability and availability of
sustainable energy conversion systems and (ii) realize real-time diagnosis and
self-healing features are timely topics. Meanwhile, as the power grid begins to
adopt more solid-state converters, the nexus between power electronics and power
system classes in power engineering curriculum is desired to address the power
industry's urgent need for a highly educated workforce.

The objectives of this CAREER proposal are to: (i) create intelligent-
reconfigurable grid-interactive solid-state converters as smart elements for the
smart grid concept, (ii) advance availability and reliability of solid-state
converters in wind and solar energy conversion systems, and (iii) impart
required knowledge and skills of practical problems of sustainable energy
systems to the next generation of U.S. power engineers.

The intellectual merit of this research includes the filling of crucial gaps in
the literature regarding smart grid-interactive converters for wind and solar
energy systems. This work offers the following advantages: (i) the formation of
an innovate family of solid-state-based power converters with diagnostic,
healing, and lifetime prognostic features, (ii) the improvement of grid-
interactive converter reliability by preventing catastrophic failures and
mitigating stress on vulnerable components, (iii) the reduction of overall
system downtime and maintenance costs, and (iv) the facilitation of movement
toward the next generation of power grid (smart grid). The broader impacts of
this research include: (i) the provision of quality-integrated education,
research, and engineering to adequately equip the emerging workforce and the
U.S. energy industry needs, and (ii) research findings that are readily
extendable to other critical technologies, such as flexible power transmission
lines, electric hybrid vehicles, mechatronics, robotics, etc.