* 1351487
* CAREER/CDS&amp;E: Advanced, 3D Infrastructure Information Modeling Using Lidar
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2020
* Michael Olsen, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Culbertson
* 03/31/2020
* USD 400,000.00

The primary research focus of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER)
Program award is to efficiently identify and extract meaningful information from
three-dimensional, geospatial models of transportation infrastructure in a
holistic, automated framework, enabling broader application. Advanced mapping
technologies such as laser scanning produce three-dimensional maps, creating
highly detailed scenes that can be virtually explored and queried for a diverse
range of purposes including infrastructure management, digital terrain modeling,
cultural heritage, flood plain delineation, and landslide detection. However,
tradeoffs exist between the detail and scale provided by these technologies and
the immense size of the resulting datasets. This complexity can strain the most
powerful computational resources and require a steep learning curve to exploit
the data. While recent tools have made significant progress, only a small and
piece-meal portion of information can be automatically extracted from these rich
datasets compared to what is actually available. Key scientific questions to be
addressed through this research include (1) What inherent attributes of an
object and associated representation in laser scan data and supporting imagery
are most beneficial to accurately identifying and extracting an object?, (2) How
can neighboring features and context of an object help with rapidly identifying
it within geospatial data?, and (3) How can an abridged framework be developed
to improve information extraction from laser scan data to consider the broad
range of transportation objects? This overarching framework will consider a
broad range of object types, incorporate advanced system information and data
structuring, function in noisy, real-world environments, and focus on datasets
covering large spatial scales consistent with transportation infrastructure
management. Products resulting from this framework include a transportation
infrastructure object properties database, fully-classified benchmark datasets,
new algorithms, and supporting code, which will be made publicly available.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Well-maintained transportation infrastructure is vital to
our economy as well as public safety. Most transportation agencies charged with
maintaining infrastructure are trying to develop a comprehensive methodology for
inventory, maintenance and management of their immense assets. In many cases,
the available resources are reduced while maintenance demands still increase.
This research will provide timely solutions to map and digitally manage these
assets more efficiently and cost-effectively than current practices. Although
primarily focused on transportation, the computational methods and techniques
will be applicable and extendable to a wide range of other applications such as
land management, urban mapping, and robotics. This project also will provide
students with multi-disciplinary education and training in geospatial analysis,
computer science, transportation, and engineering. Despite the high demand for
geospatial expertise today, educational opportunities are limited and
challenging because of the rapid evolution of the supporting technologies. As a
result, the U.S. has an insufficient number of geospatially-trained students
entering the workforce to meet the ever-increasing demand utilizing geospatial
information throughout society. This project will enhance geospatial education
through activities ranging from exposure at public events to training camps for
high school age students to creation of a model civil engineering geomatics
graduate program.