* 1351558
* CAREER: Science for Sustainable and Resilient Groundwater Management
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2021
* Gretchen Miller, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 05/31/2021
* USD 418,809.00

1351558 (Miller). Sustainable management of groundwater requires the judicious
allocation of resources to meet societal, ecological, and environmental needs,
both now and over the long-term. Historically, groundwater sustainability has
been narrowly defined in terms of protecting aquifers from contamination and
limiting pumping to match groundwater use with recharge. However, a broader
paradigm is necessary, one which considers the diverse requirements of multiple,
sometimes conflicting consumers of groundwater, including groundwater dependent
ecosystems (GDEs), and one which fosters aquifer resilience to changes in the
hydroclimate. In order to develop this paradigm, the PI has the long-term career
goals of promoting the sustainable management of groundwater resources by
advancing the scientific understanding of groundwater dependent ecosystems and
by providing engineering and water resources professionals with tools to
incorporate sustainability into their decision making processes. This CAREER
grant aims to further these goals through three project specific research
objectives: 1) integrate the representation of GDEs into land-surface and
groundwater availability models; 2) test and create improved metrics for
quantifying sustainability and resilience of groundwater resources; and 3)
explore management strategies for optimizing groundwater withdrawals to reduce
impacts on GDEs and prevent water system failures. These will be complemented by
three project specific educational objectives: 1) teach sustainable engineering
practices across the civil engineering curriculum; 2) improve the application of
sustainability principles by groundwater professionals; and 3) enhance the
diversity of the engineering workforce by using sustainability concepts as a
tool to engage those from underrepresented groups. This project addresses
critical gaps that prevent a holistic assessment of the sustainability of
groundwater resources and their resilience to climate and anthropogenic
stressors. It targets to improve the modeling of GDEs, as well as create new
metrics for assessing the impact of groundwater management decisions on these
sensitive ecosystems. Using these metrics, it will explore new optimization
methods to create more sustainable and resilient groundwater systems. The
project tests the hypothesis that teaching and researching sustainability is
beneficial to the recruitment, retention and engagement of students from under-
represented groups in engineering, particularly women. The PI's CAREER plan
integrates research and education within the existing framework for the
professional development of civil engineers, who are expected to be able to
define, explain, apply, and analyze sustainability principles, in relation to
engineering design, before they are licensed to practice in the field. At the
student level, the project will develop course modules for teaching
sustainability throughout the civil engineering curriculum; materials will be
drawn from the PI?s research on both groundwater modeling and sustainability
metrics. Students will participate in the research through course projects, and
student volunteers will lead the publication of these results. These activities
will directly impact the education of up to 1900 undergraduates and 50 graduate
students at Texas A&amp;M University, as well as that of the one Ph.D. student
and five undergraduates funded by the project. Course materials will be
disseminated to a wider audience through the PI's ongoing outreach activities
and through existing NSF sponsored websites, potentially improving pedagogic
approaches for teaching sustainability in civil engineering at universities
across the country. At the professional level, the project will create two new
continuing-education opportunities for groundwater managers, consultants, and
policy makers which will aid in broadly disseminating research to enhance
understanding and benefits to society. A workshop on the relationship between
desired future conditions and the sustainability and resilience of an aquifer
will invite stakeholders to guide this research project at its start and will
produce a report on research and education needs for groundwater management. A
short-course on groundwater sustainability metrics and modeling will teach
professionals about decision making tools available for sustainable groundwater
allocation, including those developed by this project.