* 1351449
* CAREER: Smart Morphable Surfaces for Aerodynamic Drag Control
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2018
* Pedro Miguel Reis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Kishor Mehta
* 12/31/2018
* USD 400,000.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program
award is to devise and formalize a new class of Smart Morphable Surfaces (or
Smorphs), that can acquire reversible and on-demand customizable topography
through a wrinkling instability. This functionality of Smorphs will be exploited
for switchable and tunable aerodynamic drag reduction and control on structures
with complex-shaped surfaces. This research first calls for a fundamental
understanding of the mechanics of the post-buckling regime and associated
geometric nonlinearities of this pattern formation process. Moreover, detailed
wind tunnel testing will be performed to quantify the aerodynamic performance of
Smorphs. Whereas the epicenter of the research is in structural mechanics,
utilizing wrinkling morphologies for enhanced aerodynamics will require a
multidisciplinary approach and open new directions in fluid-structure
interaction. More broadly, the proposed research will be strongly rooted in the
basis of recognizing experiments in structural mechanics as a valuable tool for
discovery, supported by computational and theoretical efforts, in a vision of
science-enabled engineering and engineering-motivated science.

Smart Morphable Surfaces offer the opportunity for enhanced aerodynamic
performance in a variety of engineering applications, including: radomes, wind
turbine towers, automobiles and aircraft structures. For all of these, devising
mechanisms for drag reduction is of significant engineering relevance for better
resilience of infrastructure, increased fuel efficiency, and new mechanisms for
maneuverability. The underlying mechanism of Smorphs is analogous to the
workings of a golf ball whose dimpled pattern reduces drag by up to a factor of
two, when compared to a smooth sphere, albeit with added switchable and tunable
capabilities. Close interactions with an industrial partner will provide a
feasible channel to translate the fundamental research into implementable
engineering applications. Concurrently to the research, novel pedagogical
strategies will be explored for undergraduate laboratory-based education in
engineering design and experimental mechanics. Moreover, innovative web-based
tools will be developed for the online teaching of Mechanics and Materials,
through indexable and browsable video-content. Partnership with the non-profit
Summer Search will provide mentoring, coaching and research internships for low-
income inner-city students of the Boston area.