* 1351275
* CAREER: Microstructure-Specific Machining Strategies for Bone
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2020
* Johnson Samuel, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 08/31/2020
* USD 400,000.00

The overarching research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development
(CAREER) Program award is to investigate the fundamental effect of bone
microstructural components on its machining responses. In particular, the
research will test the hypothesis that age/bone-type related variations seen in
the microstructural components of bone have an influence on its critical
machining responses such as surface integrity, cutting forces, tool-wear and
chip morphology. The experimental studies will be aimed at linking the
properties of bone microstructural phases to its machining responses. The
microstructure-based finite element modeling study will be aimed at identifying
age/bone-type-specific failure mechanisms encountered during machining. The
educational objective of this CAREER award is to recruit, educate and develop
the next generation of manufacturing professionals in the upstate New York
region. The educational thrust areas include: 1) Developing a Lego-based, hands-
on module to expose 6th-12th graders to micro-manufacturing technologies; 2)
Developing an advanced manufacturing curriculum that promotes manufacturing
education and careers to high-school girls; and 3) Enhancing the manufacturing
education efforts at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute.

The research findings will have implications for surgical procedures involving
any form of bone machining. In particular, for total joint replacement surgeries
the findings are likely to reduce patient recovery times and the probability of
revision surgeries, both of which currently place a heavy economic burden on the
healthcare system in the United States. This research will also result in
product innovations in the multi-billion dollar market pertaining to bone
surgery instrumentation and surgeon training platforms. The educational
activities are geared towards addressing the current human resource crisis
facing the nation in the area of advanced manufacturing. The educational module
and curriculum being developed for the 6th-12th grade students, especially high
school girls, has the potential to funnel K-12 students to manufacturing-related
educational fields and careers.