* 1351875
* CAREER: Flexoelectricity of Nanomaterials on Deformable Substrates
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2014,01/31/2019
* Nanshu Lu, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 01/31/2019
* USD 400,982.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program
award is to test the hypothesis that the flexoelectric response can be enhanced
by controlling the morphology, the size, and the substrate-induced buckling of
inorganic nanomaterials including two-dimensional (2D) atomic layers. In
contrast to piezoelectricity, which describes electrical polarization induced by
uniform mechanical deformation, electrical polarization induced by strain
gradients known as flexoelectricity has long been overlooked due to its relative
weakness in bulk ceramics which will rupture before large strain gradients are
achieved. Nanomaterials, on the other hand, can survive orders of magnitude
higher strain gradient generated by microscale buckling and wrinkling. Recently,
enhanced electromechanical coupling at nanoscale has been discovered and was
hypothetically attributed to flexoelectricity without direct experimental
evidence. The project will be carried by combining experiments with modeling and
simulations in four research thrusts: i) flexoelectric response of barium
titanate (BaTiO3) nanowires, nanoribbons and nanomembranes on deformable
substrates, ii) electromechanical coupling in atomically thin hexagonal boron
nitride (h-BN) and molybdenum disulfide (MoS2) supported by deformable
substrates, iii) failure mechanisms and fracture mechanics of flexoelectric
nanomaterials on deformable substrates, and iv) scaled flexoelectric response by
nacre-inspired multilayer stacking. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will
enable rationalized design, optimization and scaleup of sensors, actuators and
energy harvesters based on the principle of flexoelectricity. A central goal of
this program is to promote interdisciplinary research and teaching and to expose
underrepresented groups to cutting edge interdisciplinary research. The PI will
initiate a school-wide interdisciplinary course on "Mechanics and Materials of
Flexible and Stretchable Electronics". The PI will provide interdisciplinary
research opportunities specifically designed for undergraduate and high-school
students from minority institutes through the connections established by the
Engineering Research Center (ERC) - Nanomanufacturing Systems for Mobile
Computing and Mobile Energy Technologies (NASCENT) and the Women in Engineering
Program (WEP) at the University of Texas at Austin. The PI and the students will
also prepare demos of wearable stretchable electronics and generators for lab
open houses and for university-wide outreach activities. The PI plans to
distribute both her research and education outcomes globally via publications,
conferences, and online Journal Clubs and videos.