* 1351241
* CAREER: Biophysical Control of Cardiac Differentiation in Patient Specific Cardiac Stem Cells
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2014,03/31/2019
* Lauren Black, Tufts University
* Continuing Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 03/31/2019
* USD 431,718.00

PI: Black, Lauren D. Proposal Number: 1351241 Title: CAREER: Biophysical Control
of Cardiac Differentiation in Patient Specific Cardiac Stem Cells

Current methods for deriving functional cardiac muscle cells from patient-
specific stem cells have resulted in low efficiency in part because they only
mimic the chemical signaling aspect of the environment of the cell present in
the body. The studies described in this proposal seek to enhance our
understanding of how patient-specific stem cells can be influenced to
differentiate to cardiac muscle cells by understanding how the biophysical and
biochemical environment external to the cells affects the ability of resident
stem cells in the heart to turn into cardiac muscle. This work is particularly
relevant because many of the current methods for differentiation of stem cells
to cardiac muscle cells involve the use of growth factors and are highly
inefficient. If successful, the proposed studies will be impactful in terms of
advancing fundamental science, and for having significant potential in bringing
medical applications closer to the clinic. Education and outreach activities are
well integrated with the proposed research and involve local and inner city high
schools as well as curriculum development for undergraduate and graduate
students.

Recently, ckit+ cardiac progenitor cells (CPCs) have been singled out as one of
the most promising sources of cells for cardiac repair because of their relative
abundance, ease of isolation and their ability to differentiate into the three
major cells types in the heart: smooth muscle cells endothelial cells and
cardiomyocytes (CMs). The efficiency of differentiation of CPCs to functional
CMs with standard soluble factor-based protocols has been low, but co-culture
with native CMs or implantation in vivo have demonstrated an enhanced effect,
indicating that other factors in the tissue microenvironment may be important
for promoting cardiac differentiation of CPCs. The overall hypothesis of this
proposal is that integrating substrate properties and bioelectric signaling will
lead to enhancements in functional differentiation of pediatric patient derived
CPCs. This hypothesis will be tested by: 1) establishing a baseline of cardiac
differentiation of clonal populations of ckit+ CPCs derived from pediatric
patients using growth factor or small molecule based differentiation protocols;
2) assessing the individual effects of substrate stiffness, substrate
composition and resting membrane potential on cardiac differentiation of CPC
clones and elucidate the specific mechanotransductive and differentiation
pathways involved; and 3) determining the interactive effects of biophysical and
bioelectric signaling in promoting the development of functional CMs from ckit+
CPCs. To carry out these aims, techniques previously developed in the PI's lab
will be used to isolate/ characterize cardiac extracellular matrix, create
substrates with different mechanical properties, and control resting membrane
potential of cells. Functional differentiation of cells will be assessed via
gene and protein expression, as well as calcium transient imaging and
contraction force measurements via dynamic traction force microscopy.