* 1351334
* CAREER: All-Dielectric Optical Metasurfaces For Controlling Wave Fronts
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/15/2014,12/31/2019
* Jason Valentine, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 12/31/2019
* USD 400,000.00

The objective of this research is to develop metasurfaces for manipulating the
phase and wavefront of light with near-unity efficiency for realizing ultra-
compact optical elements such as lenses, waveplates, and beam formers. The
approach is to use arrays of nanoscale dielectric resonators to form
metasurfaces with low absorption loss. High efficiency will be achieved by
overlapping electric and magnetic resonances, allowing full control over the
amplitude and phase of the transmitted light. This freedom will be employed to
realize optical elements as well as metasurfaces for controlling the
polarization of light.&lt;br/&gt;This research will result in a better
fundamental understanding of how electric and magnetic resonances can be
independently manipulated in single high index resonators, yielding new insights
into metasurface and low-loss optical antenna design. The role of coupling
between resonators will also be determined, allowing a more accurate
representation of the desired phase profile and better device performance.
Lastly, this research will result in a better understanding of how to manipulate
and harness anisotropy in dielectric antennae. &lt;br/&gt;This research will
lead to a new class of ultra-compact optical elements which can improve the
performance and integration of a wide range of devices such as visible and
infrared cameras, polarimetric imagers, and spatial light modulators as well as
be an enabling technology for applications such as free-space telecommunications
and optical manipulation. The research will have a strong educational and
outreach component focused on providing awareness, exposure, and excitement of
science to students from all backgrounds and educational levels.