* 1351895
* CAREER: Interplay of topology and geometry in materials with strong spin-orbit coupling
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2021
* Taylor Hughes, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 05/31/2021
* USD 450,000.00

Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER grant, supported by the Division of
Materials Research, aims to transform our understanding of the relationship
between spin-orbit coupling and visco-elastic transport in electron systems. The
sensitivity of materials with strong spin-orbit coupling to local orbital
orientation requires a reformation of the conventional visco-elastic response
theories, and leaves open the possibility for undiscovered topological transport
phenomena that are universal and quantized. The proposed theory draws on ideas
from high-energy physics and gravitation that are adapted to condensed matter
and then used to predict phenomena in real materials, and to resolve a
controversy in the high-energy community on the role of torsion in the chiral
anomaly that will only be solved with condensed matter
insight.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The set of materials to which these developments
apply is broad, experimentally accessible, and at the forefront of modern
research activity. The set includes: topological insulators, topological Weyl
semi-metals, and spin-orbit coupled semiconductor heterostructures/quantum
wires. Using quantum and semi-classical techniques, the visco-elastic transport
in these materials will be analyzed to identify new phenomena and to predict the
values of the transport coefficients. The landmark phenomenon that will be
studied first is the dissipationless topological viscosity found in 2d time-
reversal breaking topological insulators. Along with the study of realistic
materials, there are deep conceptual issues that will be resolved regarding the
relationship between topological transport, the geometry of elastic
deformations, and quantum field theory. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;One of the key goals of condensed matter physics is to find
properties of complex systems that are universal, i.e., properties that are
independent of the complicated details inherent in real materials. Remarkably,
the so-called topological electronic properties of a material are so insensitive
to details that they can be quantitatively predicted to exquisite precision even
when crude models are employed. In fact, topological properties are so
remarkable that the first discovery of one in the early 1980s, the quantized
Hall conductivity, led to two Nobel prizes and measurements that were so
accurate that they now serve as the SI standard for units of resistance. In the
past 10 years many new families of phases of matter which each exhibit special
types of topological properties have been theoretically predicted and
experimentally discovered. While most of the focus has been on how these
materials respond to purely electromagnetic probes, this CAREER proposal seeks
to understand how these systems respond to essentially changes of shape. Unlike
the field of topology, geometry is interested in precise definitions of lengths
and shapes, and thus is an extra level of detail on top of the broad topological
features. However, in these materials there is an important interplay between
the topological electronic properties and the geometry of the material. The
exciting thing is that even when we consider detail-dependent geometrical
probes, the outcome can end up being a robust topological property. Thus, when
geometry and topology compete, sometimes topology can still win.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The set of materials to which these developments apply is
broad, experimentally accessible, and at the forefront of modern research
activity. The topological quantities studied here are an untapped resource that
is sure to lead to quantum phenomena that can be incorporated into unique
devices. This technological impact, coupled with the valuable interchange of
ideas, developed during this line of research, between the fields of high-energy
physics, gravitation, and condensed matter indicate the broadness of this grant.
In addition, this CAREER is dedicated to the integration of undergraduates into
cutting-edge research, and the training of undergraduates, graduate students,
and postdoctoral researchers in communication and research skills that will
benefit their future careers.