* 1351609
* CAREER: Toward unprecedented selectivities in C-O bond cleavage reactions using Fe-based bimetallic catalysts
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2020
* Jason Hicks, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 06/30/2020
* USD 400,000.00

Abstract Title: Selective, bimetallic non-noble metal phosphide catalysts for
C-O bond cleavage reactions necessary for lignocellulosic biomass conversion.

Abstract Content:

Utilization of biomass for fuels and chemicals is an important component of a
sustainable and secure national energy plan, but the design and development of
new catalysts is needed to enable this aim. Specifically, catalysts that
selectively cleave C-O bonds, which are ubiquitous in biomass, are needed to
efficiently and effectively convert biomass to value-added liquid products and
fuels. The novel, iron-based bimetallic catalysts developed by PI Jason Hicks at
the University of Notre Dame address this need using earth abundant transition
metals which are not only highly selective for these reactions but also offer
environmental benefits over existing catalysts and technologies. Using this NSF
CAREER award, Prof. Hicks will seek the optimum catalysts for the bond breakage
reactions, and will seek some fundamental factors that will point directions for
improvements in these catalysts. In addition to the specific research aims, this
CAREER project also benefits student education by planning for research in the
laboratory by undergraduate and high school students, and development of a new
Heterogeneous Catalyst Design course and Graduate Research Symposium at the
University of Notre Dame. These activities integrate research with education of
future scientists to address the challenge of sustainable energy.

The primary goals of this project are to thoroughly investigate the stability,
reactivity, and selectivity of bimetallic Fe and Mo based phosphide catalysts
for C-O bond cleavage reactions of biomass model compounds, targeting those
bonds most relevant to bio-based feedstocks. Bimetallic catalysts often exhibit
enhanced catalytic activity and/or selectivity compared to monometallic
catalysts for many reactions, including the production of biofuels and bio-
derived chemicals. The ability to tune the performance of a catalyst by
incorporating another metal or additive can, therefore, have profound effects on
the reaction pathway and provide more control over the catalytic selectivity.
The CAREER proposal is focused primarily on transition metal phosphide catalysts
for these important reactions. Metallic phosphides are a class of materials that
have tunable structural and chemical characteristics based on the metals used,
ratio of metals to phosphorus, and synthesis parameters. Phosphides can be
synthesized as well-defined crystalline powders, nanoparticles, or supported
catalysts, depending on the desired application. Experimental studies by the
Hicks group on these catalytic materials indicate possible selectivities for C-O
bond cleavage of phenolic model compounds greater than 90%. Based on these
initial results, the proposed Project involves the synthesis of unique
bimetallic phosphide catalysts with various metal compositions to ultimately
control the catalyst performance. Additionally, reaction mechanisms for the
hydrodeoxygenation of phenolic compounds using these catalysts, as well as other
oxygenated compounds found in bio-oils, will be studied. Together with bulk and
surface characterization techniques, catalyst structure/performance
relationships will be determined to elucidate the properties of these catalytic
materials. Ultimately, the PI aims to develop sustainable energy processes and
pathways to cleaner fuels production by leveraging rational catalyst design to
enhance the conversion of lignin and lignocellulosic materials to liquid
transportation fuels and chemicals.