* 1351466
* CAREER: Transport properties and morphology associated with bursting-bubble induced jetting phenomena
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2014,08/31/2019
* James Bird, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2019
* USD 463,147.00

PI: Bird, James Proposal Number: 1351466

The proposed CAREER project is focused on understanding the physic al mechanism
of the generation of aerosol droplets as bubbles burst. Understanding the
physics behind submicron aerosol formation is important in a host of engineering
applications ranging from turbine corrosion to the dispersion of respiratory
deceases, since their residence time in the atmosphere can be on the order of
weeks. Intellectual Merit: When a bubble bursts, a set of droplets is formed and
these droplets break into other smaller droplets, the larger of which break up
further creating a hierarchy of droplet sizes. Ultimately, submicron aerosol
droplets are formed that are not predicted with current fluid dynamic models,
since the primary physical mechanism responsible for their formation is unknown.
The goal of this proposal is to explore three concepts on how jet drops from
small bursting bubbles may account for observed submicron aerosols. One concept
is that the empirical formulas that relate the size of millimeter bubbles to the
size of jet drops that they produce may not be valid for micron-scale bubbles.
Another concept is that satellite and sub-satellite droplets may develop when
larger droplets are produced, and that these smaller droplets may account for
the unexplained submicron aerosols. The final concept is that larger bubble-
induced jets may couple with smaller jet drops or satellite drops and propel the
smaller drops beyond the viscous sublayer. The PI will explore and evaluate
these ideas using direct highspeed observations, numerical simulations, and
appropriately dimensionalized experimental models. Broader Impacts:

Results from the proposed work can find important applications with significant
economic and societal impact, for example avoiding corrosion due to salt
aerosols in sensors and engines operating in marine environments. Other
applications on a local scale include modeling the airborne flux of aerosolized
pathogens, such as bevotoxins from red tides to make better public policy
decisions, such as which beaches to close. On a global scale, a better
understanding of aerosol production is necessary to reduce uncertainty in global
climate models, and will allow policy makers to better assess the risks and
rewards of geoengineering mitigation strategies, such as deliberately injecting
large amounts of sulfur particulates in to the atmosphere in hopes to counter
the warming effects of greenhouse gases. The proposal also includes outreach and
education activities that are complementary to the research project. It is
proposed to develop workshops for pre-service Early Childhood Education teachers
and intensive laboratory immersion experiences for seasoned in-service
elementary and preschool teachers. Finally, the proposal includes a partnership
with the Boston Museum of Science to develop new science modules that aim to
increase scientific engagement between children and their parents.