* 1351933
* CAREER: Expanding the Toolbox of Encodable Fluorescent Probes to Image Macrophage Redox Dynamics
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2014,09/30/2017
* Huiwang Ai, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 09/30/2017
* USD 612,000.00

With this award from the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division, Dr. Huiwang Ai and his research team at the University of California,
Riverside are developing new methods for the detection of hydrogen sulfide and
other redox-active molecules in living cells. Fluorescent proteins in nonnative
topologies with nonnatural chromophore structures will be exploited as novel
redox probes. These selective fluorescent probes will be utilized to uncover the
mechanisms of redox response and regulation in macrophage immune cells. The
project will result in a general strategy for probing redox-active small
signaling molecules in subcellular locations and in space close to proteins of
interest. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is widely accepted by the scientific
community that cells use redox-active molecules to generate and relay signals.
The misregulation of these processes is linked to a large number of diseases.
Dr. Ai and his coworkers have discovered the means to selectively observe redox-
active molecules in live cells. This project will be a necessary step toward a
more comprehensive understanding of redox signaling and regulation. The project
will also train graduate and undergraduate students for specialized expertise at
the chemistry-biology interface. Middle and high school students from the local
STEM school will be supported for research experiences. Curriculum enhancements
and outreach activities will be carried out to further broaden the impacts of
this project.