* 1351371
* CAREER: Engineering colloidal assembly of nanoemulsions for material design
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2014,01/31/2020
* Matthew Helgeson, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 01/31/2020
* USD 400,045.00

This CAREER award supports experiments, modeling, and educational activities to
explore new ways of synthesizing materials based on templating. The goal is to
control interactions among droplets in a nanoemulsion so that the droplets
assemble into arrangements that can be used as a template to form new materials.
The forces between droplets will be modulated by adding polymers to the
nanoemulsion, which will provide control over the phase behavior of the
nanoemulsion and the resulting structures formed by the nanodroplets. As a first
step, a model system will be examined consisting of oil-in-water nanoemulsions
containing end-adsorbing polymers that bridge droplets in ways that can be
controlled by temperature. A variety of experimental techniques, including
microrheology, isothermal titration calorimetry, and neutron scattering methods,
will be used to characterize nanoemulsion structures and transitions induced by
the temperature-sensitive polymers. Modeling studies will be carried out to
estimate how interactions between droplets are modified by the presence of the
polymers. In addition, new microscopy techniques will be applied to probe
structural dynamics of the nanoemulsion aggregates.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientists and engineers continually seek new ways to form
materials with highly controlled physical and chemical properties. The
development of nanoemulsion-based templates for materials synthesis will extend
the range of materials that can be formed by templating. For example, the
results of this project will provide researchers a new method to develop porous
materials with highly controlled internal structures. Various synthetic
chemistries will be incorporated into the nanoemulsion formation process,
resulting in materials that could be useful in catalysis, pharmaceuticals,
foods, and other consumer products. The award will also support the development
of a new course and textbook on formulation science and engineering, which will
broaden the curriculum for undergraduate and graduate students. In addition, a
workshop will demonstrate to middle-school students how colloidal science is
used in the development of familiar consumer products. Students from under-
represented groups will be recruited to the project through established programs
on the UCSB campus.