* 1351161
* CAREER:The Electrochemical Flow Capacitor: Capacitive Energy Storage in Flowable Media
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2014,09/30/2020
* Emin Caglan Kumbur, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 09/30/2020
* USD 400,000.00

1351161 - Kumbur&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER proposal aims to explore a
fundamentally new energy storage concept called the electrochemical flow
capacitor. It exploits the characteristics behind the operation of
supercapacitors and flow batteries, combining (i) the scalable energy capacity
of flow batteries with (ii) high power ratings, rapid charging and long cycle-
life characteristics of supercapacitors.&amp;#8232;The main idea is capacitive
energy storage in a flowable media. As such, the unique aspect is the
utilization of flowable capacitive slurry electrodes&amp;#8232;that contain
porous activated carbon particles suspended in an electrolyte. Although
much&amp;#8232;is known about suspension flow and capacitive charge storage in
thin film electrodes, currently&amp;#8232;there is no theoretical framework
describing the coupling between these two processes. As&amp;#8232;a result,
there are a number of fundamental questions that need to be addressed in order
to&amp;#8232;develop this concept into a practical technology. Motivated by
this, the research objective&amp;#8232;here is to establish the enabling science
necessary to address the critical scientific gaps related to the capacitive
charge storage in flowable media. In line with this&amp;#8232;goal, the PI will
conduct studies to (i) explore the nature of charge percolation
between&amp;#8232;the carbon particles in the slurry; and (ii) assess the
interplay between slurry composition, performance, system architecture and
operational losses. To amplify the impact of this research, an integrated
educational plan is planned that targets&amp;#8232;a large body of students
ranging from K-12 to graduate level. The educational objectives are&amp;#8232;a)
to inspire young people, especially females and minorities, to explore careers
in STEM,&amp;#8232;and b) to enhance energy education at Drexel University.
These activities include development of a new course on energy storage and
research experience for undergraduates, K-12 students&amp;#8232;and teachers by
leveraging international and domestic programs at Drexel. In addition,
the&amp;#8232;PI will develop a parental engagement program that targets the
parents of minority students&amp;#8232;in Philadelphia to better utilize them as
partners in STEM education. The goal will be to increase parental awareness of
opportunities in STEM and help them motivate&amp;#8232;their children to pursue
careers in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;This project will
constitute a major step toward establishing the enabling science of flowable
capacitive slurry electrodes for use in electrical energy storage. Specifically,
it will provide an in-depth understanding of the nature of charge percolation
between the capacitive carbon particles in a flowable slurry and help establish
a framework for describing the coupling between suspension flow and capacitive
charge storage. Moreover, this work will expand the knowledge in colloidal
science by investigating a unique class of capacitive suspensions that can be
used for energy storage. Besides contributing&amp;#8232;to this concept, the
resulting knowledge will help better understand the particle interactions and
double layer formation in conventional supercapacitors, and will provide useful
insights into other slurry electrode systems (e.g. capacitive water deionization
and semi-solid batteries).&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;The project will
facilitate the implementation of a new energy storage concept, which can
potentially approach ~10x higher power density and ~100x faster charging rates
with longer lifetime (~100k cycles) than batteries. Development of such systems
will overcome challenges associated with grid-scale energy storage and enable
better utilization of renewable resources. This project also offers significant
opportunities to extend the impact of the research to a larger audience. A large
number of students will be affected by this work. Two Ph.D. students, several
undergraduates, K-12 students and high school teachers will be directly involved
in energy research through international and domestic programs at Drexel.
Additionally, more than thirty students per year are expected to enroll in a
newly developed energy storage course. Connections between research and service
to society will be fostered through the parental engagement workshops that will
focus on the role of engineers in society. Special emphasis in these workshops
will be given to the parents of students from traditionally underrepresented
groups to help increase their enrollment in STEM.