* 1351956
* CAREER: Asynchronous Analog-to-Digital Converters with Non-Uniform Discrete-Time Signal Processing
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/15/2014,01/31/2020
* Mike Shuo-Wei Chen, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 01/31/2020
* USD 400,000.00

Objective: &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to enable a
new way of performing analog-to-digital conversion and anti-aliasing filtering
in a completely asynchronous fashion, which leads to substantially improved
dynamic range, power efficiency and relaxed analog filter requirement. The
proposed approach should benefit from the faster device speed and digital
computation due to technology scaling but avoid the emerging challenges of
analog circuit design in general.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit:
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit is a new class of asynchronous
analog-to-digital converter topologies that asynchronously sample the analog
signal with the proposed non-uniform digital signal processing algorithms to
reconstruct and filter the resultant irregular samples. The proposed
architectures lead to a new design paradigm shift by performing both voltage and
time quantization, and create a new path towards the analog-equivalent digital
computation that is significantly more flexible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts: &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this research is that it
will transform any electronic system involving analog-to-digital conversion from
performance demanding to power constrained applications, such as communications
and biomedical devices. The multidisciplinary nature of the project provides an
excellent platform to cultivate the involved graduate and undergraduate students
towards the next generation leaders in science and engineering field. The
planned K-12 outreach activities and cross-disciplinary courses will further
enhance the broader impacts.