* 1351403
* CAREER: Promoting a Fundamental Understanding of Post-Liquefaction Response and Deformations: A Next-Generation Analytical and Experimental Methodology
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/01/2013,11/30/2019
* Adda Athanasopoulos-Zekkos, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 11/30/2019
* USD 400,000.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project
is to develop a unified, scalable approach for soil liquefaction deformation
analysis from micro to macro-scale. Earthquakes are among the most deadly and
expensive natural disasters affecting our society. One of the leading causes of
loss during earthquakes is seismically-induced displacements due to seismic
compression (i.e. accrual of contractive volumetric strains in unsaturated soils
during earthquake shaking), ground softening or soil liquefaction. The majority
of research in soil liquefaction engineering has focused on the assessment of
the likelihood of "triggering" of liquefaction, however much remains to be done
with regards to the assessment of liquefaction-induced deformations. Yet, to
engineer effective and efficient liquefaction hazard mitigation techniques, a
thorough understanding of the development of liquefaction and its consequences
is needed. This CAREER award presents a next-generation integration of 3D
Discrete Element Modeling (DEM) and unique large-scale experiments for
understanding post-liquefaction stability and ground deformation. The
overarching research goal is to identify and quantify the physical and
environmental parameters that affect the cyclic response of granular soils at
the micro- and meso-scale particularly and relate them to the macro-scale (i.e.
field) response and deformations. Soil exhibits a highly complex response to
applied loads and deformations due to its particulate nature. It is widely
recognized that especially during cyclic loading, it is this particulate nature
of the soil and the particle morphology (i.e. particle aspect ratio and
angularity) that mostly affects its response and its associated deformations.
This research will (a) characterize particle morphology of granular assemblies
and investigate the cyclic response of dry and saturated granular soils at the
micro- and meso-scale by combining CSS laboratory tests and 3D DEM analyses, (b)
study the micromechanical aspects of soil fabric changes and void ratio
redistribution during cyclic loading using 3D DEM analysis and (c) develop a
framework for scaling the micro (i.e. particle-to-particle contact) and meso-
scale (i.e. particle assembly) behavior of granular soils to the macro-scale
(i.e. field) response by simulating select centrifuge experiments reported in
the literature and one proof-of-concept case-history, and investigating the
input model parameters that control the transition to the macro-scale response.
Recent advances in parallel computing will be employed to reduce computational
effort of the 3D DEM. A custom-made TST (Translucent Segregation Table) and 12"
CSS (Cyclic Simple Shear) laboratory device will be employed to characterize for
the first time the particle morphology of thousands of particles that will then
be cyclically sheared. The large-scale CSS apparatus can accommodate gravel-size
particle specimens of known total number of particles and particle morphology
allowing for a particle-to-particle simulation using the 3D DEM. Such a 1:1
approach of experimentation and DEM simulations is attempted for the first time
using real soils.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project's approach has the potential
to transform the field of soil liquefaction engineering by providing more
reliable estimates of liquefaction-induced deformations. A better understanding
of the micro-scale response of granular soils under cyclic loading with respect
to displacement can lead to a better evaluation of the performance of earthen
structures during earthquake loads and also of the assessment of the
effectiveness of mitigation measures for critical engineered structures such as
earth or rockfill dams, levees, harbor frontages, bridge abutments, and pile and
pier foundations. The educational plan of this study focuses on testing the
hypothesis that providing an academic and research environment rich in real-life
applications and socially relevant examples, will improve female undergraduate
student retention in geotechnical engineering. To this effect, the PI intends to
(a) introduce undergraduate female students to research projects by capitalizing
on programs within UMich, (b) develop a series of in-class presentations,
handout materials and questionnaires for the undergraduate course on
geotechnical engineering to introduce real-world applications and positive
social outcomes from civil engineering projects and (c) develop a new course on
Computational Geomechanics.