* 1351881
* CAREER: Ultrafast Phonon Dynamics in Complex Nanostructures: Systematic Investigation with Ultrafast Phonon Spectroscopy and Femtosecond Thermal Reflectance Technique
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2014,12/31/2020
* Yaguo Wang, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Ying Sun
* 12/31/2020
* USD 402,400.00

CBET-1351881&lt;br/&gt;PI: Yaguo Wang, University of Texas at
Austin&lt;br/&gt;CAREER: Ultrafast Phonon Dynamics in Complex Nanostructures:
Systematic Investigation with Ultrafast Phonon Spectroscopy and Femtosecond
Thermal Reflectance Technique&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Phonons are quantized lattice
vibrations and the major heat carriers in many crystalline materials. Our
scientific understanding of phonons lags behind that of electrons and photons,
mainly because of the difficulties in measuring and manipulating individual
phonon. In bulk materials, the phonon transport is purely diffusive and governed
by Fourier's Law. In nanostructures, phonons can travel ballistically, scatter
at boundaries, interfaces and nanoparticles, and can be localized by quantum
confinement effects. When different nanostructures are integrated together,
phonon dynamics becomes exceptionally complicated. This research will
investigate individual phonon behavior in complex nanostructures with ultrafast
phonon spectroscopy and femtosecond time domain thermal reflectance technique.
The effect of different nanostructures on specific phonon modes will be examined
in detail through a systematic introduction of boundaries, interfaces,
nanoparticles, and quantum wells into the material. Phonon lifetime and group
velocity will be characterized for specific phonon modes with the ultrafast
phonon spectroscopy, and the effect on macroscopic thermal conductivity will be
measured by time domain thermal reflectance technique. Quantitative information
will be provided about the effects resulting from the degree of lattice-
mismatch, superlattice period, nanoparticle size, type and concentration, and
the interplay of these mechanisms. The results will be used to validate the
predictions from numerical and theoretical studies and bridge the gap between
macroscopic thermal property measurements and microscopic phonon
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will address the fundamental heat
transport problems encountered by researchers in a wide variety of disciplines:
thermoelectrics, quantum cascade lasers, infrared detectors, and
nanoelectronics. The new discoveries obtained from this study will be integrated
into both graduate and undergraduate courses. This project will prepare next-
generation leaders in thermal sciences, ultrafast optics, material science and
physics. Outreach activities will include demonstrating research findings in
pre-college programs focused on K-12 students, and providing research
opportunities to undergraduate women mentored by graduate women. This project
will also enhance diversity at University of Texas at Austin by actively
recruiting graduate students from under-represented populations, such as women
and minorities.