* 1351370
* CAREER: Microassembly Using Transfer Printing for MEMS Fabrication
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2014,01/31/2019
* Seok Kim, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Steve Schmid
* 01/31/2019
* USD 400,000.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program
award is to understand the fundamental limits of transfer printing regarding dry
adhesion control and extend it to 3D additive micromanufacturing for the
flexible production of microsystems. Transfer printing is a method to transfer
solid materials from a substrate where they are generated to a different
substrate by using controlled dry adhesion of elastomeric stamps. This approach
in conjunction with material bonding techniques will enable the assembly of 3D
microsystems with heterogeneous materials that cannot be realized by
conventional monolithic microfabrication. As a step toward the research
objective, shape memory polymer will be studied in terms of controllable dry
adhesion to overcome the limit of elastomeric stamp-based transfer printing.
Furthermore, the fundamental physical properties of interfaces formed by
transfer printing will be characterized and laser assisted localized bonding
will be exploited to establish transfer printing-based 3D additive
micromanufacturing. The educational objective of this project is to transfer the
experience and excitement of adhesion science and microscale engineering to
students with diverse backgrounds. This will be accomplished by building
teaching modules in adhesion science for K-12 outreach, developing course and
curriculum in advanced micromanufacturing for undergraduate/graduate programs,
and participating in existing outreach activities for underrepresented students
at the University of Illinois.

Knowledge obtained from this research will complement and transform the
manufacture of microsystems towards flexible, rapid, and cost-effective
production. Microsystems, such as the miniaturization of large scale ordinary 3D
machines, are indispensable for advancing modern technologies. Current
hindrances to further innovations in microsystems encompass the difficulty of 3D
manufacturing and the process complexity originated from the nature of layer-by-
layer microfabrication. The outcomes from this award will mitigate these
hindrances, thus greatly benefit microscale scientific research and the
manufacturing sector in the USA by providing a new transformative methodology
for 3D additive micromanufacturing.