* 1351534
* CAREER: Mechanics of Geomaterials Exposed to Multi-Physical Perturbations:  Innovating Science, Training and Education through Fundamental Principles
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/01/2013,11/30/2019
* Giuseppe Buscarnera, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 11/30/2019
* USD 451,690.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project
is to gain a fundamental understanding of the mechanisms that deteriorate the
mechanical properties of geomaterials subjected to environmental forcing, as
well as of the deformation/failure events potentially triggered by such
alterations. In particular, the project aims to formulate novel theoretical
approaches to quantify the risk of failure induced by multi-physical agents,
link theories with predictive models and use these tools for interpretation and
design purposes. To achieve these goals, the project will combine a range of
methods to enhance the physical foundations of geomechanical modeling
frameworks, thus improving their ability to predict homogeneous and localized
deformations initiated by multi-physical processes. More specifically, the
project will involve energy methods for detecting the onset of instabilities
during non-mechanical forcing, innovative bifurcation analyses for assessing the
performance of constitutive formulations, computational analyses to identify
possible sources of heterogeneity induced by transient phenomena and a novel
strategy to couple the evolution of the mechanical properties with the
hydrologic, thermal and chemical processes modifying the microstructural
characteristics of a geological solid. The research activities will be
integrated with a dedicated educational plan, with the purpose to coordinate
education, training and outreach efforts. The planned initiatives will involve a
wide range of users, ranging from graduate and undergraduate students to
practitioners, local high schools and the general public. Such a wide audience
will be engaged through a number of activities, including the development of
e-learning tools, the involvement of undergraduate students in research and
internationalization activities, the organization of workshops for local high-
school teachers and the global dissemination of the research findings.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given the pervasive distribution of multi-physical
processes in the natural environment, the research findings resulting from this
project can benefit the society by supporting the quantitative assessment of
environmental risks, as well as the safe and sustainable implementation of
numerous technological activities. In particular, the tools and methods
formulated by this project will assist engineers and geoscientists in the
interpretation, monitoring and prediction of critical events in geotechnical and
geophysical contexts. Prominent examples are the forecasting of natural hazards,
the management of aging infrastructures, the optimization of energy technologies
and the underground storage of hazardous substances (e.g., nuclear waste or
carbon dioxide). As a result, the findings of the project can have an impact on
a number of neighboring disciplines, such as reservoir engineering,
environmental engineering, geophysics, engineering geology and geomorphology. In
addition, the future incorporation of the above mentioned advances in the
technological practice can yield long-term benefits for a number of challenging
societal problems, such as the pressing need for durable infrastructures, the
reduction of casualties and property loss in urbanized areas, the safe supply of
natural resources and the safeguard of public investments in the area of
environmental sustainability.