* 1351362
* CAREER: Geometric approaches to hierarchical and nonparametric model-based inference
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2020
* Xuanlong Nguyen, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2020
* USD 400,000.00

Hierarchical and nonparametric models present some of the most fundamental and
powerful tools in modern statistics. Despite valuable advances made in the past
decades, there are several widely recognized and emerging problems. First, even
as these models are increasingly applied to large data sets and complex domains,
a statistical theory for inferential behaviors of the hierarchy of latent
variables present in the models is not yet available. Second, local inference
methods based on sampling, although simple to derive, tend to converge too
slowly, thereby losing their effectiveness. Third, most existing methods are
incapable of handling highly distributed data sources, which are increasingly
responsible for the influx of big data. Addressing these challenges requires
fundamentally new ideas in theory, modeling and algorithms that must account for
the contrast and interplay between the global geometry of an inference problem
and the need for decentralization of inference and algorithmic implementation.
This project aims to make fundamental contributions toward advancing
hierarchical model-based inference. They include a statistical theory for the
latent hierarchy of variables and for analyzing the effects of transfer
learning. They also include variational inference algorithms based on the global
geometry of latent structures and geometric analyses of the tradeoffs between
statistical and computational efficiencies. Both the algorithms and theory are
unified by the use of Wasserstein geometry, which arises from the mathematical
theory of optimal transportation. Moreover, scalable hierarchical models will be
developed that can exploit highly distributed data sources and decentralized
inference architectures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will improve our
ability to manage, analyze and make decisions with large-scale, high dimensional
and complex data, especially in the research and applications of networks and
the environment. The decentralized detection algorithms for highly distributed
data sources have the potential of advancing the state of the art technologies
that support data-driven and high-performance distributed computing
architectures. As such, this research has the potential of extending the
capabilities of the real-time detection and tracking devices currently deployed
in the health-care and security domains. The optimal transport based theory will
deepen our understanding of hierarchical Bayesian inference, a fundamental
concept of modern statistics. The algorithms and geometric analyses will provide
useful tradeoffs between statistical and computational complexity, an important
issue lying in the interface of Statistics and Computer Science. This research
will also provide support for broadening the current statistics curriculum at
the University of Michigan. The PI will integrate the teaching of statistical
and computational tools with modern applications, by developing synthesis
courses which interact closely with research topics of the project. This
provides an excellent opportunity to train students with a broad base of
knowledge and cross-disciplinary skills in the fields of statistics,
probability, machine learning, distributed computation and networked systems.