* 1351281
* CAREER: Using "hot" carriers for photovoltaics and photocatalysis
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2020
* Prashant Nagpal, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 05/31/2020
* USD 499,077.00

PI: Nagpal, Prashant Proposal Number: 1351281 Institution: University of
Colorado at Boulder Title: CAREER: Using "hot" carriers for photovoltaics and
photocatalysis

This project focuses on development of nanostructured colloidal semiconductors
for utilizing high energy quantum-confined states, or "hot-carriers", for
improved photovoltaics and photodetection. The project will develop single and
composite photocatalysts, with tuned energy levels, to generate wavelength-
selective catalytic products for use as solar-fuels. While the cost of
photovoltaic modules has reduced due to advances in thin-film semiconductor
fabrication techniques, the energy mismatch of incident solar-radiation and
finite-bandgap semiconductor leads to waste energy (>30% of incident radiation).
This project will utilize this "excess energy" by using "hot-carriers" in
quantum-confined nanostructured semiconductors, and by generating "wavelength-
matched" selective solar fuels, without the need of expensive separations of
high-value products. This can lead to development of so called "generation-III"
photovoltaic and photocatalytic processes.

This project will investigate charge and energy transport of "hot-carriers", in
molecule-like quantum-confined energy levels of semiconductor nanocrystal
colloids. Nominally, these hot-carriers cool down to bandedge, within a few
picoseconds, making it difficult to develop charge transport devices, or hot-
carrier devices. The PI will investigate a new class of molecular wires which
can simultaneously transport hot-carriers and bandedge carriers, for efficient
charge and energy transport, for applications in generation-III photovoltaics
and photodetection devices. Besides these exciton-shelves, we will also explore
nanocrystal superlattices for band-like transport of charges, and energy
transfer complexes of donor-acceptor quantum dots, for development of novel
devices and architectures. Towards generation of solar fuels, we will
investigate applications of hot-carriers in quantum-confined semiconductor
photocatalysts, for wavelength-selective generation of specific fuels. We will
use CO2-H2O reduction and H2O-splitting as model systems, to demonstrate
specific photocatalytic generation of high-value products, where the photon
energy matches the reduction potential of the solar fuel produced. These
generation-III photovoltaic and artificial photosynthetic processes will expand
our knowledge of fundamental electronic phenomena following photogeneration of
charge carriers, coupling between quantum states of semiconductor nanostructures
and HOMO-LUMO level of molecular wires, and fundamental physics governing charge
and energy transport in these semiconductor thin films. The study will also
expand applications of these novel physical phenomena for renewable energy
generation and development of next-generation devices and nanocatalysts. Besides
development of novel devices for efficient photovoltaics and photocatalysis, the
PI will promote awareness about research in renewable energy, and generate
interest in K-12 students, particularly URM and women, to adopt careers in
science and engineering education. The PI aims to develop a diverse team of
trained engineers and scientists, and hence proposes new initiatives to reach
these objectives.