* 1351274
* CAREER:Multi-Scale Meniscus Thin-Film Evaporation Enhancement using Hierarchical Tri-Porous Media
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2014,11/30/2014
* Chanwoo Park, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Ruey-Hung Chen
* 11/30/2014
* USD 400,000.00

CBET-1351274 Title: Multi-Scale Meniscus Thin-Film Evaporation Enhancement using
Hierarchical Tri-Porous Media PI: Chanwoo Park Institution: University of
Nevada, Reno

Advances in electronic, and energy systems require more efficient cooling to
effectively manage high heat fluxes and large heat dissipation. Because of its
superior cooling capabilities with low thermal resistances, phase change heat
transfer is the preferred method to remove such demanding heat loads at
isothermal conditions to avoid thermally induced damage. Meniscus thin-film
evaporation is a fundamental phenomenon commonly found in phase change processes
such as bubble growth and departure in pool boiling, slug and annular flows in
flow boiling, wick boiling in capillary porous structures, and falling-film
evaporation. The extended meniscus (Greek for crescent) is a curved liquid
region near a three-phase (gas-liquid-solid) contact line which undergoes a
drastic change in its liquid film thickness?from nano to micro to macro-scales.
The extended meniscus is divided into three distinctive regions: (i) the
adsorbed layer [region of intermolecular-bonding forces between liquid and solid
molecules of a thickness < O(10 nm)], (ii) the thin-film evaporating region
[disjoining-pressure-dominant region of a thickness > O(100 nm)] where
evaporation predominantly occurs due to the small thermal resistance of the thin
liquid film and (iii) the intrinsic meniscus [capillary-pressure-dominant region
of a thickness > O(100 Âµm)]. For meniscus thin-film evaporation enhancement, a
fundamental understanding of interplaying multi-scale moving meniscus and solid
surface morphology is warranted. This project will study the meniscus thin-film
evaporation enhancement using hierarchical multi-scale tri (nano, micro and
macro) porous media ? (i) macro-scale surface modulation of (ii) micro-scale
porous structures (e.g., interconnected particles or wires) with (iii) nano- and
micro-scale surface morphology (e.g., second-tier surfaces) and specifically
investigate micro-scale meniscus topology and dynamics in micro-scale capillary
gaps, and meso-scale meniscus thin-film evaporation assisted by macro-scale
liquid distribution and transport.

This hierarchical multi-scale approach, common in nature but rare in
engineering, will provide a unique opportunity to delve into three-length-scale
system designs and fabrication, combining nano-, meso- and macro-scale analyses
for complex interfacial and phase-change processes. The insight gained from this
research will advance a variety of emerging applications such as solar-powered
point-of-use portable water desalinators using membrane distillation, bio-heat
transfer from hyperthermia implants for cauterizing tumors, lab-on-a-chip, nano-
fluidics, functional surfaces, miniature cooling systems of microthrust-powered
satellites, and nano thermal?diode which rely on multi-scale and multi-physics
processes of adsorption/desorption/diffusion, spreading, wetting, phase change
and interfacial instability