* 1351961
* SusChEM: CAREER: The development of cobalt(I) catalysts featuring strong-field ligands for C-X bond formation.
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2019
* Alison Fout, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 04/30/2019
* USD 665,997.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Catalysis program of the Chemistry
Division, Prof. Alison Fout of the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign is
developing new earth-abundant cobalt catalysts capable of mediating various
types of bond formation chemistry. This project targets sustainable,
biocompatible earth-abundant catalysts to generate products currently made by
the more expensive and toxic, Noble metals, such as palladium, platinum and
iridium. Simple replacement of the Noble metal catalysts with their earth-
abundant counterparts is not straightforward, so methods are being developed to
change the chemical environment about the metal center in order to promote the
desired catalysis. The broader impacts of the research involve developing
catalysts for important fine chemical synthesis based upon earth-abundant
metals, training research scientists in a technologically important area of
research, and building foundational activities for primary school students to
gain exposure to science experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Due to the difficult
nature of preventing single-electron transfer or radical chemistry on first-row
transition metals, an oxidatively-robust ligand system is being developed to
stabilize low-valent late first-row transition metal complexes. This study
features a fundamentally important group of transition metal complexes to
mediate organic catalysis involving activities ranging from chemical synthesis,
spectroscopic analysis to catalysis, providing an excellent vehicle to train
future scientists from various educational backgrounds. An outreach program
developed by Professor Fout is building the foundation for economically
disadvantaged elementary and junior high students to gain exposure to science
experiments and to assess how the interest in science changes as a function of
age. The broader impacts of this work include the benefits of using sustainable,
earth-abundant catalysts for the synthesis of important organic complexes.