* 1351188
* CAREER: Wastewater Treatment as a Conduit and Control of Emerging Respiratory Viruses in the Environment
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2019
* Krista Wigginton, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 04/30/2019
* USD 400,000.00

1351188&lt;br/&gt;Wigginton&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Respiratory tract infections in
humans, caused by viruses, are a major cause of deaths worldwide and they are
becoming more prevalent at an increasing rate. Two recent examples of this are
the severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) and the Middle Eastern respiratory
syndrome (MERS). Recently, it has been shown that these can be transmitted
through fecal matter and hence they may be present in wastewater. Before
recommendations can be provided to deal with the release of respiratory viruses
to the environment, the actual infective virus loads must be assessed. This
proposed study will determine what typical concentration of respiratory tract
viruses are in wastewater. These data will allow the those in the area of
wastewater treatment to formulet plans on how to control these
threats.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To seek answers to this problem, during this study
the following three research tasks are included:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) Develop
an integrated cell culture/mass spectrometry (ICC-MS) method that simultaneously
identifies enveloped respiratory virus strains and confirms their infective
state;&lt;br/&gt;2) Assess levels of infective enveloped respiratory viruses in
raw wastewater and through a standard wastewater treatment plant over a period
of two years, and, &lt;br/&gt;3) Conduct bench-scale experiments to optimize
selected wastewater treatment steps for respiratory virus removal under
background and heightened viral load conditions that would be possible during an
outbreak or seasonal peaks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research plan will
provide a unique and urgently needed information on the fate of infective
respiratory viruses in wastewater. To date, research on viruses in the aquatic
environment has focused almost entirely on detecting the presence and
infectivity of enteric viruses, despite the fact the respiratory viruses are
likely present. If high levels of infective respiratory viruses are present in
wastewater, then the results may lead to widespread modifications in wastewater
treatment and the adoption of outbreak preparedness plans. Alternatively, if
results suggest minimal infective respiratory viruses in wastewater and
wastewater products, then the information will provide valuable reassurance to
the public, particularly during otherwise stressful outbreak events.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To disseminate the results of this project to both the
public and to wastewater agencies, professional workshops on pathogens in
wastewater treatment will be developed. For the younger students an interactive
exhibit on wastewater treatment processes and research for the Ann Arbor Hands
on Museum will be developed.