* 1351411
* CAREER: Unraveling the Spatial Structure of Turbulence in the Atmospheric Boundary Layer using Unmanned Aerial Vehicles
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2020
* Sean Bailey, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 04/30/2020
* USD 419,734.00

PI: Bailey, Sean Proposal Number: 1351411

The focus of this proposal is to explore and model the structure of the
atmospheric boundary layer (ABL) using instrumentation mounted on Unmanned
Aerial Vehicles. The scientific goals are to directly observe the hierarchy of
length and time scales in flow structures (eddies) within the ABL, develop a
predictive framework for these eddies, and understand how the dynamics of these
structures contribute to transport processes within the ABL.

Intellectual Merit: The intellectual merit of the proposed work rests on
resolving a wide range of spatial scales within one of the most challenging
flows in turbulence research - the ABL. These measurements, using a combination
of experimental tools and analysis techniques, will fill a void in traditional
ABL research capabilities and create new understanding of the ABL organization
and of the effects of the flow structures on transport processes, such as
pollutant dispersion, heat and temperature fluctuations in the atmosphere. The
knowledge generated by these experiments will lead to (a) the development of a
framework of the hierarchy of the flow structures which form in the ABL; (b) the
characterization of the effects of the terrain on the behavior of these
structures; and (c) the understanding of how the dynamics of these structures
contribute to transport processes within the atmospheric boundary layer.

Broader Impacts:

Our climate, agriculture, and commerce are affected by the turbulence within the
atmospheric layer closest to the earth surface, and this proposal's goal to
decipher the chaotic dynamics of this layer has both fundamental and practical
importance. Better understanding in this scientific area can lead to
improvements in modeling weather and climate patterns, energy recovery in wind
farms or tracking pollutants in the atmosphere. Graduate, undergraduate and high
school students will participate in this project. The educational and outreach
plan of this proposal leverages the popular appeal of drones (UAVs) to pursue
recruiting high school students into STEM programs, motivate undergraduate
students to enroll in graduate programs, and retain undergraduate students
within engineering programs. Specifically, the PI is a co-organizer of the
Kentucky Institute for Aerospace Education (KIAE) since 2010, and he will
leverage his CAREER educational activities with KIAE to expand the wing design
competition to include hands-on learning exercises for the KIAE high school
students at the University of Kentucky. For undergraduate students, he is
planning the development of Boundary Layer UAV Experiment for the
Characterization of Atmospheric Turbulence (BLUECAT) team design, in which
undergraduate students will become active with his research..