* 1351469
* CAREER: Pushing the Boundaries: Advancing the Science of Micro-Additive Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2014,12/31/2020
* Kira Barton, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 12/31/2020
* USD 451,427.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program
award is to investigate the next generation micro additive fabrication science
and technology to enable high fidelity, 3D printing at the micro-scale. Barriers
that preclude advancements in this paradigm stem from a lack of standards for
designing, modeling, and controlling new processes. This research addresses
these barriers through the characterization of key design criteria, process
parameters, and environmental conditions. These three areas provide the
foundation for modeling and control laws that will improve the performance of 3D
printing at the micro-scale. The educational goal is to introduce students,
teachers, and parents to the intellectually diverse field of manufacturing with
emphasis on the cross-disciplinary nature of the advanced manufacturing
paradigm. This will be accomplished by developing interactive outreach
activities and workshops tailored for families and K-12 students, integrating
research findings into classroom modules for undergraduate and graduate courses,
and providing research opportunities to underrepresented students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research results will have a direct impact on the way the
U.S. manufactures functional electronics, biosensors, and optics at the micro-
scale. This research aligns with national interests in manufacturing by
improving the fundamental science and providing the enabling tools for advancing
3D printing technology at the micro-scale. 3D printing can be used as a low-
cost, flexible alternative for fabrication without a cleanroom environment.
Educational initiatives and outreach programs will recruit, educate, and retain
the next generation of manufacturing engineers through a unique interactive
program conducted in collaboration with local science and technology museums.
The research results will be disseminated through publications aimed at reaching
local, national, and international audiences.