* 1351807
* CAREER: Using chemistry to probe anthrax toxin protein translocation
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Bradley Pentelute, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Max Funk
* 07/31/2019
* USD 600,000.00

With this award, Bradley L. Pentelute from the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, funded by the Chemistry of Life Processes Program, will investigate
the mechanism of protein translocation across a cell membrane. Nature has
evolved a number of large proteins whose function is to enter mammalian cells.
Some of these proteins are produced by bacteria and are often toxic to the host.
An example of such a protein is anthrax toxin. The aim of the research is to use
chemistry to uncover the molecular basis of anthrax toxin protein entry into
cells. A battery of translocation assays and a protein modification toolkit,
that allows at-will modification, will be used to investigate how the non-toxic
forms of anthrax toxin enter cells. By virtue of taking a chemical approach,
variants that contain chemical modifications at defined positions within these
large anthrax protein complexes will be prepared and investigated in order to
provide a fundamental understanding of the operation of these nanomachines.
Research training at the graduate and undergraduate levels will expose students
to the latest chemical methods that are used in these studies and provide them
with insight into complicated biological processes. Additional effort will be
put into an outreach chemical show. The PI together with MIT undergraduate
students will perform chemical demonstrations that appear to be magical to an
audience of 8-12 year old students. The teaching philosophy is that magic will
capture the youths' attention and excite them about science. The long-term aim
of outreach program is to springboard young patrons into careers of fundamental
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will systematically uncover
the role of cargo on translocation across a membrane and design charged peptides
for heterologous protein passage through a protective antigen pore. The research
procedures will employ a protein modification toolkit that allows at-will
modification and investigation of the anthrax toxin nanomachine. The studies
proposed here will provide a mechanistic understanding of protein translocation
across a membrane and lay the foundation for using semi-synthetic strategies to
probe the translocation process. In addition, the tools and insights gleaned
from these studies will allow the development of inhibitors and methods to
deliver novel chemical forms into cells, which is a longstanding problem in
chemistry.