* 1351931
* CAREER:   Damage and Fracture Characteristics of Rocks Under a Broad Spectrum of Strain Rates
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2014,04/30/2018
* W. Ashley Griffith, University of Texas at Arlington
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 04/30/2018
* USD 319,005.00

The motions of Earth's enormous tectonic plates are typically measured in
millimeters to tens of centimeters per year, seemingly confirming the generally-
held view that tectonic processes are slow, and have been throughout Earth?s
history. In line with this perspective, most laboratory research focused on rock
failure has been limited to experiments utilizing slow loading rates. However,
many natural processes that pose significant risk for humans (e.g., earthquakes
and extraterrestrial impacts), as well as risks associated with human activities
(explosions, mine failures, projectile penetration), occur at rates which are
hundreds to thousands of time faster than typically simulated in the laboratory.
As a result, little experimental data exists to confirm or calibrate theoretical
models explaining the connection between these dramatic events and the
pulverized rocks found in fault zones, impact, or explosion sites. Therefore, a
combined experimental and field investigation is proposed to study brittle rock
failure in both earthquake and impact environments. The mechanical behavior of
different rock types at fast loading rates is postulated to depend on the
microscopic composition and structure of individual minerals within the rocks.
If true, this will allow scientists to better predict the consequences of
earthquakes and impact events based on the rock structure in individual areas
and furthermore allow engineers to design more effective structures to withstand
the pressures in mining, petroleum and military environments. Integrated into
this research plan is a partnership with Teach for America (TFA), a national
teacher corps of college graduates and professionals who commit to teach for two
years and raise student achievement in public schools, to create the TFA
Geocorps. The TFA Geocorps will be high-achieving secondary school teachers
involved in summer research activities related to the project who will also work
with the Principal Investigator to design Geophysics-based thematic curriculum
units to teach in their own classrooms. Graduate students supported by this
project will supplement their academic training by taking active roles in
collaborations with the participating TFA Geocorps teachers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Brittle damage accumulates in the earth?s crust via
numerous processes ranging from very slow (fault creep) to very fast
(extraterrestrial impact). The strain-rate-dependent micromechanics of brittle
damage formation in rocks, particularly under confinement, is poorly
constrained, yet it is generally understood that rocks become stronger at higher
strain rates, and that above a critical strain-rate threshold, failure in
compression transitions from localized damage along discrete fractures to
delocalized (distributed) fracture damage (i.e., fragmentation or
pulverization). A recent series of studies focused on pulverized rocks in fault
damage zones provide evidence that ultra-high strain rates (&gt;100/s)
associated with rupture tip propagation and/or supershear earthquake rupture are
responsible for this pulverization. The transition from discrete fracture to
fragmentation depends on confinement (burial depth); and the mechanism, although
poorly constrained, is likely controlled by the grain-scale structure of rocks
and the dynamics of microcrack propagation. Here it is proposed to characterize
the high strain rate inelastic response of rocks by following an integrated
field, experimental, and theoretical study focused on the strain rate dependence
of fracture toughness, strain rate (and confinement) dependence of compressive
strength and damage, and comparison with field observations to determine a
microstructural signature of strain rate. The proposed work is expected to
calibrate damage mechanics models of high strain-rate rock failure, and to
characterize damage zones formed in different strain rate (and confinement)
regimes. Expected results should provide a basis for distinguishing strain rate
and stress conditions responsible for rock damage based on observing fracture
networks and seismic anisotropy. While the focus of this work will be on damage
created during earthquakes and impacts, the strength and failure characteristics
of rocks under high strain rates are also of fundamental interest in mining,
petroleum, and military applications related to blasting, rock burst,
underground explosions, and protective design.