* 1351115
* CAREER: Design Automation for Microfluidic Large Scale Integration Laboratories-on-a-Chip
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2014,02/28/2022
* Philip Brisk, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 02/28/2022
* USD 506,816.00

Emerging laboratory-on-a-chip technology enables automation and miniaturization
of biochemical reactions for applications such as DNA sequencing, drug
discovery, detection of influenza and other pathogens, biothreat detection, and
water purification. Scientists presently must design new devices for each
application by hand. This may take weeks or months for complex applications.
This project will design and implement computer software that automatically
converts a scientist's biological application into a physical device layout that
can be fabricated. Successful completion of this project will enhance scientific
productivity and lower the barrier-to-entry for new users.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;In terms of broader impact, laboratories-on-a-chip are expected to
improve and reduce the cost of global healthcare, particularly through point-of-
care testing. This project will reduce the design cost for laboratories-on-a-
chip through productivity enhancements, and these savings can be passed directly
to the consumer. At the University of California, Riverside, the PI will
introduce undergraduate and graduate courses on laboratory-on-a-chip technology,
which will be assessed by a qualified professional development officer. The PI
will include women and underrepresented minority students in this project, and
has a planned an outreach program with a collaborator at Crafton Hills College
to promote computer science education to underrepresented minority high school
students in the economically-disadvantaged Inland Empire region of Southern
California.