* 1351871
* CAREER: Global Quantum Modeling of Topological Nanosystems for Energy-Efficient Devices.
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2019
* Matthew Gilbert, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 05/31/2019
* USD 400,000.00

The majority of information processing is done using Complementary Metal Oxide
Semiconductor (CMOS), an architecture based on a series of interconnected Metal
Oxide Semiconductor Field Effect Transistors (MOSFET). The MOSFET is a very
simple semiconductor device in which an applied electric field controls
electrical current flow between two electrical contacts allowing the definition
of "on" states with current flowing and "off" states with no current flow. Using
these characteristics of "on" and "off" states, it is possible to then define
bits "1" and "0" which form the basis of digital information processing. Our
society is becoming increasingly dependent on digital information processing
systems used in, e.g., computers, smart phones, and televisions for every aspect
of our personal and professional lives. The related societal demand for
increased performance from ever-smaller electronic devices is driving the
miniaturization of the MOSFET. However, future miniaturization of the MOSFET is
predicted to result in not only diminishing returns in device performance, but
also in devices that consume too much power. Thus, a grand challenge is to
design and implement novel information processing devices that bypass the
limitations of the MOSFET. The solution to this problem will require an
orthogonal approach that utilizes new materials and new approaches to solve this
power consumption problem. In the past several years, topological systems have
been the focus of intense theoretical and experimental study. Topological states
are unique in the sense that their existence is protected by an underlying
symmetry present in the system, so the states cannot be removed unless the
symmetry is broken. Topological materials have the potential to make a
disruptive change to information processing due to their unique physical
properties. Nonetheless, a key aspect missing from topological research is a
path to move from basic physics to engineering real-world devices. This work
will bridge the fundamental physics and engineering world to develop tools that
serve to address the many open questions remain about the behavior of
topological materials at the nanoscale, the answers to which, will ultimately
dictate their role in future nanosystems that consume less power with minimal
sacrifice of performance.

This CAREER award sets forth a series of tasks designed to take advantage of the
exciting opportunity to study topological nanosystems under a variety of
different operating conditions with the stated goal of understanding their
applicability in future information processing systems. In particular, the award
aims to understand the light-matter interactions and high-frequency responses in
topological nanosystems. Numerical results will be attained by, for the first
time, coupling the time-dependent versions of the Kadanoff-Baym quantum
transport equations to the full solution to Maxwell's electromagnetic curl
equations in three spatial dimensions. We will use this quantum global modeling
tool to gain a fundamental understanding of how Maxwell's equations are modified
in 3D topological materials under electromagnetic illumination. Furthermore, we
will apply this knowledge of fundamental responses to understand the role
topological materials may play in future nanosystems. Additionally, in
conjunction with the numerical approach, compact models for each of the devices
considered will be derived based on the results of the detailed numerical
simulations to provide a strong bridge between the physical principles of the
topological nanodevices and simple models useful to researchers seeking to
design circuit architectures utilizing such devices. Such compact models will be
derived using a variety of analytical techniques ranging from basic field theory
to semi-classical magnetism. The results of this work will not only increase
theoretical understanding of topological materials and their ultimate
applicability in future information processing systems, but will also help in
the design and interpretation of experiments and circuits.