* 1351598
* CAREER: Theories for Magnetic Properties of Lanthanide and Actinide Complexes
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2014,02/29/2020
* Toru Shiozaki, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 02/29/2020
* USD 625,000.00

Toru Shiozaki of Northwestern University is supported by a CAREER award from the
Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Chemistry
division to develop novel wave function theories and efficient computer programs
for accurately simulating magnetic properties of lanthanide and actinide
complexes. The Computational and Data-Enabled Science and Engineering program in
the Advanced Cyber Infrastructure division is contributing in part to this
award. The Shiozaki group develops multi-configuration electronic structure
methods on the basis of the fully relativistic Dirac equation to account for
large spin-orbit and spin-spin interactions and quasi-degenerate electronic
structure in f-element complexes. These theories are implemented into efficient
parallel computer programs, realizing the quantitative simulation of magnetic
properties, such as zero-field splitting and electron paramagnetic resonance
parameters, of complexes containing 100 atoms or more. The program package
developed by the Shiozaki group, BAGEL, is freely available under the GNU
General Public License to end users and other
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Einstein's theory of relativity plays a
central role in magnetic properties of molecular systems, because the sources of
magnetic anisotropy, the spin-orbit and spin-spin couplings, originate from
relativity. In the relativistic framework, the behavior of the electrons is
governed by the so-called Dirac equation. This work develops theory, algorithms,
and computer programs that are tailored to the electronic structure of magnetic
molecules to efficiently solve the Dirac equation. The computational tools
developed in this work help to rationally design magnetic materials. The
computer package resulting from this research is freely available to the
community.