* 1351296
* CAREER: Impact of Mineralogy and Wettability on Pore-scale Displacement Mechanisms of Nonaqueous-Phase Liquids in Heterogeneous Rocks
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2020
* Lamia Goual, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 08/31/2020
* USD 408,670.00

1351296 Goual

Groundwater is a precious resource in the US and other countries in the world.
In many situations people have disposed of chemicals in the subsurface, either
as a best practice at that time, or, unintentionally. Within the wide variety of
organic chemicals many are not very soluble in water. If compounds that are not
soluble in water enter the subsurface they tend to stay in concentrated zones
referred to as non-aqueous phase liquids (NAPLs). If the chemicals are lighter
than water they float on top of the water table and are referred to L-NAPLS
(light non-aqueous phase liquids) and if the are heavier (more dense) than water
they sink to the bottom of the water table and are referred to as D-NAPLs (dense
non-aqueous phase liquids). These liquids do not move in the same manner as does
the ground water and therefore may stay in one location acting as a long-term
source of pollution. This proposed project will examine these NAPLs in rocks,
where the rock strata are not evenly distributed in size (for example a sand)
but rather in rocks that non-uniformed or what we refer to as heterogeneous
formations. These system are extremely complex and the Principal Investigator,
using experimental and modeling tools developer for oil exploration, will apply
these to nearer surface (but yet sub-surface) systems where NAPLs exist. Through
a better understanding of these processes we will be better able to manage our
groundwater resources and provide water as a source of drinking water and for
irrigation.

The tools that the PI will use will integrate experimental and modeling methods.
X-ray computed micro-tomography will be used:

i) to generate high-resolution maps of pore space topology and mineralogy (shape
and composition) in rock samples from which network models are made, and (ii) to
perform well-characterized in-situ flow experiments to measure fluid occupancy
and the effect of surfactants on NAPL remediation in the same rocks.

The impact of NAPLs on wettability alteration will be examined using a state-of-
the-art interfacial tension and contact angle apparatus. Because wetting forces
lead to an equilibrium condition between the mineral surface, NAPL, and aqueous
phase, this study will systematically consider NAPL/surfactant/water/mineral
combinations that are likely to induce wettability alteration. Differences
between measured macroscopic and microscopic properties will be highlighted. A
novel dynamic pore-scale network model will be developed for two-phase flow
simulations at the core-scale. The model will explicitly account for
heterogeneities in rock mineralogy and wettability on a pore-by-pore basis to
faithfully predict the impact of wettability alteration on NAPL displacement
mechanisms in heterogeneous rocks. Unlike existing network models that are
quasi-static, the dynamic pore-scale network model will incorporate physically
based and mathematically rigorous treatment of the complex dynamics of pore-
scale displacements that account for capillary, viscous, and gravity forces. It
will use most realistic representations of pore-space topology and be heavily
parallelized to handle network models at the core-scale.

The model will then be rigorously validated against the experimental data
generated in this work to predict the performance of surfactant-enhanced
remediation methods in various NAPL/brine/rock systems.

To help disseminate this the results of this research, the educational
component of this proposal has three main goals: (1) foster interest in science
and engineering, especially among women and minorities; (2) engage undergraduate
and graduate students through mentorship and guided research programs; and (3)
bridge the gap between current progress in science and engineering and
K12/undergraduate teaching curriculum, public education, and service. The new
"Journey Into Underground Rocks" will provide grade 6-12 students with an
unforgettable opportunity to move with the flow inside multi-scale rocks using a
newly-established CAVE, thus promoting their curiosity and scientific interest.

Through its "Surface Science Days," the educational plan will contribute to
increase the acceptance of underrepresented students in the society and work
place by assisting them in reaching their full potential.