* 1351537
* CAREER: Toward a Mobile Sensing Platform for Bridge Condition Monitoring
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2021
* Shamim Pakzad, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Gianluca Cusatis
* 03/31/2021
* USD 438,150.00

The objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program award is
to establish a long-term research and educational program which focuses on the
application of mobile sensors for structural health condition assessment. The
inclusion of sensing capabilities in mobile devices presents an incredible
opportunity for measuring structural response and environmental conditions at
rates, volumes and locations not possible in the past. This project will develop
the analytical models and experimental platform for validation and verification
that will improve safety and reliability of highway bridges. The project aims to
produce knowledge and build the foundation necessary for taking advantage of a
wealth of data that will become available through mobile sensors for structural
monitoring. The ultimate objective of this project is to use this abundant data
for structural condition assessment that will benefit the society. The project
will incorporate its research products into a comprehensive educational plan for
underclassmen, underrepresented and community college students, through two
specific programs: a hands-on Summer School in Sensing and Structural Health
Monitoring, and Project Based Research at the institution for Community
Colleges.

The project aims to produce and manage the knowledge, and build the foundation
necessary for taking advantage of a wealth of data that will become available
through mobile sensors for structural monitoring. It will test the hypotheses
that (i) the dynamic properties of a bridge can be identified using data from
moving sensors which produce randomly incomplete data matrices, (ii) dynamic
interaction of a vehicle carrying mobile sensors over a bridge can be exactly or
approximately uncoupled from the motions of the bridge, and (iii) a prototype
test bed could produce data and procedures to verify the validity of the
estimated dynamic properties of a bridge using mobile sensors. Testing these
hypotheses is crucial in addressing the technology and data processing knowledge
gaps for using mobile sensors for monitoring structures. An entire class of new
methods for understanding the behavior of systems is developed; they form a
unique platform that uses mobile devices to understand the performance of
infrastructure systems.