* 1351383
* CAREER: Molecular Scale Characterization of Water Adsorption on Surfaces Relevant to Cirrus Cloud Formation
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2020
* Miriam Freedman, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2020
* USD 533,842.00

This CAREER proposal by Professor Miriam Freedman of Pennsylvania State
University is co-funded but the Environmental Chemical Sciences Program in the
Chemistry Division and the Atmospheric Chemistry Program in the Atmospheric and
Geospace Sciences Division, both at the National Science Foundation. The
research results obtained in this proposal will be used to determine the
sensitivity of cirrus cloud properties to chemical composition. In addition,
while seeking to apply surface science techniques to address questions in the
atmospheric sciences, the results of the study will also impact the
environmental, biological, and materials sciences. As a result, articles that
stem from the proposed studies will be disseminated primarily in journals that
will attract these different audiences. Professor Freedman is committed to the
professional development of undergraduate and graduate students in her research
lab and courses. In both environments, she works with students to enhance their
ability to communicate science. In this proposal, she will build on her interest
in teaching communication skills and increasing scientific literacy by working
with science and communications undergraduates to develop a miniature online
course in atmospheric chemistry and clouds aimed at teachers of secondary
education. Based on the online course, the investigator will hold summer
workshops for groups of teachers to develop demonstrations and labs for the
classroom. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term goals of the research are to
apply fundamental ideas from surface and materials science to advance the field
of atmospheric chemistry through 1) investigation of the physical and chemical
processing of aerosol particles using novel methods that combine spectroscopy
and microscopy techniques and, 2) exploration of how the organization of organic
compounds on single-crystal surfaces influences water and ice adsorption on the
molecular scale with application to heterogeneous ice nucleation. The results of
the proposed studies will be used to determine the sensitivity of cirrus (ice)
cloud properties to chemical composition. The effect of competitive adsorption
of water before and after adsorption of organic molecules will be explored.
Mixtures of organic compounds and oxidized organic compounds will be used in
this study. Professor Freedman has designed and built a novel variable
temperature ultrahigh vacuum chamber equipped with instrumentation for the study
of these insulator materials.