* 1351915
* CAREER:Terahertz Interconnect, the Last Centimeter Data Link
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2019
* Qun Jane Gu, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Mohammod Ali
* 12/31/2019
* USD 400,000.00

CAREER: Terahertz Interconnect, the Last Centimeter Data Link Intellectual
Merit: The objective of this proposal is to develop terahertz interconnect
compatible and scalable with silicon processes to address the long-standing
interconnect issue. The ever-increasing inter- and intra- chip communication
bandwidth imposes a big challenge over decades: interconnect bottleneck.
Existing electronic interconnect (EI) and optic interconnect (OI) cannot address
the interconnect issue by their own. These result in the "last centimeter"
dilemma in data links. THz unique spectrum, sitting between microwave and optic
frequencies, allows it to enjoy advantages of both low cost, high reliability
electronic processing and low loss, small size transmission channels, therefore
holds great promises in interconnect area to bridge the "last centimeter" link.
Ultimate interconnect solutions mandate high energy efficiency, high bandwidth
density, high reliability, low cost, as well as a fast adaptability and scaling
capability with process advancements. To address this multi-dimension challenge,
the PI proposes THz Interconnect research, including the investigation of TI
theory, channel design, circuit implementation techniques and demonstration
validation. Particularly, we will investigate three crucial enabling techniques:
planar silicon process compatible channels and couplers, the high efficiency
self-oscillating harmonic power amplifier based transmitter, and the high
sensitivity receiver. THz interconnect system architecture and fundamental
performance limits given practical circuit/system constraints, and TI
scalability with process advancements will also be investigated. To the PI's
knowledge, this will be the first time to investigate THz Interconnect
compatible with mainstream silicon technologies. THz interconnect theory
discovers the understanding of the bandwidth density and energy efficiency
limits of the interconnect, and leads to evolving TI architectures that scale
performance with technologies to ultimately close the interconnect gap. If
successful, THz Interconnect will provide orders of magnitude better bandwidth
density and energy efficiency than existing interconnects to ultimately address
the last centimeter interconnect issue. Broader Impacts: THz interconnect
development opens a new, high potential application for the under-utilized THz
spectrum. The PI also envisions that the success of THz interconnect will enable
new computer architectures to satisfy the ever-increasing bandwidth requirement
in the BIG DATA era. It will also save tremendous energy to not only bring
significant economic impacts, but also mitigate global warming problems. THz
interconnect will form a killer application for the under-utilized THz spectrum
to further motivate THz advancements and impact our lives and societies in
larger and deeper scales. The PI will also integrate research with education and
outreach programs, and broadly disseminate the research results through
publications.