* 1351705
* CAREER:  Systematic Understanding and Control of the Mechanical Properties of Functionalized Nanoporous Metals
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2020
* Antonia Antoniou, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 06/30/2020
* USD 487,994.00

The objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program grant is
to uncover physical mechanisms governing the mechanical properties of nanoporous
materials for hierarchical structures where struts and joints are complex.
Nanoporous metals can be thought of as a three-dimensional interconnected
network of struts and joints with typical size in the range 10-100 nm. These
materials possess high surface-to-volume ratios, electrical conductivity,
catalytic activity, and strength. They have shown great promise in many
applications, for example as high-performance catalysts or electrodes for fuel
cells and batteries. The ability to design nanoporous metals with enhanced
mechanical properties is crucial for all applications, yet fundamental
understanding of how their internal structure influences macroscopic properties
is still lacking, especially for hierarchical structures where struts and joints
are themselves complex (e.g. are nanocrystalline). This project aims to uncover
physical mechanisms governing the mechanical properties of such structures. This
will be achieved through a comprehensive experimental campaign utilizing in-situ
deformation experiments across different scales. The effects of the nanoporous
metal geometrical structure will be investigated with the aid of analytical and
numerical models, as well as by conducting experiments on scaled-up
structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will generate crucial insights into
the deformation mechanisms governing mechanical properties of hierarchical
nanoporous metals, thus providing a basic scientific knowledge necessary for
controlling and optimizing their properties and bringing closer wider adaptation
of this class of materials. Research activities are closely integrated with
education and outreach efforts: both graduate and undergraduate students will
work on the project, thus gaining cutting-edge skills and expertise in
nanotechnology and science; the PI will work with high school teachers and
students in the Atlanta area through Georgia Intern Fellowship for Teachers
program and through Georgia Tech's Women in Engineering summer camps; some of
the results will be introduced in engineering courses at Georgia Tech as case
studies; the PI will participate in Tech to Teaching program that inspires
students to choose a teaching career.