* 1351543
* Integrative program to sustain and strengthen colloidal and interfacial science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (CAI-STEM) capabilities
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2014,09/30/2016
* Jacob Israelachvili, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Angie Lueking
* 09/30/2016
* USD 59,995.00

1351543&lt;br/&gt;Alcantar&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI proposes a collaborative
workshop to establish a strong scientific dialogue among researchers involved in
colloids, interfacial science, and separation technology. The workshop will be
held in Cancun, Mexico in May 2014. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the
workshop is to enhance innovation, design, and biomedical applications of
colloids, interfaces, and separation systems that could revolutionize research
and manufacturing practices in the U.S. In this integrative communications
program, it is propose to mix researchers who have dedicated their lives to
investigations and discoveries in colloids, interfacial science, and separations
with mid-term and young scientists in STEM disciplines to promote their
interaction. The objective is to catalyze collaborations that lead to high
impact invention, enterprise, and medical research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A 5 -
8 day meeting is proposed. It is expect that national and international experts
in experimental and theoretical CAI and STEM who would not normally meet to
exchange ideas will convene, with the goal of interdisciplinary advances that
will benefit all investigators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The organizing committee
will develop a website for consolidating registration and disseminating learning
and logistic information about the workshop. The PI anticipates having
publishing the workshop results in two special issues of Langmuir and the
Journal of Colloids and Surfaces. The editors of both journals have expressed
interest. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop will be co-funded by the Office of
Naval Research.