* 1351482
* CAREER: First-Principles Modeling of Gas Evolution Reactions in Lithium Batteries
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2020
* Donald Siegel, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 05/31/2020
* USD 400,000.00

PI: Siegel, Donald&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1351482&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
University of Michigan Ann Arbor&lt;br/&gt;Title: CAREER: First-Principles
Modeling of Gas Evolution Reactions in Lithium
Batteries&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary objective of this project is to
characterize the reaction mechanisms associated with electrolyte decomposition
within the cathode of Li-air and Li-ion batteries. These reactions occur at the
electrolyte/cathode interface, and have major implications for the safety,
longevity, and efficiency of these systems. Nevertheless, they have received
relatively little attention compared those occurring on the opposing electrode,
i.e., at the electrolyte/anode interface. This bias, coupled with the inherent
complexity of the electrolyte/cathode interface, has resulted in limited
understanding of cathode-mediated decomposition mechanisms. This project will
close this knowledge gap by simulating the electrolyte/cathode interface at the
atomic scale, under conditions similar to those found in a realistic battery,
using state of the art ab intio molecular dynamics and dispersion-corrected
Density Functional Theory simulations, in concert with a design of experiments
approach that will isolate individual contributions from the electrode
potential, variations in the electrode surface, and the presence of solvated
(salt) ions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In high-capacity Li-air batteries,
decomposition of the electrolyte results in the formation of stable compounds
(e.g., Li carbonate), which require high overpotentials to recharge and which
release CO2 rather than O2. In Li-ion batteries, reactions at the electrolyte-
cathode interface can lead to the accumulation of gaseous species such as CO2,
H2, etc., which when vented to the atmosphere release highly flammable solvent
vapor. By revealing the elementary steps associated with these decomposition
processes the PI will facilitate the development of rational strategies to
minimize their occurrence, leading to more efficient and safe batteries. The
simulations will advance understanding of the interplay between structural,
electronic, thermodynamic, and kinetic aspects of protype electrolyte-electrode
interfaces. These interfaces are pervasive in electrochemical systems such as
fuel cells and photo-electrochemical cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition,
this project will translate research outcomes into energy-themed educational
activities for students at the grade school, collegiate, and professional
levels. At the grade-school level the PI will engage 7th-8th grade girls by
developing a week-long focus group on "Materials for Energy" for the UM Girls in
Science and Engineering Summer Camp. At the collegiate level, the PI will extend
his existing course, "Atomistic Computer Modeling of Materials," by developing
new lectures and laboratory exercises that describe methods for introducing bias
potentials into electronic structure calculations, and their importance in
modeling electrochemical systems. Finally, at the professional level, a new
module on "Battery Safety" will be created and distributed to participants in
the PI's short course for practicing automotive engineers, "Introduction to
Electrical Energy Storage." The impact of these activities will be assessed
annually -- and in selected cases over a multi -year term -- using web-based and
social media.