* 1351445
* CAREER:  Thermal stress and intertidal zonation:  The neglected role of food supply
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2021
* Sarah Gilman, Claremont McKenna College
* Continuing Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 05/31/2021
* USD 706,685.00

This CAREER grant uses a combination of laboratory studies, computer modeling,
and field experiments to test the relative influence of temperature stress and
energy limitation on the upper vertical limit of an intertidal barnacle (Balanus
glandula). Understanding the mechanisms by which temperature limits an
organism's success is critical to generating accurate predictions of the effect
of climate change on biological systems. Past work in this field has emphasized
the direct physiological stress of extreme temperatures, but it is unclear if
such extreme conditions limit species in the wild. Alternately, animals may
simply lack enough energy to defend against thermal extremes that they could
otherwise tolerate. This work has three main objectives: 1) to extend an
existing modeling approach in physiology (Dynamic Energy Budget) for use with
intertidal species, which alternate daily between marine and terrestrial
conditions, 2) to use the model, in conjunction with field experiments, to test
the hypothesis that energy limitation, rather than direct thermal stress, limits
the success of B. glandula in the wild; and, 3) to use field and laboratory
measurements to explore how thermal tolerance and success differ between
barnacle populations from California and Washington. Altogether, these projects
will improve our understanding of the thermal physiology of B. glandula,
specifically, and of the role of energy limitation in thermal stress, more
generally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The integrated education plan of this CAREER
grant contains three specific objectives: 1) to use research opportunities to
attract and retain students in biology majors, 2) to improve the retention and
performance of women and minority undergraduates in an introductory biology
course, and 3) to improve the understanding of science by the general college
population. The grant activities will include: generating new research
opportunities for undergraduate and high school students, the piloting of a
research experience program for sophomore-level students, the establishment of a
peer-study program for students in an introductory biology course, and the
development of a new course for non-science majors that emphasizes scientific
literacy. The educational effectiveness of these programs will be rigorously
tested and the results will inform the future teaching activities of the PI, her
department, and the greater academic science community. The broader impacts of
this CAREER grant will be 1) broadening the participation of women and under-
represented minorities in science, 2) improving biology education and the
educational skills of the PI, 3) increasing public scientific literacy, and 4)
informing our understanding of the biological consequences of global climate
change, a critical societal need.