* 1351055
* CAREER: Interactive Gesture-Based Data Manipulation and Visualization for Exploratory Learning and Research
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2020
* Christopher Weaver, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 07/31/2020
* USD 496,124.00

Visual exploration and analysis of data is increasingly important for
advancement in virtually every area of human endeavor. Whether recorded directly
by people or indirectly using machines, data captures our observations and
interpretations of the world. When people interact with data, it is almost
always in a visual form like graphics or text. The goal of this project is to
vastly expand the usefulness of interactive visualizations by providing a
general way to create and edit data inside the visualizations themselves. The
key new idea of the project is that visualization users can perform sequences of
gestures with common input devices to express their observations and
interpretations directly in visual form. The visualizations not only show data,
but also serve as meaningful graphical spaces in which to edit that data. By
extending the data processing workflows and display techniques that are
currently used in popular visualization tools and software libraries, we can
flexibly and expressively translate the details of interactions into precise
data changes with simultaneous visual feedback.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
innovative contributions of the project will include a general method to support
interactive data editing in visualizations, a diverse collection of data editing
gestures, a set of patterns to guide the process of designing visualization
tools with data editing features, a declarative programming language for quickly
building those tools, and a variety of built tools that show off real
applications of data editing in visualizations. The project focuses on
developing, evaluating, and distributing tools for scholarly research in the
digital humanities. It tightly integrates education to bring together students
and researchers from computer science, information science, and the humanities,
and provide them with concrete opportunities to engage in authentic
interdisciplinary collaboration. Scholarly research and education in the
humanities involves open-ended exploration, analysis, and interpretation of
complex data sets in diverse areas of study. This makes it an exemplary first
target to demonstrate how gesture-based visual editing can be broadly applied to
data analysis in virtually every segment of society. The broader impacts of the
project will spring from the availability of a new, foundational, general-
purpose methodology to support data entry, organization, annotation, and
correction. Project products will include publications, tutorials, videos, the
visualization gesture system as open source software, a compendium of data
editing gestures, and a gallery of demonstration visualization tools for public
download. Information on the project and resulting resources can be accessed on
the project web site (http://www.cs.ou.edu/~weaver/nsf-career/).