* 1351557
* CAREER: Microfluidically Loaded Highly Reconfigurable Compact RF Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2019
* Gokhan Mumcu, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 12/31/2019
* USD 416,000.00

CAREER: Microfluidically Loaded Highly Reconfigurable Compact RF
Devices&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merits: &lt;br/&gt;This CAREER effort
investigates the interdisciplinary concept of microfluidically loaded
reconfigurability within the context of RF antennas, filters, and imaging
systems. These devices operate based on a new technique that relies on
continuously movable microfluidic loads consisting of metal (liquid/solid) and
dielectric solution volumes. Different than the recent work that relied on
fluidic tubes and one-time reconfigurability, the proposed integrated
microfluidic channel realizations with thin insulator walls truly allows for
maximizing the parasitic loading based reconfigurability offered by the liquid
volumes. The proposed effort investigates both flexible soft substrate device
realizations and rigid hard substrate implementations to provide superior
reconfigurability performances in terms of frequency tunability, agility, power
handling, size, and speed. The project also envisions a novel microfluidic based
reconfigurability approach based on employing metalized quartz pieces within the
microfluidic channels. This constitutes a major deviation from existing approach
of utilizing liquid metals and paves the way for low-cost non-toxic highly
reconfigurable microfluidically loaded RF components. Systematic studies are
planned to characterize and improve the reliability of the proposed devices
under certain mechanical impact and stress conditions in order to advance the
state of microfluidically reconfigured devices from simplistic conceptual
laboratory prototype demonstrations to the system level integrations.
&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;There is currently a strong need for low
cost, easy to use, mm and sub-mm wave imaging/radar technologies. Next
generation satellite, ground-to-air, air-to-air communications and radar
technologies will demand easy-to-use low-cost highly reconfigurable and self-
adapting RF front-ends. The power handling capability of reconfigurable compact
filters have historically been an important challenge, and the proposed effort
holds promise to alleviate these concerns. The proposed reconfigurable devices
and imaging systems, if successful, hold potential to transform such
technologies from complicated military platforms, luxury cars, expensive
devices, and specialized hospitals into general use to benefit the society. The
educational plan is centered on providing learning opportunities by leveraging
unique partnerships with Florida Advance Technological Education Center (FL-ATE)
and NSF Florida-George Louis Strokes Alliance for Minority Participation
(FGLSAMP). An important contribution will be the initiation of a 3D
visualization centric electromagnetic theory education by utilizing USF's
recently established Advanced Visualization Center (AVC). The 3D visualizations
and interdisciplinary nature of the project will be used to support outreach
activities with elementary and high schools.