* 1351570
* CAREER: Adipocytic Mechanotransduction for Obesity
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2019
* Jung Yul Lim, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 04/30/2019
* USD 430,554.00

PI: Lim, Jung Yul Proposal Number: 1351570 Title: CAREER: Adipocytic
Mechanotransduction for Obesity

Obesity is a huge burden to society with its increasing trend unstopped. Obesity
significantly increases risk factors for type 2 diabetes, high blood pressure,
and cardiovascular diseases. A pathological recruitment of new fat cells, or
adipocytes, contributes to obesity, and a source of adipocytes can be
mesenchymal stem cells(MSCs). However, there is a significant knowledge gap in
understanding the environmental factors that control MSC differentiation into
adipocytes, and research is needed on how to prohibit the differentiation of
MSCs into fat cells. This seriously limits therapeutic ways to treat obesity.
The goal of this study is to gain a thorough insight on how mechanical signals
regulate the propensity of MSCs to differentiate into adipocytes, and on the
basis of this knowledge propose novel therapeutic approaches to prevent and
treat obesity. Therefore, the proposed studies are expected to address in the
long run the unmet needs in obesity and relieve the high medical spending over
obesity and related diseases. Research will be integrated with educational
efforts to offer engineering students a basic foundation on stem cell
bioengineering. This educational goal will be achieved by curriculum development
on stem cell-based bioengineering, graduate student training, training
undergraduates via Undergraduate Creative Activities and Research Experiences
(UCARE) program at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln, and the Lab Experience
Program for Homeschool Students (LEPHS) developed by the PI.

A pathological recruitment of new adipocytes to form adipose tissue hyperplasia
induces obesity, and one of the main causes of adipocyte number growth is the
recruitment of newly formed preadipocytes from MSC sources. Since MSCs have
plasticity to commit and differentiate into various lineages, it is critical to
understand how MSCs determine their fate to adipocytes to deal with obesity.
However, there is a huge knowledge barrier in regard to complex
adipogenesisleading milieus, biochemical, mechanical and physical, and how to
prohibit the adipogenesis of MSCs. This seriously limits therapeutic ways to
treat obesity. The long-term goal of this study isto gain a thorough insight on
how mechanical signals regulate MSC adipogenesis for potential therapeutic
attempts targeting molecular mechanosensors. For this goal, this CAREER study
exploits a novel adipocytic mechanotransduction theme. It is proposed to inhibit
MSC adipogenesis via applying mechanical cell stretch and unveil primary
molecular mechanisms that govern MSC stretch mechanotransduction during the
course of adipogenesis. Two Specific Aims are proposed. 1. To examine the
effects of mechanical stretch at varying regimens in inhibiting MSC adipocytic
commitment and differentiation. 2. To determine the role of cellsubstrate and
cell-cell interactions in the stretch inhibition of MSC adipogenesis. The
hypothesis to be tested is that mechanical stretch will induce inhibitory
effects on MSC adipogenesis via cell-substrate and/or cell-cell interaction-
mediated mechanotransduction mechanisms. The proposed studies may suggest a
novel adipocytic mechanotransduction strategy to treat obesity. Specifically,
sensitizing molecular mechanosensors, for example, focal adhesion kinase(FAK)
and cadherin cell-cell adherens junction, may enhance mechanical inhibitory
effects acting on MSC adipogenesis. This may suggest potential molecular
therapeutic targets for dealing with obesity. Research efforts will be
integrated with educational and outreach efforts at the high school,
undergraduate and graduate student levels.