* 1351828
* CAREER: A Framework for Integrated  Computational and Physical Simulation of Dynamic Soil-Pile Interaction
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Jeramy Ashlock, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 08/31/2019
* USD 400,000.00

The goal of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program award is to
develop an integrated research and education program aimed at advancing
fundamental knowledge on dynamic pile-soil interaction for pile groups. To this
end, integrated full-scale physical and computational studies will be carried
out in the quasi-elastodynamic and nonlinear ranges. Advancements in physical
simulation methods developed for single piles in the PI's recent NEES Payload
project will be extended to pile groups. Specifically, coupled vertical-
horizontal-rocking tests with broadband excitation and random-vibration signal
processing techniques will be used to efficiently characterize the dynamic
response of soil pile-group interaction in the frequency domain. Concurrently,
three-dimensional inhomogeneous disturbed-zone computational models developed
for single piles in the PI's previous centrifuge studies will be extended to the
more complex and practically significant, yet less well-understood, case of pile
groups. The sensitivity of the theoretical pile response will be determined
through parametric studies of the model parameters, including (1) modulus and
damping profiles in the disturbed zones around the piles, (2) modulus and
damping profiles in the far-field, (3) size and shape of the disturbed zone, and
(4) pile-soil contact conditions. Upon characterizing their relative
contributions to the overall elastodynamic response, these parameters will then
be calibrated to the observed experimental responses in a system-identification
optimization approach, to produce calibrated computational disturbed-zone models
of the observed soil pile-group interaction. The research will be transformative
in its use of unique multi-modal and random-vibration experimental testing
techniques developed in previous centrifuge projects and a full-scale NEES
project; the 3D modeling of dynamic soil-structure interaction (SSI) by advanced
BEM and FEM programs with capabilities for multiple, multi-layered domains to
capture both near-field and far-field soil response through the use of
disturbed-zone continuum models; and by examining the link between the
elastodynamically calibrated disturbed-zone models for small strains, and their
performance as initial models in nonlinear time-domain analyses for large
strains. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In accord with the purpose of the CAREER program,
this award will enable the PI to develop a research program that will build a
firm foundation for a lifetime of leadership in integrating education and
research. The CAREER research project will be unified with a comprehensive
education, outreach and training (EOT) program aimed at strengthening the
analytical and teaching skills of graduate and undergraduate students, while
reaching out to K-12 students to introduce them to topics of geotechnical
engineering. To maximize the impact of the EOT program, the activities will be
planned in consultation with established university outreach and diversity
programs with proven records of inspiring K-12 students towards STEM fields and
increasing participation of underrepresented minorities in engineering. The EOT
activities include development of teaching modules for dissemination via NSF's
TeachEngineering web site, outreach lectures on geotechnical and earthquake
engineering for an annual science festival and K-12 classrooms, NSF field days
through which students will learn about the project and observe tests, and
involvement of local middle school students in summer research. The project also
includes a formal assessment plan to ensure the success of the EOT activities
through collaboration with an evaluator from the ISU Research Institute for
Studies in Education.