* 1351744
* CAREER: Transformative Approaches to Achieving Very High Density Cryogenic Sensor Arrays
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2019
* Joseph Bardin, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 12/31/2019
* USD 440,000.00

CAREER: Transformative Approaches to Achieving Very High Density Cryogenic
Sensor Arrays&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Joseph C. Bardin, University of Massachusetts
Amherst&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Low-temperature superconductor
based sensing systems offer unprecedented sensitivity, but compared to their
room temperature counterparts, are relatively undeveloped. The research
objective of this program is to explore how the information gathering
capabilities of cryogenic sensor systems can be improved by an order of
magnitude through novel combinations of ultra-low-power silicon circuits and
superconducting sensors. Two different system applications will be studied:
terahertz superconductor-insulator-superconductor mixer focal plane arrays and
near-infrared superconducting nanowire single photon detector cameras. In each
case, the quantitative goal will be to enable the realization of cameras with
over 1,000 independent pixels in a single 4 K cryostat. Achieving this level of
integration will require an order of magnitude reduction in the power
consumption of the active electronics. The basic research carried out under this
program is expected to advance the state of the art in cryogenic integrated
circuit design, ultra-low-power cryogenic low-noise amplifiers, superconducting
nanowire single photon detector readout, on-wafer noise measurement techniques,
and the heterogeneous integration of superconductor and semiconductor circuits.
This research is important because it addresses open problems in measurement,
design, and system integration, and the resulting system capabilities will be
transformative to members of the scientific
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The most sensitive of
experimental systems rely upon cryogenically cooled electronics. These systems
allow scientists to push measurements towards the limits of fundamental physics,
and thus have had a profound impact on experimental science. For instance,
cryogenically cooled electronic systems allow scientists to study basic physical
phenomena through low-temperature physics experiments, to communicate with
spacecraft at distant planets, to interface to quantum computers, and to probe
the history and contents of the universe through radio astronomy. If successful,
the improved instruments that will be enabled by this research program will
greatly expand the toolset that scientists have to gather data. The broader
impacts also include an aggressive educational and outreach program, which
targets participants at all levels. The research themes of the program will be
leveraged in order to improve course offerings, both at the undergraduate and
graduate levels, and a set of seminars aimed at high school teachers will be
created and offered through the UMass STEMEd program. Finally, low-temperature
electronics is a field in which there is limited expertise, and the training of
new experts who understand the applications of these systems will help to ensure
that forward progress continues in the years to come. To this end, a set of
yearly scientific site visits will be organized in which graduate and
undergraduate researchers will have the opportunity to present their research
results to leading scientists and to learn about ongoing work at some of the
nations premier research institutions.