* 1351688
* CAREER: Dissecting the role of biomaterials in lymph nodes to study and shape immunity
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2014,02/28/2019
* Christopher Jewell, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 02/28/2019
* USD 468,338.00

1351688&lt;br/&gt;Jewell&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The studies described in this
proposal integrate bioengineering with immunology to generate new knowledge on
how biomaterials interact with immune cells and tissues. This insight will
contribute towards the development of new vaccines as well as towards better
understanding the modulating the immune responses towards implanted
biomaterials. Immune responses are mediated by inter-connected signaling
pathways coordinated in lymph nodes (LNs). Thus, all vaccines must reach LNs to
be effective. Biomaterials, such as synthetic polymers, are being intensely
studied as vaccine carriers because they offer controlled release and co-
delivery of cargo. Several biomaterials have recently been associated with
intrinsic properties that activate inflammatory immune pathways, even in the
absence of other immune signals. However, direct information on the impact of
biomaterials in LNs or the mechanisms by which these effects modulate immunity
is largely lacking. This knowledge gap persists due to the inefficiency (&lt; 1%
of dose) with which biomaterial vaccines reach LNs after injection at peripheral
locations (e.g., muscle).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall hypothesis is that
both the physicochemical properties of biomaterials and the combinations and
delivery kinetics of incorporated immune signals define the impact on the LN
microenvironment and the resulting systemic immune response. To address it, the
PI will exploit a new platform that directly delivers biomaterials to LNs to
control the concentration and delivery kinetics of biomaterials and vaccine
components in LNs. The specific aims are to 1) quantify the impact of
biomaterials with different stabilities on LN activation and systemic response
in the absence of other immune signals, 2) study the role of antigen and
adjuvant released from biomaterial particles in activating LNs, 3) dissect the
influence of the density of antigen/adjuvant presentation in and across LNs, and
4) compare signaling pathways activated by biomaterial carriers to profiles
associated with clinically approved vaccine
adjuvants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: The proposed studies will
address how polymers impact LN activation to shape immunity, which has
significant ramifications in vaccine development and in understanding and
modulating the immune response towards biomaterials. More specifically, the
proposed studies will provide 1) fundamental information of how biomaterials
impact local LN structure in the absence and presence of immune signals, 2)
knowledge of how local changes in LNs modulate systemic immunity, 3) the
relative roles that controlled release and inherent polymer immune activity of
biomaterials play in inducing responses, and 4) signaling profiles of two
classes of key biomaterials compared with approved
adjuvants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: Vaccines have had an
extraordinary impact on global health, but challenging diseases such as HIV and
cancer still circumvent vaccine efficacy. The proposed studies will have a
significant impact on the vaccine field and, more generally, on understanding
the immune response towards biomaterials in the absence and presence of immune
signals. In particular, the proposed studies may help overcome current technical
limitations in vaccine development, while generating fundamental knowledge on
the interactions between biomaterials and LNs. The proposed studies are
integrated with an education plan to promote research exposure and awareness of
career opportunities incorporating biomaterials, immunology, and vaccines. This
will be accomplished through partnering with high-need schools, supporting
community outreach programs, and training of undergraduate, graduate, and
postdoctoral researchers. These education and outreach activities will help
increase enrolment of high school students in STEM degree and research programs
and will provide training opportunities in research education for undergraduate,
graduate, and postdoctoral researchers.