* 1351860
* CAREER: Myco-fluidics -- Mathematics at the interface of fluid dynamics and fungal biology
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2021
* Marcus Roper, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 06/30/2021
* USD 425,001.00

This project combines mathematical modeling and physical experiments to study
the dispersal and growth of fungi and to predict how fungi will respond to our
changing Earth. The mathematical work in this project includes probability
theory, optimization, dynamical systems, fluid mechanics, and the synthesis of
new models. The central biological questions addressed are: (i) How do adaptive
fungal networks form and how are they optimized for mixing and transport? (ii)
How does the flow in these networks self-organize to eliminate congestion? (iii)
What adaptations are used by fungi to control their spore dispersal? This
project will develop interdisciplinary teaching and research methods connecting
physics, genetics and the environment. Teaching and research are integrated
through the interdisciplinary training of graduate and undergraduate students in
mathematics and biology. New undergraduate mathematical modeling seminars and
classes that emphasize societal impacts will be developed. Undergraduate
researchers will be mentored to make key research
contributions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Humans, mammals, fish, reptiles and plants
represent only a razor's edge of the Earth's immense biodiversity. Most of the
Earth's multicellular species are undescribed and lie inside of plants or buried
in the soil and undergrowth. Millions of these undescribed species are thought
to be fungi. Increasing our knowledge of these species is important because
emerging fungal diseases pose a danger to society by threatening our forests,
crops and wildlife. This project will provide mechanistic models of adaptation
in fungal networks and the physical processes involved in fungal dispersal.
These models will provide a platform for predicting which fungi are capable of
adapting and dispersing into new habitats and the rate at which they will do so.
The discovered strategies used by fungal transport networks can be applied to
scheduling problems in a variety of other settings such as traffic or data
networks.