* 1351129
* CAREER: An integrated research-education program to uncover rapid cellular mechanisms by which stress-steroids facilitate context-appropriate behaviors
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2020
* Emma Coddington, Willamette University
* Continuing Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 08/31/2020
* USD 575,000.00

It is often assumed that stress is bad, but is this really true? Addressing this
question is critical to understanding how humans and other animals respond to
prolong periods of disturbance and retain the capacity to navigate the
challenges of life. In this context, stress is not bad, merely an experience to
navigate. This project promises to reveal the unknown processes by which animals
respond to and cope with acute stress - processes that occur on the rapid
timescale from seconds to minutes. The project explores the mechanisms using a
combination of neurophysiology, confocal microscopy, and behavior. This approach
to understanding how hormones and physiological state affects behavior provides
an integrated approach to identify important research questions and design
undergraduate courses. Student training is integrated with teaching at all
levels and is developed through a combination of research-based courses and
collaborative student-faculty research. Undergraduate researchers are involved
in all stages of the project from experimental design, data collection, and
analysis to dissemination through publications and conference presentations.
Through involvement in the project undergraduates will be exposed to state-of-
the-art research and receive close faculty mentoring. Students are actively
encouraged to pursue careers in science through workshops that develop science
self-efficacy, and recruits underrepresented students to research through
collaboration with the Pacific Northwest Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority
Participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will test the hypothesis that
CORT employs disparate cellular mechanisms in a cascade that functions within a
rapid time frame of ms to min. This cascade is critical for context-appropriate
behavioral responses to occur because neurons respond differently to specific
temporal input patterns. We know very little about the cellular mechanisms that
enable rapid actions of CORT, or about the ability of CORT to affect context-
dependent effects. A long-term goal of the research is to identify and
characterize the multiple rapid effects of CORT on those neurons that have clear
behavioral relevance. The proposed research will use in vivo single-unit and
slice whole cell electrophysiology, behavior, and imaging to investigate the
following questions: (1) How do hormones impact neurons on different timescales
to affect the selection of context-appropriate behaviors? and (2) How do small
ephemeral signaling molecules, endocannabinoids, behave as the switch upon which
hormones act? Findings from these studies promise to elucidate two novel
mechanisms in which CORT modulates intrinsic electrical properties of behavior-
associated neurons and receptor-mediated endocytosis of behavior-regulating
hormones. Furthermore, this research offers four significant broader impacts:
(1) Advancing discovery and understanding while promoting authentic teaching,
training, and learning, because student-training is integrated with teaching at
all levels and is developed through a combination of research-based courses and
collaborative student-faculty research; (2) Participation of underrepresented
groups is actively encouraged through a highly impactful workshop to develop
science self-efficacy, and by attracting underrepresented students through
collaboration with PNW-LSAMP. (3) Enhancement of infrastructure for research and
education through collaboration with an assessment expert to develop tools and
methods to evaluate learning outcomes, and development of an imaging workshop
for novice faculty and students in the region; (4) Broad dissemination of the
findings of this work through public lectures, conference presentations, and
peer-reviewed publications.