* 1351692
* CAREER:  Dynamic Deep Brain Stimulation: From Theory to Technologies
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2021
* Caleb Kemere, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Stephanie George
* 04/30/2021
* USD 422,221.00

Proposal Number: 1351692&lt;br/&gt;Institution: William Marsh Rice
University&lt;br/&gt;PI: Kemere, Caleb T. &lt;br/&gt;Title: CAREER: Dynamic Deep
Brain Stimulation: From Theory to Technologies&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Deep brain
stimulation (DBS) is a remarkable treatment for later stages of Parkinson's
disease and an emerging revolutionary therapy for other neurological and
psychiatric disorders. Currently DBS is employed in a static fashion, in the
sense that stimulation intensity and frequency are manually adjusted. However,
the neural circuits of the brain are highly dynamic, so major advances to DBS
therapy must be "dynamic" systems as well, with recording and processing neural
signals in real-time and modulating the applied stimulation based on the dynamic
state of the brain. The overall goal of this project is to lay the scientific
and technical foundations for dynamic DBS systems that will radically increase
the efficacy of DBS in treating neurological and psychiatric disorders. The
proposed studies are therefore significant in terms of advancing both basic
science, by enabling new and faster experiments, and clinically, by accelerating
the development and implementation of DBS therapies. As part of education and
outreach activities, high school, college and graduate students will be engaged
in neuroengineering education and research by (i) using an engaging module to
teach high school students basics of neurobiology theory and experiment; (ii)
challenging college juniors to build their own rat DBS with power and size
constraints; and (iii) teaching graduate students neural signal processing using
recorded neural activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project
is to advance the scientific and technical foundations for dynamic DBS systems
that will radically increase the efficacy of DBS in existing indications and
enable rapid development for other neurological and psychiatric disorders. As an
initial target for innovation, this proposal focuses on DBS of the subthalamic
nucleus (STN) for Parkinson's disease. The following specific aims are proposed.
1 Use new materials to develop joint stimulation and recording electrodes.
Record the activity of cortico-striatal-thalamic neurons in healthy, diseased,
and DBS-stimulated states during intentional movements. 2 Develop a latent
variable model of the dynamics of neural activity during intentional movement.
Build a rodent-scale dynamic DBS device that implements model-based, closed-loop
dynamic stimulation. 3 Evaluate the effects of long-term dynamic DBS across
large cohorts of animals using an automated, high-throughput behavioral
monitoring system. The proposed studies are expected to lay the foundation for
novel dynamic DBS therapies; generate new conceptualizations of the neural basis
of motor symptoms and STN DBS therapy in Parkinson's disease; transition
computational models of DBS from the current static approaches to ones that
incorporate the time-varying nature of movement-related neural activity; and
help discover the neuroprotective and non-motor effects of static and dynamic
DBS.