* 1351687
* CAREER: Midfield Wireless Powering of Subwavelength Probes for Neuroscience and Cardiology Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2018
* Ada Shuk Yan Poon, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 12/31/2018
* USD 400,000.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Electronics provide powerful
capabilities when interfaced with the body. Their miniaturization over the past
few decades has paved way for tiny devices capable of biological sensing or
stimulation, and hold promise for restoring physiological functions in patients.
Although electronics can be made extremely small, existing methods for powering
them involve large batteries or energy harvesting modules. The size of these
powering components severely constrains the integration of electronics in living
systems. The research in this proposal aims to overcome these challenges and
enable arrays of optoelectronic probes small enough to be directly injected into
the body. Routes to miniaturization are provided by the midfield wireless
powering approaches recently established in the PI's lab. These approaches allow
the transfer of power to nearly any location in the body at performance levels
far exceeding requirements for both complex electronics and physiological
stimulation. The research combines a fundamental understanding of power transfer
physics with advances in low-power integrated circuits to demonstrate tiny yet
fully operational sensors, electrodes, light sources, RF transceivers, and other
classes of injectable electronics. Such capabilities represent a considerable
advance in applying physics, wireless technology, and integrated circuits
towards addressing challenges in biology and
medicines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research enables the integration of
electronics into the body through tiny devices, providing previously unavailable
diagnostic and therapeutic options such as minimally invasive surgery and
continuous monitoring. These capabilities will accelerate scientific discovery
and improve overall healthcare cost. To maximize research benefits, results will
be synthesized in formats understandable to the general public, including
clinicians, patients, and policy makers; and widely disseminated through online
platforms. The popular appeal of robotic microsystems, will be leveraged to
motivate and inspire high school students over the grant period to strengthen
the STEM pipeline in the U.S. This is done through the internship of local K-12
teachers to multiply impact, mentoring of underrepresented students, and an
annual summer workshop on robotics with biomedical applications for local high
school students. The PI will also leverage her experience in mentoring female
students at the high school level to encourage them to pursue higher degrees in
engineering.