* 1351586
* CAREER: Graphs, geometry and algorithms for sparse decentralized control systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/15/2014,02/29/2020
* Mohamed-Ali Belabbas, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 02/29/2020
* USD 400,000.00

Objective: In recent years, a new paradigm for control systems, now increasingly
seen as a collection of interacting autonomous agents, has emerged. A
decentralized power distribution system, a formation of unmanned autonomous
vehicles used for aid or even package delivery, terrestrial vehicles platoons,
and auctions systems are all control systems built around this new paradigm.
Similarly, progress in the biological sciences and the need to provide
comprehensive and affordable healthcare have made the mapping of complex
genetic, metabolic and more recently disease networks commonplace.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: The research deals with a novel
framework that unites ideas from graph theory, computer science and dynamical
systems. The focus is on control-theoretic methods that are broad enough to
address the relevant questions arising in various application settings, yet
specific enough to yield implementable methods and algorithms. Specific
questions include: how to characterize the minimal communication structure
needed to accomplish a task (which links are necessary for the ensemble to
cooperate, and which ones are redundant?), how to quantify the resistance of a
network to attacks and link failures (what is a good measure of robustness?),
how to construct networks accomplishing a given task (what is the most
economical network design?).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The work
proposed here will provide key technologies to enable the deployment and
analysis of large-scale, secure and efficient multi-agent systems. Over the
course of the past twenty years, the paradigm of centralized control systems has
faded in favor of systems that are large-scale, heterogeneous, sometimes ad-hoc,
and decentralized. Because the proposed framework directly relates the dynamics
to the underlying network, its potential applications span the various subfields
where networked dynamics appear, including, but not limited to, distributed
optimization, the study of metabolic networks, formation control, and
decentralized power distribution.