* 1351081
* CAREER: Robust and systematic molecular engineering with synthetic DNA neural networks and collective molecular robots
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2014,01/31/2019
* Lulu Qian, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 01/31/2019
* USD 500,000.00

Introduction and motivation. Life is full of amazingly sophisticated programs
encoded in genomes, orchestrating molecules to sense, to compute, to respond,
and to grow. Towards rationally designing and synthesizing molecular systems
with programmable behaviors as sophisticated as life itself, this project will
take an approach that is biologically inspired and computer science centered. On
one hand, nature has been very successful in evolving and selecting the most
efficient and powerful biological programs made of simple individual molecules.
In order to use the full potential of molecules to create complex and
programmable systems, one needs to borrow the information processing principles
in biology. On the other hand, computer science has been very successful in
mastering complexity, and devices with billions of electronic components have
been manufactured. In order to build ever-more-complex molecular devices, one
needs to borrow the concepts that enabled the success of computer engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit. If successful, this project will
transform the frontiers of understanding about what possible behaviors a network
of interacting molecules can exhibit and how one can rationally design such
behaviors. In particular, the project will seek answers for the following
questions: (1) How can spatial organization improve the performance of molecular
circuitry and machinery? Inspired by spatial organization in biology such as
neural wiring and scaffold proteins, the project will develop molecular systems
that are spatially organized on the surface of DNA nanostructures, to build
faster and more reliable biochemical circuits, efficient molecular Turing
machines, and DNA cellular automata with complex spatial and temporal behaviors.
(2) How can the brain-like principle of learning from examples be embedded
within a network of interacting molecules? Inspired by the learning and memory-
forming rules in the brain, the project will explore simple and efficient
learning algorithms to create synthetic DNA neural networks that learn from
their biochemical environment and recall patterns of biochemical signals. (3)
How can sophisticated collective behaviors arise from simple individual
behaviors of molecular motors? Inspired by collective behaviors in animals, such
as ant foraging and termite clustering, the project will build molecular robots
that have simple functions as individuals but as groups perform complex tasks
such as cargo sorting and maze solving.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact.
This project will bring computer science into areas of molecular sciences in a
way that is fundamentally different from the existing approaches in
computational biology and bioinformatics: it is not just about using computer
algorithms and programs to aid the design and analysis of molecular systems, but
it is more about adapting the principles of computer science to create
biochemical systems that can carry out instructions to perform tasks at the
molecular level. If successful, this project will help extend computer science
from the traditional electronic substrates to new molecular substrates that can
execute new biologically-inspired algorithms, and create new frontiers in
chemistry and biomedical sciences with potential solutions to smart autonomous
chemical synthesis and complex disease diagnostics and therapeutics. The project
will contribute to education and educator development by designing innovative
courses, providing students and postdocs with teaching and mentoring
experiences, supporting undergraduate research and student competitions,
creating a highly interdisciplinary research environment, and involving more
women in science. This project will also increase public engagement with science
and technology by developing open-source software tools, producing research
videos on YouTube, giving open lectures, and interviewing for science TV series.