* 1351462
* CAREER: Nature's Mix and Match: Designing Omniphobic Surfaces with Multi-Functional Characteristics
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2021
* Tak Sing Wong, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 04/30/2021
* USD 461,739.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant provides funding for the
design and development of a new class of biologically inspired liquid-repellent
materials with multi-functional characteristics. The blueprints of these bio-
inspired materials is based on the surface engineering principles of multiple
natural species, including but not limited to the lotus leaf, butterfly, Tokay
gecko, beetle, springtail, and the pitcher plant. Enabled by their surface
architectures at the micro and nanometer scales, many of these natural species
exhibit unique macroscopic wetting, adhesion, and optical properties. In
understanding these natural surface architectures, novel biologically inspired
materials engineered to have multi-functional capabilities will be developed
using advanced micro- and nanomanufacturing techniques. Combinations of
functions, such as directional liquid repellency, friction reduction, water
harvesting, as well as switchable wetting, adhesion, and optical
characteristics, are of particularly interest.

The results of this research will lead to the development of a new class of
multi-functional materials and surface coatings with various industrial and
medical applications, including but not limited to coatings for anti-biofouling,
anti-icing, friction reduction, camouflage, reversible adhesion, thermal
management, and fluid collection or separation. Through a "mix and match" of
various natural surface engineering mechanisms, these multi-functional materials
will further enrich the existing library of biologically inspired materials, in
which most of these materials are currently modeled after individual natural
species. The research will also contribute to the development of novel multi-
functional materials exhibiting interplay between wetting, adhesion, and optical
properties. Ultimately, the outcomes of this research will enhance the public
understanding of biologically inspired technology, as well as their importance
to technological advancement.