* 1351932
* CAREER:  Quantifying the Isotopic Signature of Nitrogen Oxides Emissions Sources
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2020
* Meredith Hastings, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 05/31/2020
* USD 764,095.00

This project focuses on developing a better understanding of the sources of
nitrogen oxide emissions to the atmosphere. Samples will be collected from
several key sources such as vehicles, biomass burning, and emissions generated
from soils. The fraction of isotopic nitrogen (15N) will be measured in each
sample. This will enable ?fingerprints? to be developed for each of the
important sources to the atmosphere. Being able to identify the contribution of
major sources of nitrogen oxides to the atmosphere has broad implications for
addressing environmental issues, such as the formation of smog and acid rain,
and for air quality modeling and decision making associated with source
reduction strategies. This research will be integrated with a multi-faceted
education program to increase the participation of minorities in science
research.

A new method has been developed to enable the measurement of nitrogen oxides
(NOx) without having the samples subject to fractionation upon collection. The
method uses a solution of NaOH with KMnO4 that reacts with both NO and NO2 in
the gas phase yielding nitrate in solution. The method has been tested in the
PI?s laboratory and found to have a good level of reproducibility based upon
repeated measures of standards and samples. A field deployable system is being
developed by pairing this technique with a method to determine the fraction of
isotopic 15N of the NOx. The resulting characterization of NOx sources will
enable tracing the sources of NOx for studies ranging from urban pollution to
nitrogen fertilization in ecosystems.