* 1351531
* CAREER: Artificial Cell Membranes for Ultra-Pure, High Throughput Cellular Isolation
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2014,01/31/2020
* Brad Berron, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 01/31/2020
* USD 422,512.00

CBET-1351531 Berron

Cell-based therapies, where cells are transplanted to naturally restore
biological function, represent an exciting future biomedical application.
Critically, current techniques for high-purity cell sorting are time-intensive
processes which lack the speed to satisfy the emerging widespread need for
purified cells in research. The PI recently discovered a rapid cell isolation
method in which batch size is virtually unlimited and nonspecific cells are
undetected. The developed technology, Antigen Specific Lysis (ASL), selectively
coats targeted cells in a temporary protective membrane, then destroys all
uncoated cells to yield viable, purified cells. The proposed work will
investigate fundamental mechanisms and relationships governing ASL in cellular
isolation. This career development plan provides the foundation for a long term
research program in the development ASL for the high speed isolation of rare
biological products which yields a high-purity isolate from poorly-expressed
markers. This research explores fundamental questions of cellular protection,
and applies these findings to a cellular isolation technique which has the
potential to reduce the presence of non-targeted cells to undetectable levels
while sorting at exceptionally high rates.

Bioseparations will play a critical role in the future of the US economy, yet
many postsecondary institutions lack sufficient staffing and expertise to offer
these courses. A distance learning Bioseparations course will be developed to
reach geographically disparate institutions, enabling a robust offering of
Bioseparations materials to students several hundreds of miles away. This course
will serve as a platform to probe the limits of collaborative learning
techniques in distance learning environments. A significant limitation to
Bioseparations education is a lack of online learning tools. ASL is built upon a
foundation of diverse Bioseparations principles (e.g. lysis, filtration,
sedimentation, adsorption), and this career development plan uses ASL as the
centerpiece to online Bioseparations screencasts - short educational videos.
These videos are popular among students, yet are currently limited in Chemical
Engineering to core courses. The developed screencasts will be disseminated in
collaboration with the NSF-funded, LearnChemE.com site, where the existing
screencasts have had 1.6 million views in the last 12 months. Further, the
screencasts will be critiqued and edited by the LearnChemE.com team, ensuring
the highest quality educational products.