* 1351303
* CAREER: Geophysical Flow control
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2020
* Michele Guala, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2020
* USD 408,180.00

PI: Guala, Michelle&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1351303&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
focus of this CAREER project is to use concepts from passive/active flow control
from the field of aerodynamics in order to control flow-surface interactions at
the geophysical scale. The large characteristic scales of natural landscapes are
found to overlap with the very large scale structures of the turbulent flow that
continuously reshape the confining landscape (such as flow of rivers, ocean
streams, or wind). The PI proposes to explore the relationship between the large
scales of turbulent flows and the evolution of an erodible topography, and then
to use this knowledge along with flow control concepts to shape natural
topography, introducing the concept of Geophysical Flow Control
(GFC).&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;Flow control has been extensively
used in aeronautics to control laminar to turbulent flow transition on airfoils,
or to alter the structure of turbulent boundary layers through perturbations of
the boundary conditions. In many geophysical flows, the observed large scale
patterns result from flow instabilities somewhat different from those governing
turbulent wall-bounded flows. The PI proposes to extend the flow control
approach to the case of meandering flows in natural or built environments,
aiming at achieving specific flow or topographic patterns. By identifying the
intrinsic instabilities of a natural dynamical system and by understanding their
governing mechanism one can selectively dampen these instabilities and control
their effects. Geophysical flow control will be validated through specific
benchmark experiments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Successful completion of the project will enable
the control of the formation and evolution of meandering patterns affecting the
economy of entire communities in coastal or fluvial environments. Fundamental
knowledge generated through this project can affect river and estuarine
restoration projects, as well as the process of harnessing energy in river flows
with the deployment of marine hydrokinetic turbines at the appropriate
locations. &lt;br/&gt;The educational plan is to construct a movable GFC
demonstration model that can be used, for example, at the Minnesota Stare Fair
or in K-12 tours. It also includes the establishment of an open competition for
a remotely-controlled experiment and a virtual field experiment. The ongoing
outreach activities at St. Anthony Falls Laboratory at the University of
Minnesota will be utilized to bring exposure of the educational activities of
the project to students and the public.