* 1351455
* CAREER:  A Single Shot Camera Capturing Ultrafast Dynamic Phenomena
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2019
* Ki-Yong Kim, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 06/30/2019
* USD 400,000.00

This research is focused on developing new methodologies for ultrafast imaging.
In particular, it will contribute to a new development of ultrafast optical and
X-ray cameras capable of providing molecular movies with unprecedented spatial
and temporal resolution. This will greatly advance ultrafast optical science in
single-molecule imaging, light-matter interaction, and inertial confinement
fusion. The project also includes educational activities such as developing a
summer/winter short course in optical science for undergraduate and graduate
students, as well as training one graduate and two undergraduate and/or local
high school students per year in the PI's laboratory. The research also includes
extensive educational activities for students in individual and collaborative
research settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Conventional pump-probe methods can
routinely provide ultrafast time-resolved imaging, but they mostly work for
highly repeatable events. However, if event-to-event reproducibility is
irregular or involves material damage, irreversible chemical reactions, and/or
structural phase transition, single-shot detection is a necessity. The project
here is to develop a single-shot camera capable of capturing ultrafast dynamic
images, simultaneously recording spatial (2-dimensional) and temporal evolutions
in a single-shot. Such a camera can capture images at a frame rate of ~50
trillion frames per second, recording 3 ~ 60 frames in a single-shot. Here, the
enabling technologies include ultra-broadband spectrum generation, ultrafast
optical pulse shaping, and single-shot hyperspectral imaging. This kind of
camera can be potentially used in material characterization, biomedical imaging,
bio-sensors, and optical and plasma diagnostics. In particular, its application
in X-ray free electron lasers will lead to ultrashort electron beam imaging and
characterization.