* 1351430
* CAREER: Graphene-enabled Synthesis and Surface Modification of Water Separation Membranes
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2014,12/31/2015
* Baoxia Mi, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 12/31/2015
* USD 400,000.00

1351430&lt;br/&gt;Mi&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposed project is designed to
examine a relatively new material, graphene oxide nanomaterial's (GO), as a
possible solution to desalination and for purifying impaired waters. By impaired
waters, it refers to waters that may be contaminated with anthropogenic (made by
people) chemicals. Graphene oxide membranes are thought to increase the rate at
which water permeates (goes through) the membrane. This means that salt
rejection is more controlled by pore size that semi-permeable membranes that are
presently used in desalination. Nanomaterials are an extremely active area of
research and they hold out the promise of revolutionizing many fields of science
and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
will:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(1) for the first time experimentally characterize
aqueous-phase water transport through GO nanochannels, thereby filling the gap
of our knowledge about the use of GO nanomaterials for highly efficient water
separation;&lt;br/&gt;(2) offer novel routes to the synthesis and surface
modification of water separation membranes; and &lt;br/&gt;(3) fundamentally
elucidate the transport and photocatalytic mechanisms for the removal of
targeted water contaminants by GO-enabled membranes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed strategies for GO-based membrane synthesis and surface modification are
facile, highly scalable, and potentially become a standard for the incorporation
of GO into various membrane materials. Once these membranes are better
understood, they will find widespread applications such as point-of-use water
purification, on-site treatment of hydrofracking flowback water, renewable
energy production, and drug delivery and artificial organ
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To help to disseminate that findings of this
research the education plan will emphasize &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(1) recruiting
underrepresented groups to promote greater diversity in the environmental
workforce, and &lt;br/&gt;(2) participating in public exhibitions to raise
environmental awareness among a much wider audience. The adopted active learning
pedagogy has the potential to transform engineering sustainability education.