* 1351424
* CAREER: Graphene-based Ultra-responsive Photo-sensing Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2019
* Swastik Kar, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Ruyan Guo
* 12/31/2019
* USD 400,000.00

The objective of this research is to investigate how the unique electronic
properties of graphene impacts the nature of photo-induced carrier injection,
transport and recombination at heterojunctions of graphene with a range of
semiconductors and nanomaterials; and to potentially harness these mechanisms
for various advanced optoelectronic applications. The approach will be to study
photo-absorption, photocurrent, and photoluminescence spectroscopy at junctions
of graphene with materials such as silicon, zinc oxide, molybdenum disulphide,
and bismuth selenide at different photon energies, doping levels, and gate
voltages.

Intellectual Merit: Photo-induced carriers injected across a heterojunction into
graphene demonstrate a number of unusual and intellectually stimulating
properties. A comprehensive investigation of these carrier dynamics will lead to
rich new physical insights related to the nature of injection/recombination
across atomically thin interfaces, and its interplay with ultrafast mobility and
constrained density of states in graphene. A variety of junctions will be
investigated, and the engineering knowledge thus acquired will be utilized to
develop a range of exceptionally sensitive photo-switching, photo-harvesting,
photometry, imaging, and spectrometric applications.

Broader Impact: The proposed research and education program can potentially
result in transformative changes in imaging, detection, analysis, communication
and energy-harvesting technologies. It will create exceptionally skilled
graduate and undergraduate students qualified to pursue both academic and
industrial careers in some of the most topically impactful research areas. Local
high-school students and teachers will be exposed to world-class, research-
based, learning-enhanced and career-catalyzing education. Traditionally under-
represented communities will be proactively integrated into a stimulating
environment of research and education in STEM fields.