* 1351363
* CAREER: Agent-based Modeling of Action Potential Initiation and Propagation in Unmyelinated Neurons
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2021
* Georgios Lykotrafitis, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 03/31/2021
* USD 479,674.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program
award is to reveal the spatial organization of voltage-gated sodium and
potassium channels in the unmyelinated axon of a living neuron at the nanometer
scale and to investigate how the spatial arrangement of these channels
determines the properties of the action potential. Atomic force microscopy
combined with toxin pharmacology will be employed for ion channel detection. For
each type of ion channel, the axon of a rat hippocampal neuron will be scanned
with a cantilever tip functionalized with the corresponding specific toxin under
normal conditions. By using electrophysiology, the effect of cortical
cytoskeleton disruption on the initiation and propagation of the action
potential will be measured. To understand how the spatial organization of ion
channels determines the action potential properties, coarse-grain molecular
dynamics and electrochemistry, within the framework of agent-based modeling,
will be used.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Successful completion of this project will
open new avenues in quantitatively understanding the biomechanical basis of the
action potential. The introduction of agent-based modeling as a general
framework for simulating the connection between biochemistry and cell function
will allow for modeling of dynamic behaviors of cells such as cell motility and
response to signaling. The educational program includes the development of a
graduate course on agent-based modeling with emphasis on cell mechanics and the
incorporation of atomic force microscopy in an undergraduate class of
experimental techniques in mechanical engineering. An informal group will be
established to promote cross-disciplinary interaction between researchers and
students interested in neuronal mechanics. Computational and experimental
projects stemming from this award will be incorporated in the School of
Engineering Diversity Program to promote engineering and science among high
school teachers and students, including underrepresented minority students from
local high schools.