* 1351156
* CAREER:Investigating Co-Curricular Participation of Students Underrepresented in Engineering
* ENG,EEC
* 07/01/2014,04/30/2019
* Denise Simmons, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Paige Smith
* 04/30/2019
* USD 451,768.00

The objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program award is
to investigate how engineering students decide to participate or not participate
in co-curricular activities and how these students perceive the impact of
various types of co-curricular activities on their persistence, learning and
entry into the workforce (or career) and what interventions encourage co-
curricular involvement. This project is aligned with two of the National Science
Foundation's (NSF) strategic performance goals: prepare and engage a diverse
STEM workforce motivated to participate at the frontiers (T-2) and build the
capacity of the nation's citizenry for addressing societal challenges through
science and engineering (I-2).&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project uses existing
NSF-funded instruments to develop, test and distribute a new survey instrument;
collect and analyze quantitative and qualitative data on co-curricular
involvement, persistence and learning outcomes that can be leveraged to guide
institutional policies and programs and to design effective innovations to
retain diverse students in engineering that progress to the workforce; apply
research findings to design, pilot test and evaluate an innovative, evidence-
based intervention constructed to enhance student persistence and learning and
to inform institutional policies and practices on retention; and collaborate
with institutional programs and national professional organizations to expand
and scale up the intervention and disseminate results of the project.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project advances the understanding of engineering students'
pathways to include those traditionally underrepresented in engineering;
methodologically contributes to informal learning of engineering students;
shapes future research and development related to these populations; and informs
research communities, policymakers, and institution leaders. Research on the
student experience is essential to transforming engineering education, which
will result in broader participation of underrepresented groups in engineering.