* 1351413
* CAREER:Nutrients and Energy-rich Macromolecules Recovery from Microalgae using Subcritical Water
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2014,06/30/2019
* Sandeep Kumar, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 06/30/2019
* USD 490,751.00

1351413&lt;br/&gt;Kumar&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this CAREER research/educational
project, the PI will utilize subcritical water for both extracting the energy-
rich macromolecules and for recovering the minerals. The project is expected the
address both of the challenges currently faced by algae biofuels. In the first
step, PI will utilize flash hydrolysis (FH) to recover proteins, carbohydrates,
lipids. In the second step, the PI will utilize hydrothermal mineralization
(HTM) to recover inorganic nutrients for recycling. The proposed process has
potential of recovering more than two-thirds of macronutrients using geo-mimetic
precipitation method, while producing biofuel intermediate species. These
nutrients include P, N, and inorganic solids. The FH process has the advantage
of being able to disrupt algal cell walls without changing the functionality of
the cell components such as lipids. The recovered nutrients will be utilized as
slow-release fertilizer for algae cultivation. An array of characterization
methods will be utilized for understanding the effects of algae productivity,
and the efficacy of the recycled nutrients. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Selective FH
of algae proteins within a few seconds without the use of any added chemicals is
a new concept. The project will examine FH of model proteins to derive a
fundamental understanding of reaction pathways, intermediate compounds, and
interactions of macromolecules under fast reaction conditions. This will extend
our knowledge of conversion of organic matters in hydrothermal medium. The
proposed nutrients recovery using HTM mimics natural geological process of
minerals precipitation in aqueous medium. The integration of HTM with FH is a
novel concept considering that no additional heating or pressurization will be
required. A new knowledge will be developed by studying the mineralization and
precipitation of dissolved ionic species (extracted from algae during FH) in
hydrothermal medium to recover nutrients. The additional benefits include
production of biofuel intermediates while reducing NOx
emissions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to educating graduate and
undergraduate students, the project calls for K-12 and community outreach and
involvement of underrepresented/minority groups. The outreach program is
supplemented and enhanced by laboratory experiences. The PI also aims to
introduce a freshman level class of environmental sustainability, exposing
students to the importance and career possibilities in this topic area.