* 1351647
* CAREER: Collision Prediction and Vehicular Control Using an Episode-Based Modeling Framework
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2020
* Samer Hamdar, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Yueyue Fan
* 05/31/2020
* USD 447,998.00

The objective of the Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) program award is
to explore mechanisms for predicting freeway vehicle-to-vehicle collisions and
specifying the pre and post-collision maneuvers to improve traffic mobility and
safety. This research utilizes concepts from the fields of economics,
psychology, and engineering to specify performance measures for traffic system
evaluation. In order to realize the research objective, the acceleration and
lane-changing driving behaviors that lead to freeway vehicle-to-vehicle
collisions will be modeled. A stochastic episode-based framework will be adopted
where the driving experience is represented by a series of episodes. Within each
episode, a driver accelerates/decelerates in order to maximize his/her
preferences and this is represented by a subjective utility function. This
function captures risky behavior and collisions. Once collisions occur, another
function representing vehicle dynamics will be used to capture the vehicular
post-collision movements. The resulting model that integrates the driver's
preferences along with vehicle dynamics will be calibrated in real-time using
data collected through an instrumented vehicle, a 3-D driving simulator, and a
virtual laboratory environment. A simulation tool will be developed to test
different pre and post-collision maneuvers that potentially lead to safer and
more efficient freeway traffic networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the
research will help in the development of different passive and active driving
assistance systems. The objective of these systems will be to increase driver's
responsiveness and to provide a safer driving environment especially for younger
drivers. For this reason, high-school and university students in the Greater
Washington Metropolitan Area will be involved in the data-collection and
educational activities. Traffic safety workshops will be organized. A virtual
interactive 3-D environment will be utilized in these workshops while
collaborating with local agencies including the National Children's Museum.