* 1351528
* EAGER: Framework for Exposure of Government and Scientific Data
* CSE,OAC
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2014
* Golam Choudhury, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Chadduck
* 08/31/2014
* USD 100,283.00

The PI is proposing work that will begin with a consideration of government data
but will be extended through the Research Data Alliance (RDA) thereby bolstering
the prospects of a common set of data models, APIs and registries for both
government and scientific data. Given the global connections of RDA,the proposed
work offers the potential to advance common data infrastructure even beyond the
US landscape. Johns Hopkins University will develop a set of implementation-
independent data models and application programming interface (API)
specifications to support semantically useful sharing and machine action over
metadata aggregated from heterogeneous data sources. Support for aligning and
reasoning over common concepts within these data will be provided through a
system of types and properties (fields, concepts, etc.) associated with these
types. The initial specification will include a type (and associated properties)
that defines a set of core metadata to which participating data providers can
map each registered dataset. Allowing multiple types will support extending
these core properties and permitting each metadata record to enumerate the set
of types to which it conforms. Properties may describe high-level attributes of
a dataset and more detailed features. The PI and his team will develop and
clarify the initial set of core metadata and to develop an exemplar set of
extension types. Intellectual Merit : Seamless and effortless transfer of
government and research data across time, geographies, and scientific domains is
a difficult problem and this small and admittedly risky project can only hope to
provide one piece of the puzzle, but the potential rewards of success are
significant and well worth pursuing. Broader Impacts: The proposed work would
address a range of diverse data types from government and scientific sources,
making them generally available for adoption without encumbrance. The
coordination of outreach and adoption through the Research Data Alliance would
amplify the results of this proposed to a wide range of communities, data
producers and data consumers. Additionally, since the proposal team works within
a research library, there is a natural venue for outreach to a community that
provides capacity for additional outreach, adoption and sustainability. Finally,
it is worth noting that one of the team members (DiLauro) is African-American.