* 1351591
* CAREER: A Performance-Based Multi-Objective Optimization Framework to Define Innovative Structural Concepts and Support the Seismic Design of Critical Buildings
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2014,09/30/2020
* Gordon Warn, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Caglar Oskay
* 09/30/2020
* USD 400,000.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) program
award is to integrate performance-based design and multi-objective optimization
into a single computational framework to support the seismic design of critical
buildings. The emphasis is placed on critical buildings, such as acute care
hospitals and emergency response centers, because these buildings play a key
role in a community's response to an earthquake event and subsequent recovery.
Disruption to the functionality of these buildings can have cascading effects
resulting in significant societal losses. Although the focus here is on the
seismic design of critical buildings, the integrated framework developed will be
adaptable to all types of buildings and various natural hazards. Performance-
based seismic design (PBSD) provides decision variables for post-event
functionality or economic loss. However, the PBSD process is likely to lead to a
satisfactory but not necessarily optimal design solution. Furthermore, the
heuristic nature of the PBSD process does not provide understanding of the
tradeoffs of robustness and cost-effectiveness. This research will pursue an
integrated computational framework that simultaneously identifies innovative
structural concepts and tradeoffs between conflicting design objectives to
support decision-making.

The study will develop a computational framework that integrates probabilistic
seismic performance assessment methodology and multi-objective algorithms. The
integrated framework will be tested and validated in three phases. Each phase
involves an increased level of mathematical modeling and computational
complexity. In conjunction with the second phase, an improved hospital
functionality model will be developed and incorporated into the framework to
gain insights about how physical damage affects functionality and to identify
innovative seismic protective system concepts that maximize post-event
functionality while balancing conflicting design objectives, such as minimizing
building cost. Following the third phase, a global variance-based sensitivity
analysis will be performed on the integrated performance-based multi-objective
optimization framework to understand how uncertainties in model factors
propagate through the framework. The integrated educational activities are
designed to address the need for understanding how to engineer complex systems
at all levels of education. These activities include various techniques to
reveal tradeoffs between conflicting objectives and techniques to identify
balanced multiple conflicting objectives. The educational activities target
groups ranging from K-12 students to K-12 educators to doctoral students and
have been designed around engineering problems appropriate for each educational
level.