* 1351646
* CAREER: Stable Carbenes as Surface Anchoring Groups
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2019
* Jeremiah Johnson, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 05/31/2019
* USD 571,397.00

Professor Jeremiah A. Johnson at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology is
supported by an award from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Program to chemically modify the surfaces of several-nanometer-sized particles
(nanoparticles) in order to make them more useful for different functions. A
broad range of modern technologies, e.g., electronics, diagnostic systems,
sensors, drug delivery agents, etc., rely on controlled, robust coating of the
nanoparticle surface with layers of molecules that will react in particular ways
with other molecules; this is called surface functionalization. It is quite
surprising that chemical methods for surface functionalization are relatively
few in number, involving only a handful of reactions for most applications, and
each of these methods has limitations. As a result, new approaches to produce
and use single layers of functional monolayers could drastically impact a wide
range of technologies. The research in this project focuses on the development
of particular carbene families (reactive carbon compounds) as a new way of
making single-layer surface modifications of nanoparticles. This carbene
chemistry offers a potentially ideal combination of strong surface bonding and
synthetic versatility with the potential to be the ideal platform for different
modern nanoparticle technologies. The research encompasses fundamental studies
of NHC-layer formation, as well as applications of this technology to
electronics and drug delivery. This CAREER proposal research is being integrated
with an outreach program focused on the development of a Nanoscience Day and
science fair at an elementary and high school. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal seeks to develop addressable N-heterocyclic carbenes (ANHCs) as
versatile ligands for the fabrication of novel metal-organic interfaces. This
goal is being pursued through three research thrusts: (1) a library of ANHCs
with varied steric bulk and reactivity is being synthesized and studied in the
context of film formation on various substrates; (2) the scope of surface-
initiated polymerization from ANHC surfaces is being expanded to include a
variety of semiconducting polymers and other polymeric nanostructures; (3) the
electronic properties of bis-NHCs and metal-organic ANHC wires is being studied
using the scanning tunneling microscopy break junction (STMBJ) technique. The
synthetic diversity of the proposed ANHCs, the ability to form ANHC monolayers
on a wide array of substrates and subsequently functionalize those monolayers,
and the potential to form conductive ANHC-metal interfaces makes the proposed
research a platform technology for a variety of surface modification
applications. Furthermore, the results of this research are being integrated
with a comprehensive education plan that includes course development within MIT
and extramural graduate, undergraduate, high school, and elementary education.