* 1351049
* CAREER: Microscopy Image Analysis to Aid Biological Discovery: Optics, Algorithms, and Community
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2014,03/31/2020
* Zhaozheng Yin, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 03/31/2020
* USD 369,867.00

This project develops image analysis algorithms and systems to process
microscopy images that record the proliferation history of biological specimens
and evaluate their behaviors that respond to different culturing conditions,
therefore, deciphering complex biological processes and accelerating the advance
of biological discovery. The research combines techniques of physical optics,
computer vision and crowdsourcing to bring a breakthrough to microscopy imaging
and microscopy image analysis. The developments of such technologies transform
the image-based biology research from subjective to a rigorous, quantitative,
and efficient manner. The research team also seeks to promote interdisciplinary
collaboration between biological imaging and computer vision, integrate the
research outcomes into education activities, and disseminate the project to a
wide audience via web, K-12 group, conferences and industry collaborations.

Previous microscopy image analysis methods do not consider the particular image
formation process and treat them in the same manner as general natural images,
causing many difficulties or failures in the image analysis. This project
addresses the challenges in a principally different way by investigating the
theoretical foundation of microscopy optics. The computational imaging models of
microscopes are derived and used to restore artifact-free images and extract
optics-oriented image features, which makes the automated image analysis
fundamentally correct and easy. The models are further used to enhance the
microscope's functionalities including calibration and virtual microscopy. A
cyber-enabled research community is being established within which active
learning and crowd-computing are leveraged to improve the algorithm performance
and biological discovery.

Updates are available from http://web.mst.edu/~yinz/.