* 1351389
* CAREER: THz active metamaterials employing thin-film semiconductors
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2019
* Berardi Sensale-Rodriguez, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 12/31/2019
* USD 400,000.00

Objective: The objective of this program is to provide a solid foundation for
the PI's long-term research goal of developing active solid-state terahertz
devices that can be employed in compact, low cost communication and imaging
systems. Based on the enhanced light-matter interaction in thin-film
semiconductor-based metamaterials, this proposal aims to develop devices for: a)
terahertz beam steering, based on the linear properties of these materials, and
b) terahertz generation via mixing and/or higher harmonic generation, based on
the materials nonlinearities, thereby targeting two of the central limitations
in existing terahertz technology. &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The
intellectual merit is to foster the development of novel terahertz
optoelectronic devices, which can form the basis for a wide range of
applications. Moreover, these studies are expected to improve the current
understanding about the terahertz properties of two thin-film semiconductors:
vanadium dioxide and graphene, especially in terms of their non-linear
properties. Since both materials can be built on arbitrary substrates, their low
cost is expected to lead to market applications. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The
broader impacts are to create some of the components necessary to make complex
terahertz systems and to make these more readily available. It is expected that
the developed technologies will be transformative to a broad range of scientific
and application-oriented communities. Moreover, undergraduate and graduate
students will be trained in the emergent fields of terahertz and nanomaterials,
and they are an integral element of the designed outreach activities to
disseminate the new discoveries to the general audience, school teachers and
students.