* 1351184
* CAREER: Rheology, Stability, and Sudden Collapse of Colloidal Gels: A Micromechanical Study
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2014,11/30/2017
* Roseanna Zia, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 11/30/2017
* USD 410,000.00

PI: Zia, Roseanna N. Proposal Number: 1351184

The goal of this CAREER proposal is to develop a predictive theory for gel
stability by discovering and elucidating the underlying mechanisms of the sudden
collapse of colloidal gels. Such research is important for the rational design
of soft biomaterials, such as injectable drug delivery platforms and
transplantable tissue scaffolds to patients whose body cannot generate such
tissue. The development of such theory is potentially transformative, because it
would establish qualitative understanding of gel collapse.

Injectable gels have emerged in the past decade as a premier tool in tissue
engineering and drug delivery due to their biocompatibility, tunability to
different therapeutic moieties, and minimally invasive delivery. However, such
gels are susceptible to sudden failure ? without warning the scaffold collapses
into a dense, structureless sediment. In that case, the transport of active
compounds is dramatically curtailed, and the scaffold-like structural support is
lost. It is not currently possible to predict gel collapse owing to the
difficulty of detailed observation of collapse, the computational expense of
simulating large-scale gel evolution, and limited theory of arrested colloidal
dynamics. This study will create a window through which to view, in exacting
detail of particle and network rearrangements, the real-time collapse, as it
occurs. This will yield a phase map that, for the first time, predicts the
collapse and the characteristic length scale, age, attraction and underlying
forces that lead to collapse.