* 1351100
* CAREER: Routing for the Emerging Topologies of Modern Internet Services
* CSE,CNS
* 04/15/2014,07/31/2018
* Ethan Katz-Bassett, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 07/31/2018
* USD 503,963.00

The rise of streaming video, interactive applications, and smart phones has
transformed how we use the Internet. Providers such as Google, Netflix, Akamai,
and Amazon now supply much of the traffic, and they have adapted their serving
infrastructures and networks in an attempt to serve clients everywhere over
fast, reliable, high-bandwidth paths. To avoid relying on transit providers,
these content providers connect directly to client networks around the world
and, in some cases, even host servers in client or third-party networks.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite these changes, Internet traffic often follows
geographically circuitous routes, even though more direct ones exist. Partial
outages lasting hours-sometimes even days-occur with disturbing frequency. The
Internet's interdomain routing architecture makes it difficult to address these
problems, yet it has remained essentially unchanged for two decades, even in the
face of massive changes in the Internet's topology and how we use it. The design
gives poor visibility into what other ISPs are doing, provides no way to
coordinate routing decisions past immediate neighbors, and provides only limited
means for communication even between neighbors. Complicating matters, the
strategies pursued by content providers render their infrastructures,
interconnectivity, and routing largely invisible to traditional measurement
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: This research project will
develop deployable approaches to improve routing by improving inter-ISP
coordination. So that the approaches suit actual content providers, much of the
work will involve developing measurement techniques and conducting measurement
studies to discover providers serving infrastructures and topologies. This
project will make the following contributions: (1) Techniques to map the
distributed serving infrastructures of large content providers, and, using these
techniques, longitudinal studies of expansion and evolving serving strategies.
(2) Measurement platforms capable of uncovering the rich interconnections and
routing between content providers and other networks. (3) A testbed capable of
emulating an arbitrary ISP and connecting it to real ISPs around the world to
exchange routes and traffic. This testbed will enable realistic experiments that
can help overcome the current impasse. (4) Measurement studies to quantify
inefficiencies in current routing and characterize opportunities for improvement
made available by the distributed infrastructures and rich peering of the large
providers. (5) Methods for inter-ISP routing collaboration, focusing on what
visibility and control a content provider should give to client ISPs, while
balancing the dueling concerns of autonomy and
optimality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact: With the project's focus on
deployable solutions grounded in real measurements, providers will be able to
benefit from the approaches in order to understand problems affecting them and
realize opportunities for improvement. The measurements and measurement
platforms will be available to researchers, providing a novel view of important
aspects of today's Internet, spurring research. The ISP emulation testbed will
enable a new class of experiments. The project also has a significant education
component, including the design of graduate courses and course material on
Internet measurement and on Internet routing/content delivery, as well as
undergraduate projects that use the project's testbeds.