* 1351821
* CAREER: Design of Two-sided Markets In Dynamic and Uncertain Environments: Theoretical and Operational Issues
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2014,01/31/2019
* Mustafa Akan, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 01/31/2019
* USD 400,554.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program
award is to study the design of two-sided markets in dynamic and uncertain
settings. The population of agents in the system evolves over time due to
stochastic arrivals to both sides of the market. Agents report their preferences
upon entering the system, and either accept or reject match offers based on the
compatibility of preferences as well as value of future options. The primary
goal of this award is to design such marketplaces in an efficient way by taking
into account dynamic interaction, uncertainty and forward looking behavior of
agents. The research approach is to compute each agent's expected benefit from
remaining unmatched as a utility promise from the market designer under a given
policy, which will enable an algorithm for (dynamically) individually-rational
match offers. The algorithm will be generalized to the environment where agents
may not know their true preferences over matches before the match and there are
multiple matches generated on both sides. Further analysis will endow agents
with straightforward incentives for truthful behavior and consider the
possibility that a market designer learns about agent preferences by observing
their responses to match offers while the agents learn about the distribution of
available partners by observing the offers they get.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If
successful, the results of this research will lead to improvements in the layout
of markets where there is a need to match two-sided populations of agents such
as labor markets, organ transplant, child adoption, and foster care. The award
can provide modeling and analysis tools to maximize the efficiency of the
matching system and the welfare of its participants. The research is made
possible by combining tools developed both in matching/market design in
economics and those commonly used in operations. The mathematics developed will
also help train graduate and undergraduate students as well as contribute to an
ongoing private public partnership between Carnegie Mellon and Pennsylvania
Adoption Exchange (PAE).