* 1351980
* CAREER: High Density Bio-Compatible Electro-Fluidic Neural Interfaces for Mapping the Brain
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2018
* Shadi Dayeh, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 12/31/2018
* USD 400,000.00

Overview: &lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of this work is to develop compact, bio-
compatible, high sensitivity and high resolution neural interfaces utilizing a
new family of electro-fluidic capacitive probes. These probes will sense,
stimulate and inhibit action potentials, as well as provide the capacity to
deliver drugs in a highly targeted manner as well as monitor the physiological
response to the drug with unprecedented temporal and spatial resolution. The
proposed research entails semiconductor device processing, electrical modeling
and simulations, and both in-vitro and in-vivo physiological measurements.
Anticipated results will enable deeper understanding of neural functionality in
a large population of neurons, determine the scaling limits for neural probes,
and be integrated with educational, mentoring and outreach
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
program is motivated by the need to overcome technological challenges to
understanding the neurological processes by which humans perceive, act, learn
and remember, and in doing so make headway toward controlling some of these
processes such as limb movements. This requires development of electro-neural
interfaces with resolution that can probe at the single cell or sub-cellular
level in a network of a large population of neurons. The neural probes need also
to be biocompatible, stable, and possess reliable interfaces for durable
operation. This task can be best achieved with programmable and targeted
microfluidic drug delivery to mitigate the response of the immune system and
enhance the probes biocompatibility. Such functionality and resolution is not
met with any existing technologies. A new family of neural probes, electro-
fluidic capacitive probes, that can meet these requirements will be developed in
this program. These probes will utilize a new fabrication process for the
purpose of addressing individual 3D neural probes in a dense configuration. This
process adds, for the first time in the field of neural probe electrode arrays,
multiplexed and highly targeted drug delivery channels through each individual
neural probe site, thus enabling a novel and robust neurophysiology platform.
Such a platform will lead to new research directions in neurophysiology and new
technologies to improve patient care because: (1) The platform is scalable to
very dense arrays. (2) The probes are biocompatible because the sensing
mechanism relies on capacitive coupling and eliminates electrochemistry at the
electrode sites. (3) The multiplexed microfluidic drug delivery ports will help
reduce the response of the immune system to implanted electrodes, in contrast to
current approaches where biocompatible coatings are temporary and deplete with
time. (4) The microfluidic delivery channels will enable targeted drug delivery,
and potentially ion sensing, at dimensions that are comparable to neurite size
and synaptic distances for the first time. (5) The process is compatible with
silicon, allowing ease of integration with signal processing and conditioning
silicon circuits. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
project will enhance the research infrastructure through development of tools
that will have far reaching applicability in the areas of biosensing and
neuroprosthetic device development. The proposed platform will deliver new
insights into neuroscience and has direct relevance to the Brain Research though
Advancing Innovative Neurotechnologies (BRAIN Initiative) recently unveiled by
President Obama. The resulting devices will enable for the first time highly
localized electrical intervention and simultaneous targeted drug delivery that
are critical for realizing high fidelity neuroprosthetic devices. Also proposed
are plans to enhance graduate and undergraduate curricula in the
multidisciplinary area of medical devices by developing and teaching a new core
course, Medical Devices and Interfaces, that will include laboratory training
not currently available to UCSD graduate students. Through participation in
outreach programs coordinated by UCSD's Qualcomm Institute, the PI will mentor
and provide research experiences for high school students from underrepresented
groups. Active participation in ongoing diversity-promoting initiatives of
UCSD's Jacobs School of Engineering will enable the PI to provide research
experiences for undergraduate students during the academic year as well as the
summer throughout the award period.