* 1351201
* CAREER: Stochastic and Data Driven Approaches for Addressing Variabilities in Power Consumption and Generation of Smart Distribution System
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/2014,09/30/2020
* Sarika Solanki, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 09/30/2020
* USD 400,000.00

This project will develop new computer-based methods to model and predict
electricity distribution systems,&lt;br/&gt;so as to do a better job of handling
uncertainty, multiple time intervals, and the possibility of greater
&lt;br/&gt;penetration of plug-in hybrid (PHEV) and electric cars. PHEV are not
expect to cause major problems for the &lt;br/&gt;major transmission grids, but
they add major uncertainties and need for more flexibility at the level of
&lt;br/&gt;distribution companies. To address that challenge, the PI will
combine new work at the distribution level &lt;br/&gt;together with new
mathematical methods for coping with uncertainty and random disturbances. She
will also &lt;br/&gt;expand her ongoing efforts on behalf of West Virginia's
"Vision 2020" strategic plan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical
objective here is to identify stochastic models and develop controls for
improving short &lt;br/&gt;term and long term performance of smart distribution
systems. One often hears system stress, congestion &lt;br/&gt;and curtailment
with volatility in renewable generation and demand. Transitioning to a
sustainable energy &lt;br/&gt;future often results in complex and fast
aggregated generator and load dynamics, which may lead to &lt;br/&gt;severe
impact on distribution systems. This transition has forced power system
researchers to pay serious &lt;br/&gt;attention to their time varying
characteristics in a stochastic sense. This research has been facilitated by
&lt;br/&gt;the advances in stochastic control theory and recent boost in data
mining applications. The goal of the &lt;br/&gt;project is to develop a unified
framework of stochastic and data driven approaches by which these
&lt;br/&gt;variabilities can be identified, not by traditional approaches of
modeling and control but by generating &lt;br/&gt;scenarios available from
historical data and optimal predictive control design. The main question is
&lt;br/&gt;whether massive amount of time series data can be handled by the data
driven approaches to capture &lt;br/&gt;volatility and variability of generation
and demand. The PI will use knowledge and concepts from &lt;br/&gt;stochastic
theory, control theory, data mining, computational intelligence for a non-
conservative approach &lt;br/&gt;for smart distribution system optimization and
control.