* 1351456
* CAREER: Heterogeneous Delayed Networks: Data-based Design and Optimization of Connected Vehicle Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2019
* Gabor Orosz, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Rob Stone
* 06/30/2019
* USD 400,000.00

Connected vehicle technologies allow vehicles to share information with each
other through wireless communication interfaces. By enabling vehicles to share
information about their location and motion, such technologies have the
potential to revolutionize transportation on roadways, significantly reducing
traffic congestion, and reducing the number and severity of accidents. However,
currently there exist no design principles for connected vehicle systems that
take into account the differences in human behavior, vehicle features, and
wireless communication across the network. This Faculty Early Career Development
(CAREER) Program award supports fundamental research to provide a systematic
approach for designing and constructing connected vehicle systems of the future.
The scientific tools created will enable auto manufacturers to exploit vehicle-
to-vehicle communication to benefit customers while at the same time enhancing
the performance of large-scale transportation systems. This aligns with the
national interest in improving mobility and reducing energy consumption without
large investments in road-side infrastructure. The educational contribution is
to create a new generations of engineers who can apply system-level thinking to
solve the large-scale engineering problems of the 21st century. This will be
accomplished by integrating the research results into undergraduate and graduate
courses and by providing opportunities to underrepresented high-school students
to excel in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM)
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The penetration of vehicles equipped with wireless
communication is expected to grow significantly in the near future, increasing
the demand for data-based models for heterogeneous connected vehicle systems,
where heterogeneity originates from the differences in human behavior, vehicle
properties, and wireless communication across the network. This research is
addressing a knowledge gap related to the decomposition of the dynamics of
large, heterogeneous, infinite-dimensional networks and provides a systematic
way to design and optimize such systems. Modal equations that map the spatio-
temporal complexity into the time domain will be used to optimize the system-
level performance by designing the network structure and tuning the gains and
delays for the communication links while satisfying driver constraints. The
educational activities include the development of a new course on network
dynamics and control design and the initiation of a problem solving competition
in high-school physics that will provide an opportunity for underrepresented
minority students to increase their chances to enter and excel at the best
universities in the nation.