* 1351775
* Workshop on Advances in Tropical Dynamics; Honolulu, Hawaii; January 14-15, 2014
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2015
* David Randall, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 09/30/2015
* USD 21,435.00

This award provides support for a workshop on the Madden-Julian Oscillation
(MJO) to be held January 14-15 2014 at the East-West Center (EWC) at the
University of Hawaii. The MJO is an envelope of organized convection that
propagates from the Indian Ocean to the Pacific Ocean and constitutes the
dominant form of intraseasonal precipitation and atmospheric circulation
variability in the tropics. The MJO influences a variety of tropical weather and
climate phenomena,including tropical cyclones (affecting hurricanes in the Gulf
of Mexico), the onset and intraseasonal fluctuations of the monsoons and
rainfall over Asia, Australia, Africa, and the Americas, and the onset of El
Nino events. The goal of the workshop is to bring together the community of
researchers engaged in MJO research to summarize the progress and remaining
challenges in understanding the dynamics of the MJO, and to make plans for
future coordinated numerical simulation experiments. More specifically, workshop
participants will 1) discuss and synthesize recent theoretical, modeling, and
diagnostic breakthroughs related to tropical dynamics; 2) survey remaining
challenges and roadblocks to improving our understanding of tropical dynamics,
and discuss the optimal paths forward for the community to address such
challenges; and 3) update the status of the ongoing MJO aquaplanet
intercomparison effort. A published paper summarizing the the workshop and
"highlighting progress and future challenges" is an expected outcome of the
workshop. The EWC is chosen as the venue for the workshop due to the expectation
that about half of the workshop participants will come from Asia.

The funds provided through this award will support travel for about 10 graduate
students and 5 postdocs, to be chosen through an open competition. Thus, this
award will enable scientists at the earliest stages of their careers to meet and
interact with the worldwide community of MJO researchers, and enable them to see
cutting-edge results and research perspectives which may not be available to
them at home. Aside from the scientific broader impacts associated with
promoting international collaboration and supporting early-career scientists,
the work has societal value in that it will advance understanding of the MJO, a
phenomenon which has multiple societal impacts around the world.