* 1351146
* CAREER: Identifiability Optimization in Electrochemical Battery Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2014,05/31/2020
* Hosam Fathy, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 05/31/2020
* USD 400,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program award is to examine the
identifiability of electrochemical battery model parameters, defined as the
degree to which one can quickly, uniquely, and accurately determine these
parameters from experimental data. The research will build on previous research
by the PI in battery parameter identification. The first goal is to explore
different metrics for quantifying identifiability. The research will also
develop algorithms for estimating both the internal state variables (e.g.,
degree to which a given battery is full or empty) and parameters (e.g., degree
to which a battery is healthy or unhealthy) of lithium-ion batteries from
experimental data. Together, these two contributions will serve as foundations
for identifiability optimization. Critical information to be acquired in
identifiability optimization include: the type of of sensors to be install on a
lithium-ion battery to improve the detection speed and accuracy of its health
degradation and the type of laboratory cycling experiments that can yield the
greatest amount of information about battery model parameters with minimal time
and cost.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will have broader impact on multiple
societal stakeholders. Society at large will benefit from improvements in online
battery diagnostics enabled by improvements in battery parameter
identifiability. Battery experimentalists will be able to obtain more accurate
parameters from shorter, less expensive laboratory tests. The scientific
community will benefit from the efforts to bridge current gaps among
electrochemistry, online estimation, and optimal control literature. Finally,
the effort will focus on outreach and education activities including: (i) the
engagement of undergraduate students, especially women and underrepresented
minorities through Penn State University's Schreyer Honors College; (ii) the
creation of web-based courses in the areas of battery system dynamics and
control; (iii) the engagement of industrial partners through complementary
research efforts funded by agencies such as ARPA-E; and (iv) the creation of
battery-focused educational materials for K-12 STEM outreach.