* 1351978
* CAREER: Towards an accurate and illuminating theory of weak interactions between open-shell systems
* MPS,CHE
* 03/15/2014,02/29/2020
* Konrad Patkowski, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 02/29/2020
* USD 459,273.00

Konrad Patkowski of Auburn University is supported by the Chemical Theory,
Models, and Computational Methods program in the Chemistry division to develop a
new approach to computing noncovalent interaction energies between open-shell
systems - a multireference version of symmetry-adapted perturbation theory
(SAPT). The unique feature of SAPT is its combination of high accuracy and
interpretive power, the interaction energy is obtained as a sum of well-defined
contributions corresponding to electrostatics, exchange repulsion, induction,
and dispersion. Prof. Patkowski and his group extend the applicability of SAPT
to interacting systems with significant static correlation that cannot be
described by a single Slater determinant. The newly formulated methods are used
to compute and interpret interaction energies involving atmospheric radicals,
organic polyradicals, and small molecules adsorbed within metal organic
frameworks. The NSF EPSCoR office is also supporting this
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The knowledge of interaction energies between
molecules is critical for our understanding of molecular liquids and crystals,
atmospheric reactions, interstellar molecules, and the structure and function of
proteins. Similar interactions bind small molecules such as carbon dioxide in
the porous environment of metal organic frameworks. Prof. Patkowski and his
group develop new methods to compute interaction energies in a way that
elucidates the underlying physics of the interaction. The understanding gained
in this way helps design new frameworks that can be more effective in gas
separation, in particular, in removing carbon dioxide from flue and exhaust
gases so that it does not get released into the atmosphere. The new methods are
implemented in an open-source computer code that is freely available to other
researchers. In addition, Prof. Patkowski and his group are developing hands-on
computational chemistry modules within the framework of the Auburn University
Summer Science Institute, providing realistic research experience to gifted
high-school students and enhancing their awareness of the careers in science.