* 1351625
* CAREER: Connecting the Scales - Local to Global Scales of Mixing in Heterogeneous Porous Media
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2014,01/31/2020
* Diogo Bolster, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 01/31/2020
* USD 444,182.00

Mixing is the fundamental process that leads to the dilution of solutes and
brings chemical species into contact with one another. It is a key driver of
biogeochemical reactions in hydrologic systems. Flows through the Earth's
subsurface are by their nature complex due to the ubiquitous occurrence of
heterogeneity at multiple scales. At the millimeter scale the fluid must move
through complex porous architectures. At meter to kilometer scales heterogeneity
in the geologic makeup of an aquifer becomes important. Each of these
heterogeneities acts in such a way as to distort the shape of solute plumes,
which can have a strong influence on how quickly and where mixing will occur.
Since mixing strongly affects how substances dilute and react, a better
understanding of mixing is necessary to ultimately accurately predict movement
of both inert and reactive solutes. The overarching goal of this work is to
develop an improved theoretical framework of how heterogeneity affects mixing.
This will be done by computationally simulating flow and transport through a
variety of synthetic and realistic small-scale pore structures as well as larger
scale geologically heterogeneous configurations. Simultaneously, theoretical
descriptions of mixing, driven by observations from the computational
experiments, will be developed. Ultimately, to validate these theoretical
developments, the theory will be tested on data from previous laboratory
experiments that explore mixing and mixing-driven phenomena.

Despite our image of Earth as "the water planet," global supplies of
uncontaminated surface and groundwater are indispensable, yet fragile, natural
resources. Threats to freshwater supplies in the form of contamination must be
understood to assure sustainable supplies, as well as to guide effective
remediation and future development. However conventional models that do not
account for heterogeneity (i.e. the natural variability in the geologic makeup
of aquifers) are inadequate. For example, studies by the National Research
Council show that court-ordered remediation strategies can fail to adequately
remediate polluted sites 90% of the time. The models and novel theoretical
description provided by this work, incorporating the influence of heterogeneity,
will ultimately provide policy makers, legal authorities, stakeholders and
managers with improved tools to better design and assess remediation strategies
and protect current water resources. Additionally, to ensure the success of
approaches to making water use more sustainable, a broader understanding of
groundwater and contamination processes is needed by the general public. To this
end, exploiting novel advances in computer tablet technology, this project will
develop educational tablet 'apps' for hydrology education aimed at K-12 and the
general public. The work will be conducted in close collaboration with local
primary, middle and high school teachers. At the university level new courses on
flow, transport, mixing and reactions in heterogeneous subsurface environments
will be developed. This will include the development of openly shared online
video resources to aid in conveying complex phenomena in a tangible manner.