* 1351674
* CAREER: Decentralization and Parsimony for Implementable Control of Massively Interconnected Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/15/2014,01/31/2019
* Michael Rotkowitz, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 01/31/2019
* USD 400,000.00

Objective: The advent of complex interconnected systems has created a need to
design and analyze controllers that can observe information from only a small
portion of a network but may ultimately effect a large portion of the network.
This includes smart building management, multi-vehicle systems and convoys,
irrigation networks, large array telescopes, and the power distribution grid,
and is a key challenge in many problems with cyber-physical systems.
Conventional controls analysis assumes that one centralized decision-maker can
access all available measurements, and determine the usage of all possible means
of actuation. Most methods of design and analysis are extremely fragile to this
assumption, and break down when such centralization is not possible or is not
desired, leading to the field of decentralized control.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: There is currently an enormous
disconnect in decentralized control between the celebrated theoretical advances
and the concepts that are used for implementation, or even for computation. This
is true of both recent advances and more classical results. This project pursues
the key reasons for this disconnect, along with other impending barriers to the
systematic implementation of decentralized control theory, particularly those
which will become disabling when applied to massive systems. It undertakes
theoretical investigations targeted to advance the field in a manner from which
those barriers can be eliminated, along with much farther-reaching benefits,
further coupled with computational and algorithmic investigations designed to
parlay past and future advances into enabling technologies for sensitive
applications including those listed above. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: This project will produce a novel synthesis of the theory and methods
of parsimonious recovery, which has undergone dramatic recent developments, with
both the classical results and modern advances in decentralized control. It will
further broaden the applicability of elegant and useful aspects of optimization
theory to classes of problems that are paramount for the main scope of the
project. The fundamental advances pursued in optimization and estimation have
the potential to be of use much more broadly and to impact many other fields.
This project further seeks to make broad impacts outside of its primary domain
through collaborations with industry and with experimentalists, and through the
creation of software tools for widespread use by non-experts.