* 1351721
* CAREER: From the kitchen to the clouds: research and teaching on the emission and evolution of aerosols from household energy use by the global poor
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2014,10/31/2020
* Andrew Grieshop, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 10/31/2020
* USD 442,136.00

1351721 Grieshop

This project aims to help solve a challenging problem that impacts at scales
from personal to global: the human health and global climate impacts of indoor
biofuel use by the poor, nationally and internationally. This problem-oriented
research is inherently interdisciplinary and uses engineering, aerosol science,
education and outreach activities to achieve robust and sustainable outcomes.

The central question is: What do we need to know to constrain uncertainties in
the impacts of emissions from current and future biofuel burning practices, make
good decisions and avoid unexpected outcomes?

The following goals define the scope of the program: 1) Explore how combustion
conditions and atmospheric influences dictate the "aging" of aerosol emissions
from biofuel burning, and thus their effects on air quality and climate; 2)
Bridge lab and field measurements and develop currently lacking approaches to
simulate real-world emission and aging processes that control the net impacts of
various stove and fuel types; 3) Cooperatively develop and deploy a simple
approach to assess stoves in households during new technology roll-out, support
monitoring efforts and reduce uncertainty in large-scale emission estimates;
and, 4) Engage students from high school to graduate levels and international
partners in hands-on learning and research activities to develop skills,
excitement and interest in environmental engineering and science.

Primitive biofuel use for household energy has massive impacts on human health
and the global climate. Indoor biofuel use kills millions each year, and this
and other biomass burning are a dominant source of black carbon aerosols and
other species with strong impacts on the global climate system and regional air
quality worldwide, and possibly even the quality of sources of water used for
drinking water. Therefore, reducing emissions from household biofuel burning has
rightfully garnered recent attention as a means to provide both enormous global
health and climate benefits. However, the actual impacts of current practices
and improvements associated with "improved" stoves are both highly uncertain due
to limited scientific understanding and the complexities associated with actual
stove use and performance. Real-world biofuel burning emission rates and
characteristics are not recreated in the lab, hampering the development of
effective technologies. Fundamental scientific uncertainties stem from the
dynamic nature of biomass burning emissions, which continually evolve (That is
these emissions age with time and change in their composition) via complex
atmospheric chemistry. Aging of emissions forms secondary organic aerosols,
which may fully or partially counteract the warming impacts of the emitted BC
through direct (shortwave scattering) and indirect (cloud) climate effects.
Thus, aging may dictate the air quality impacts of biofuel burning emissions and
whether they have net warming or cooling climate effects.

This project endeavors to build fundamental understanding of biofuel combustion
emissions and how they evolve in the atmosphere, and will bridge the gap between
the laboratory and household settings. The resulting knowledge and tools will
support the activities of those developing and monitoring new stoves. Insights
into the aging of all biomass burning emissions and inputs into global and
regional models will be used to understand our current atmosphere and anticipate
the benefits or impacts of different development scenarios.

The results of this research will be widely disseminated via publications,
presentations at scientific meetings and other, less formal means. A key outcome
of the work will be the training of several undergraduate and graduate
environmental engineers, and giving them direct experience with the complex,
interdisciplinary questions associated with meeting the grand challenges of
universal energy provision and environmental sustainability.

In addition, this program will help build the links between my the University
and the Upward Bound program at North Carolina State University, and thus to
rural North Carolinian youth who aspire to be the first in their families to
earn college degrees. In the end, this project will have impacts far beyond the
lab and scholarly arenas by engaging high school students and international
implementation partners in the research.