* 1351745
* CAREER:   The Role of Iron and Reactive Oxygen Species in the Oxidation and Fate of DOM in Natural Waters
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2022
* Rose Cory, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Colene Haffke
* 07/31/2022
* USD 595,671.00

Title: The role of iron and reactive oxygen species in the oxidation and fate of
DOM in natural waters &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will determine the direct
and indirect roles of iron in both light and dark reactions involving DOM
degradation, and estimate the importance of iron in determining whether this
degradation will shunt C as DOM down rivers to oceans, or fully oxidize C to CO2
released to the atmosphere. The proposed work will advance our understanding of
the degradation of soil carbon exposed to oxygen or sunlight at Earth?s surface
during land-surface disturbances. This knowledge will allow scientists to better
predict the fate of C in arctic permafrost soils, and through an education and
outreach plan, will allow society to better prepare for the potential
acceleration of global warming through a positive feedback from the thawing
Arctic. To engage underrepresented students in science, the PI proposes to
expand the infrastructure of education through partnerships that will offer new
opportunities to enhance teaching and communication skills. The PI will develop
a curriculum in earth and environmental science integrated with her research,
grounded in core education principles, and mapped to assessment goals. A novel
contribution to curriculum development will be the combination of (1) education
modules that ?telescope? in age-context and difficulty from K-12 to
undergraduate to adult outreach levels, (2) data generation on student
engagement and learning through micro-assessments of performance, and (3)
enhanced active learning by iterative improvement of modules by students for
their own peer groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will be done in the
Alaskan Arctic because (1) the lakes, streams, and soil waters provide a natural
experimental matrix of both high and low light, oxygen, DOM and Fe
concentrations, and (2) there are tremendous stores of organic C in frozen soils
(at least twice the amount of C now in the atmosphere) which are rapidly thawing
from global warming. Using field surveys and experiments on natural waters to
test mechanistic hypotheses, the PI will answer two main research questions: (1)
Do reactions mediated by iron favor the complete oxidation of DOM to CO2 by
sunlight and microbes? (2) Is the iron-mediated oxidation of DOM in the dark an
important determinant of DOM fate?