* 1351935
* CAREER: Hierarchical self-assembly of photonic devices from patchy colloids: deciphering the reflectin-photonic alphabet
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2019
* Alison Sweeney, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Randy Duran
* 06/30/2019
* USD 500,000.00

Non-Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER Award by the
Biomaterials program in the Division of Materials Research, and co-funded by the
Nano-Biosensors Program in the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering,
Environmental and Transport Systems (ENG/CBET) to the University of
Pennsylvania, is to study the self-assembly of a class of proteins found in
molluscan animals. Mollusks are animals such as squids, octopuses, slugs, clams
and oysters. Many of these animals are strikingly iridescent, and this
iridescence is used for camouflage, for signaling, and in the case of giant
clams, for optimization of photosynthesis with symbiotic algae. This project
seeks to understand the evolution of these iridescent structures, and to
understand how their structures emerge from the proteins that make them. To do
this, the PI will use a unique combination of insights from oceanographic animal
collections, materials characterization techniques, and molecular dynamics
modeling. The hierarchically ordered complexity of these structures often far
exceeds the current capabilities of synthetic fabrication, so understanding how
animals make these optical materials will provide insight into fabrication of
materials with hierarchical length scales smaller than a micron. The education
and research activities of this project are well integrated with the PI playing
a leading role in developing an introductory physics for life sciences
curriculum (IPLS) which is a core need in the Department of Physics at UPenn.
Graduate students will receive highly interdisciplinary training in cutting-edge
materials characterization techniques as well as biochemistry and biological
field work. This award will also fund summer internship for high school students
in the Philadelphia public schools who have been identified as scientifically
talented via their participation in the University of Pennsylvania's summer
physics camp. The goal of these internships is to provide opportunities for
research experiences and practical knowledge that help make these students
competitive for admission to highly selective colleges and universities. The
ultimate goal is to be able increase the number of students interested in STEM
careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Molluscan animals such as squids, octopuses and
clams build an array of living optical devices of astounding optical/photonic
sophistication and complexity, such as structural camouflaging coatings, graded
index lenses, solar radiance distributors, and wavelength-specific light guides.
Unlike the iridescent structures in fish, butterflies and birds, the
"iridocytes" in molluscs are formed from still-living cells, with the high-index
portions generated by dense assemblies of protein in the active cytoplasm. These
optically resonant cells seem to be allowed more structural diversity than
systems in other taxa, and have evolved to solve a wider array of evolutionary
optical problems than in any other animal group, such as underwater vision,
emissive camouflage, reflective camouflage, and distribution of light for
efficient photosynthesis. Several new observations about reflectin proteins and
S-crystallins from squids show that "patchy colloids" is the most informative
theoretical paradigm for understanding assembly of these living photonic
systems. This project will use molecular dynamics modeling, structural
characterization, and oceanographic collection to describe whether and how the
constituent reflectin proteins making these living photonic systems self-
assemble into the observed biophotonic structures.