* 1351649
* Developmental Specification of a Polymodal Nociceptor in C. elegans
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Denise Ferkey, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Evan Balaban
* 07/31/2018
* USD 525,000.00

All animals rely on their ability to sense and respond to the environment to
survive. The perception of pain or noxious stimuli serves an important
protective function and causes animals to withdraw from or avoid potentially
damaging stimuli. There are still large gaps in our understanding of how the
nerve cells that detect noxious stimuli (nociceptors) develop. This project will
use the small roundworm, C. elegans, to discover the genes that contribute to
nociceptor development. The findings will benefit researchers working in
organisms ranging from invertebrates to humans. In particular, understanding the
developmental specification of nociceptive nerve cells may provide new ways to
manage aversion and pain across species. Graduate students and undergraduates,
including women and minority students, will participate in these studies. The
University at Buffalo (UB) is a very diverse campus, providing a great
opportunity to mentor minority students. Funds from this grant will support a
summer stipend for an undergraduate from a Liberal Arts College that does not
offer opportunities for undergraduate research. Providing early exposure to
hypothesis-driven research is essential for preparing students for careers in
the biological sciences. Students will present their findings at local regional
and international meetings. Findings from this work will be included in the
lectures for UB's undergraduate Developmental Biology course and will form the
basis for a special topics research course for graduate students.

The primary nociceptors in C. elegans are the two ASH head sensory neurons.
These neurons detect multiple forms of aversive stimuli. This project aims to
reveal the neuronal identity code of the ASHs in their native environment in
live animals. The proposed experiments will first define the role of the C.
elegans paired-like homeodomain transcription factor UNC-42 in the developmental
specification of the ASH nociceptive neurons. RNAi screening will then identify
the complete cohort of transcription factors required to establish ASH identity.
Transgenic animals resulting from this award will be deposited at the
Caenorhabditis Genetics Center, which will distribute them to any investigator
that requests them. New gene and phenotype descriptions will also be
incorporated into "Wormbase" http://www.wormbase.org/ ,an online open access
resource.