* 1351837
* CAREER:  Diagnosis of forced versus intrinsic low-frequency variability in high-resolution coupled climate models using geostrophic turbulence techniques
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2019
* Brian Arbic, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Baris Uz
* 05/31/2019
* USD 715,918.00

Overview: A long-standing question in climate dynamics is the extent to which
low-frequency climate variability is intrinsic versus forced. The climate system
exhibits variability over a vast range of time scales. Recent findings show that
eddy-resolving ocean models exhibit substantial inter-annual variability even
when such variability is absent in the atmospheric forcing. This result suggests
that intrinsic oceanic nonlinearities are nearly as important as atmospheric
forcing in maintaining low-frequency oceanic variability. Earlier work shows
that nonlinearities also drive some of the low-frequency variability in
atmospheric models. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The project
addresses an important question of climate science - whether low-frequency
variability is free or forced. The application of new tools will provide a
useful complement to other approaches used to answer this question. The proposed
work builds upon recent research by the principal investigator, in which
frequency - and frequency-wavenumber domain spectra, spectral transfers, and
spectral fluxes have been diagnosed from eddy-resolving ocean general
circulation models in realistic domains, from gridded satellite altimeter data,
and from idealized two-layer QG turbulence simulations driven by an imposed
baroclinically unstable mean flow. As with spectral transfers and fluxes in
wavenumber space, which have long been diagnosed in geostrophic turbulence
studies, the spectral transfers and fluxes in frequency space quantify the
relative contributions of forcing, nonlinearity, and other processes to the
budgets of energy and energy flux. In the idealized two-layer QG turbulence
simulations, nonlinearities are the largest terms in the maintenance of low-
frequency variance, with forcing and friction playing important but secondary
roles. The proposed work will extend this analysis to the oceanic and
atmospheric components of coupled climate models, run in both "stand-alone" and
fully coupled modes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project will
contribute to the quantification and understanding of low-frequency variability,
and increase understanding of eddy-resolving coupled climate models, which will
soon become widely used tools in climate prediction studies. The project
provides funding for a postdoctoral scientist to perform the realistic-domain
results, in collaboration with scientists at a leading national climate modeling
lab (NOAA/GFDL). The idealized model will be run and analyzed by a graduate
student, who has obtained support from an NSF graduate student fellowship.
Undergraduates will be integrated into the research, as the principal
investigator (PI) has been doing since 2006. Collaboration with the University
of Ghana will help to develop earth science capacity in a continent where this
capacity is severely lacking. The PI and three members of his group--a postdoc
of Ghanaian descent, and two U.S. graduate students--will visit the oceanography
department of the University of Ghana for two weeks each summer. At University
of Ghana, the PI will give lectures on physical oceanographic topics, and the
PI's postdoc and students will help Ghana oceanography students develop skills
such as using Matlab, using satellite altimeter products, and attaining
familiarity with ocean models. The project builds upon the PI's continuing
interest in the development of African science, engendered during his experience
as a Peace Corps volunteer teacher in Ghana, and is consistent with the
substantial investment of the PI's institution in Africa.