* 1351302
* CAREER: Engineered bioluminescent tools for visualizing metastatic disease
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2019
* Jennifer Prescher, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 06/30/2019
* USD 400,000.00

1351302&lt;br/&gt;Prescher, Jennifer &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Imaging technologies
have revolutionized our understanding of cancer progression by enabling
researchers to 'look' into cells and tissues and visualize biological features
in real time. While powerful, current imaging techniques are restricted in their
ability to analyze cell movements and interactions over large time and length
scales?processes crucial to metastatic disease. This NSF-CAREER application
proposes the development of new imaging probes for visualizing tumor spread in
vivo. The PI and her trainees will generate bioluminescent tools that produce
light only when two distinct cell types come into close proximity (e.g., when
tumor cells infiltrate distant tissues). Collectively, these tools will enable
global surveys of cancer spread and will provide some of the first noninvasive,
macroscopic views of metastases in preclinical models. The imaging probes will
also be implemented in two outreach activities, including a luminescence
screening laboratory (for undergraduates) and imaging demonstrations (for middle
school students). The PI's outreach program also includes an innovative seminar
series to introduce graduate students to a diverse set of scientific careers and
highlight the impacts of scientific professions in society at
large.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award will result in a number
of broader impacts. First, the proposed imaging tools will enable the direct
interrogation of metastatic cancer cells not currently possible with existing
toolsets. Such studies will provide macroscopic images of tumor spread and may
fundamentally change existing views on malignancy. Second, the proposed tools
will likely inspire new discoveries in diverse areas of science, as imaging
technologies are widely used in materials research, neurobiology, and numerous
other fields. Third, the imaging probes will be incorporated into a variety of
educational outreach programs that will impact large numbers of students. These
students will learn about the challenges and excitement associated with imaging
and research in general. Last, the proposed outreach work will expose students
from diverse backgrounds to the impacts of science in society by highlighting
unique career opportunities.