* 1351538
* CAREER: Small-Molecule Capture and Ion Transport in Well-Defined Hybrid Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 03/15/2014,02/28/2019
* Hemamala Karunadasa, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 02/28/2019
* USD 575,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;With support from the Solid State and Materials
Chemistry program in the Division of Materials Research, this program will
design functional organic-inorganic hybrids to combine the advantages of
molecules and extended solids in single-phase and well-defined materials.
Specific targets include i) nonporous sorbents for the capture of atmospheric
pollutants through chemisorption, ii) solid-state reaction templates that can
alter product distribution from that of solution-state synthesis, and iii)
materials with high ion mobility and tunable ion-transport pathways for fuel
cell membranes and solid electrolytes. Solution-state self-assembly routes will
be developed to synthesize highly modular structures amenable to systematic
material optimization. The substantially different properties of the organic and
inorganic components allow for optimization of conflicting features in single-
phase materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;This
research program targets the synthesis of organic-inorganic hybrid materials for
applications in clean energy: sorbents to capture atmospheric pollutants,
nonporous ion-exchange membranes for fuel cells, and solid electrolytes for
rechargeable batteries. Most functional materials are plagued by tradeoffs.
Optimization of one property requires compromising another: e.g., flexibility
and strength, electronic conductivity and porosity. Inorganic solids have
superior electronic, thermal, and mechanical properties typically not seen in
molecules. However, the tools of synthetic chemistry allow for the structure and
reactivity of molecules to be tuned at a level of precision not yet accessible
with extended solids. This research seeks to combine the fields of solid-state
chemistry and solution-state molecular synthesis to obtain materials with
properties unique to both discrete molecules and extended solids.
&lt;br/&gt;Many female faculty claim that female colleagues and mentors were
instrumental in their career choice, but not all female students have easy
access to informal female mentors. As a step towards decreasing the number of
exceptional women who leave the academic track, the P.I. will develop an online
mentor network. This program will provide interested female students with young
female faculty mentors. Through a network of informal mentors, students can have
senior colleagues in the community-with whom they identify-who have taken the
next steps in the path to their chosen careers and are available for advice and
encouragement.