* 1351160
* CAREER: Collaborative Modeling for Distributed Sensing and Real-time Intelligent Control to Improve Battery Manufacturing Productivity and Efficiency
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Qing Chang, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 07/31/2019
* USD 499,975.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program award is an integrated
research and education study centered on collaborative sensing information
processing, and an intelligent online control framework for battery
manufacturing. It aims to integrate decision theory with real-time control,
which will allow the full potential of distributed sensor networks to improve
production system responsiveness, productivity and overall efficiency. The
methodology includes the following tasks: 1) establish a virtual multi-layer
sensing framework and event-based modeling to directly model distributed-sensor
systems, 2) develop a collaborative information processing framework to
effectively identify system transient loss and root causes of system
inefficiency, and create a system learning method to optimize sensor network
design, 3) establish an intelligent online control method to integrate decision
theory with control for adaptive resource allocation and distributed management,
and 4) validate these methods using simulation and real data through
collaboration with industrial partners. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful,
this CAREER project will advance the state of the art on distributed sensor
networks by contributing new concepts, criteria, and algorithms to its system
level real-time decision making capabilities, and create an enabling methodology
for next-generation plant-wide sensing, information processing and control.
Accomplishing these goals will lead to dramatic cost reductions as a result of
reduced downtime, improved quality and system efficiency, boosting the
competitiveness of U.S. industries and the nation's economy. The CAREER
education program will make a positive contribution to workforce training
through curriculum and lab development, real-world problem solving and other
outreach activities, with a focus on broadening participation of
underrepresented groups. Dissemination through conference/journal publications
and international/industrial collaborations will lead to exposure of these
research results to a wide range distributed sensor networks that are of vital
importance to the nation's economic growth.