* 1351621
* CAREER: Cyber-security of Electric Power Systems: Theft and Systemic Failure
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2014,09/30/2020
* Eilyan Bitar, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 09/30/2020
* USD 400,000.00

The physical infrastructure of the US electric grid is aging, over-burdened, and
prone to failure. The drive to support the deep integration of variable
renewable energy into the grid, without sacrificing reliability, will require a
paradigm shift in how we produce, deliver, and consume energy. At the heart of
this profound transformation is the rapid deployment of the Smart Grid, which
integrates new embedded sensing, communication, and computing technologies to
improve utilization of existing physical assets, operational efficiency, and
reliability. However, with the increased reliance of grid operations on complex
and actionable data flows, comes the substantial risk of cyber attacks on the
physical system. By coordinating the manipulation of actionable data transfers
from only a small number of remote sensing units (e.g. power meters, relay
states, voltage sensors), a malicious adversary can mislead the system operator
into taking corrective control actions with staggering economic and physical
consequences. These include: (i) inefficient market outcomes based on sub-
optimal dispatch of generation, (ii) manipulation of electricity market prices
and financial instruments for profit gain, (iii) cascading failures in
transmission networks, and (iv) physical damage to large generation and
substation facilities. Broadly, the proposed research seeks to address the
fundamental open research challenges associated with securing the electric power
infrastructure and electricity markets against such malicious cyber
attacks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The various mechanisms through which data
integrity attacks can manipulate the behavior of cyber-physical systems such as
the power grid are not yet well understood, and effective countermeasures remain
undeveloped. By combining expertise at the intersection of power systems,
estimation, optimization, and control theory, the proposed research aims to
develop a mathematical framework and set of algorithmic tools that will serve as
the foundation for a new information technology capable of (i) assessing the
vulnerability of existing power grids, (ii) calculating the consequence of
successful attacks, and (iii) developing effective countermeasures to thwart
those attacks -- innovations that will serve to substantially enhance the
security the United States' critical energy infrastructure. In addition to
improving the security of the US electric grid, the proposed work will aim to
have societal impact by addressing the urgent need to train the next generation
of engineers to design, build, and manage the Smart Grid. The novel integration
of the proposed research into senior course offerings will serve to create both
awareness and excitement about the field; with the ultimate goal of stimulating
increased adoption of careers in power and thus contributing to the attenuation
of the current shortfall of well-trained engineers capable of managing our
electricity grid.