* 1351667
* CAREER:  Advancement of Microalgal Biotechnology via Quantitative Sustainable Design:  An Integrated Research and Education Plan
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2014,04/30/2019
* Jeremy Guest, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 04/30/2019
* USD 462,000.00

PI: Guest, Jeremy&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1351667&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign&lt;br/&gt;Title: CAREER: Advancement
of Microalgal Biotechnology via Quantitative Sustainable Design: An Integrated
Research and Education Plan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will advance the
frontier of microalgal biotechnology through the integration of experimentation,
modeling, and quantitative sustainable design (QSD), and will leverage this
framework to improve the education and retention of a diverse student body in
environmental engineering. Research will pursue energy-positive nutrient
recovery from wastewater with microalgae, and will focus on overcoming critical
knowledge gaps that limit our ability to design mixed community microalgal
bioprocesses that might bring this transformation within reach. Objectives of
the research are (i) to elucidate the mechanisms governing microalgal bioprocess
performance across a landscape of possible designs, and (ii) to establish a path
forward for energy positive nutrient (nitrogen and phosphorus) recovery from
wastewater. Experiments with mixed communities of microalgae treating wastewater
will be coupled with modeling to advance understanding of how key design
parameters influence process performance, microbial community structure and
function. These findings will be integrated in a QSD framework (including life
cycle assessment, life cycle costing, sensitivity and uncertainty analyses) to
identify technology targets and chart a path forward for microalgal wastewater
biotechnology development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research efforts will be
integrated with an education plan designed (i) to increase the intrinsic
motivation of minority and female students in introductory- and advanced-level
environmental engineering courses through an aspirational resource management
framework, and (ii) to increase awareness of and ability to navigate trade-offs
among environmental, economic, and performance sustainability criteria for
engineered systems. These goals will be achieved by developing two online course
modules that will be designed, tested, and deployed at UIUC, Bucknell
University, and Parkland College. Modules will be designed through cognitive
labs and will include external, independent formative and summative
evaluations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current approaches to nutrient management at
wastewater treatment plants (WWTPs) use costly, energy-intensive processes that
rely on bacteria and chemicals to remove nitrogen and phosphorus. This research
will re-envision nutrient management at WWTPs by utilizing native microalgae for
energy-positive biological nutrient recovery. In addition to increasing the
embodied chemical energy of wastewater more than 2-fold, this approach may also
advance the limit of technology by overcoming the critical barrier of dissolved
organic nitrogen, a form of N that is often unable to be removed by existing
nutrient removal processes but which can be rapidly assimilated by microalgae.
The core concept of the research plan is microalgal technology development can
be expedited through integration of experimentation, modeling, and QSD. This
integrated process will elucidate molecular-scale barriers to systems-scale
sustainability and seek to overcome them through process design. This approach
will enable the setting of targets for technology performance, and identify
critical areas for future research to achieve long-term adoption and
sustainability. The research activities will be coupled with educational
activities to increase the attraction and retention of underrepresented students
by focusing on aspirational outcomes of environmental engineering and developing
a new platform for education in sustainable design.