* 1351272
* CAREER: Transitional Bridging: From Rapidly Deployable Disaster Relief to  Permanent Infrastructure Solutions
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2020
* Ashley Thrall, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Caglar Oskay
* 05/31/2020
* USD 400,000.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program
award is to build a theoretical framework for transitional bridging - bridges
that can be rapidly deployed for immediate disaster relief and can be
transformed in-situ for higher load capacity to support long-term, sustainable
development. Following natural and anthropogenic hazards, rapidly deployable
bridges are critical to restoring vital transportation arteries. The long
recovery times following the 2010 Chile earthquake and tsunami demonstrate the
need for bridging solutions that can provide an immediate response but also
serve as permanent infrastructure. To this end, the project will test the
hypothesis that novel adjustable connections can increase efficiency of rapidly
erectable bridging systems by enabling a diversity of structural forms which can
more effectively carry load using less material. The research plan will also
test the hypothesis that novel adjustable modules can provide transitional
capabilities. The efficiency of the transitional bridging framework which
integrates the adjustable connections and modules will be verified numerically
and experimentally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this research will be
translated to industry through collaboration with a leading design firm.
Integrated with this research objective, educational goals include (1) training
the next generation of researchers and designers in bridge engineering and
deployable structures and (2) increasing the participation and retention of
women in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) fields. The
Principal Investigator (PI) plans to develop a new, interdisciplinary, co-taught
Deployable Structures for Disaster Relief course for undergraduate as well as
graduate curricula in the College of Engineering and the College of Arts &amp;
Letters. The PI also plans to collaborate with a local high school to implement
"BRIDGES (Building Relationships to Inspire and Drive Girls to pursue
Engineering and Science): an enrichment environment for young women".