* 1351295
* Fitness consequences of individual variation in spatial learning ability in wild food-caching animals
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/2014,02/29/2020
* Vladimir Pravosudov, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 02/29/2020
* USD 840,000.00

There are large differences in cognitive abilities and brain morphology both
within and between species, yet it remains unclear why such differences exist.
Such differences may result from differential biological fitness associated with
individual variation in cognitive abilities, yet empirical evidence for this
hypothesis is lacking. Different tasks require different cognitive abilities
(e.g. spatial memory vs. memory for color), yet whether natural selection can
shape different cognitive abilities independently is also debated.

The proposed research will address these two major questions by (1) comparing
individual differences in two cognitive abilities (spatial learning and non-
spatial learning in wild food-caching mountain chickadees in two environments
that place different demands on just one of these abilities, spatial memory,
which is involved in recovering thousands of previously made food caches and (2)
measuring biological fitness associated with individual differences in both
cognitive abilities. If natural selection can affect these abilities
independently, only differences in spatial learning ability should be associated
with differential biological fitness.

In addition to addressing major evolutionary questions about population/species
differences in cognitive abilities, the proposed study will also have
significant implications for learning and memory research. It is still generally
assumed that the mechanisms underlying associative learning in general are the
same for all types of learning and memory and so studying one type of memory
allows development of treatments for all memory types. Demonstrating that
natural selection can affect different cognitive abilities independently would
suggest that we must consider specific cognitive abilities and their regulatory
mechanisms individually when designing interventions. The proposed research will
also increase research readiness and science literacy by providing intensive
research training to undergraduate and graduate students as well as outreach to
K-12 students and the general public through the Sagehen Biological Station.