* 1351341
* CAREER: Multi-Scale Approaches to Quantify Biomechanical Control of Lymphatic Pump Function
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2019
* Brandon Dixon, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 06/30/2019
* USD 400,000.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program
award is to investigate ways in which the coordination of the lymphatic pump is
self-regulated such that transient changes in vessel mechanical loading provide
a cue to orchestrate the contractile sequences in adjacent vessel segments.
Lymphatic muscle cells contract the vessel to move fluid form the interstitium
against a pressure gradient. It is unclear how biomechanics regulate the timing
and function of lymphatic contraction across short time scales. The objective
will be addressed by performing a system identification of the primary lymphatic
contractile unit in order to characterize the pump function response to the
variety of biomechanical conditions experienced in the body. The experiments
will seek to demonstrate that these phenomena are driven by calcium signaling
and regulated in part via release of endothelin-1 and nitric oxide within the
vessel. These hypotheses will be tested across multiple length scales using in-
vitro biomechanical tissue culture devices, feedback-controlled isolated vessel
perfusion systems, and in-vivo near infrared (NIR) imaging.

Understanding how lymphatic biology utilizes biomechanics to regulate and
coordinate its drainage response to varying demands will not only provide key
insight into diseases such as lymphedema, but it will also provide bio-inspired
design approaches for developing artificial drainage networks in tissue
engineering and nanotechnology that function in an as-needed fashion. The
educational plan for this award seeks to address the current disparity in
lymphatic training and research. Teaching modules on lymphatic physiology will
be implemented at a nearby medical school and research results will be
integrated into a graduate level Biotransport course to provide students with
unsolved engineering problems in lymphatic biomechanics through problem-based
learning. Lastly, elementary students will be engaged in interactive research-
based science education, where they will be exposed to the impact of
bioengineering approaches in medicine.