* 1351131
* CAREER: Enabling expert crowdsourcing via coordination, targeted contribution and education
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2019
* Michael Bernstein, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 12/31/2019
* USD 550,000.00

Crowdsourcing systems typically draw on the work of non-experts, as expert
crowds are difficult to gather and coordinate. To extend the reach of
crowdsourcing, this project investigates interactive systems, platforms and
computational techniques to integrate experts as core participants of
crowdsourcing systems. The project will develop and evaluate three related
systems that improve the coordination, participation and education of expert
crowds. First, the project will develop modular, composable workflows to guide
paid expert crowds to accomplish complex tasks such as design and engineering. A
second system seeks to attract a new form of expert participation by reaching
out to experts in their spare moments. A final system will enable crowd workers
to learn new skills by leveraging existing tasks as work-study opportunities.
This research will produce three concrete types of results: 1) techniques and
patterns for guiding expert crowds and their contributions, 2) scientific
results and evaluations that depict the strengths and weaknesses of expert
crowds, and 3) open, public platforms and systems to recruit, guide, and train
members of expert crowds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Crowd work has the potential to
employ millions of full-time workers and grant them the flexibility to guide
their own careers. The proposed work advances a vision of how experts can engage
in the future crowd-work economy, contribute to projects while improving their
own skills, and be supported by practical knowledge and new sociotechnical
systems. The project also includes a plan to use expert work-study techniques to
provide realistic training in Stanford?s HCI curricula and develop a peer
mentoring system to scale advising and informal learning.