* 1351701
* CAREER: A Human-Building Interaction Framework for Responsive and Adaptive Built Environments
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2014,01/31/2019
* Burcin Becerik-Gerber, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Chen
* 01/31/2019
* USD 410,689.00

The purpose of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program grant is
to advance knowledge about the impact of human-building interactions on energy
use, and to explore intelligent, collaborative, and personalized approaches that
connect built environments with their users to increase energy efficiency and
awareness. Taxonomies of types, features, and patterns of human-building
interactions will be developed, based on high-resolution building and human
related data. The impact of human-building interactions on energy use and
comfort will be quantitatively described using a simulation environment that
incorporates multiple simulations and modeling technologies. The research will
build on the concept of heterogeneous teamwork between building members and
their users, through the use of computer agents that represent and interact with
these building systems and their users. A model, capable of learning user
preferences for automation, will be employed. A diverse set of communication
strategies and styles will be evaluated through human subject experiments that
address actions influencing energy and comfort, and increase the trust between
humans and the built environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the
research will advance the understanding about the impact of human-building
interactions on energy, and transform built environments into attentive and
self-learning entities that adapt to user preferences of energy conservation.
User-related information will be incorporated into building operations thus
allowing for proactive accommodation of user needs. Knowledge of human-building
interactions will support engineering design and management activities, and
foster the evolution of built environments as eco-systems. To increase public
engagement, energy related workshops will be organized bringing together
parents, teachers and K-12 students to build hands on engineering projects. High
school female students will develop computer applications related to energy
conservation, attracting them to engineering and technology fields. The work
will engage underrepresented students and develop new materials, modules,
courses, test beds for research and education.