* 1351400
* CAREER: A Chemical Technology to Define Target-Specific Bioreactivity: Integrating Research and Education at the Crossroads of Chemistry and Biology
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2019
* Yimon Aye, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Pui Ho
* 06/30/2019
* USD 526,935.00

The inner workings of cells require exquisite orchestration of an array of
individual chemical events. The various "instruments" communicate with one
another through numerous signals, molecules that convey information about the
state of the cell. For the proper function of cells, the timing of signaling is
everything. In order to understand what is going on inside live cells,
researchers routinely apply the signaling molecules to cells and observe what
happens. There are serious limitations to this approach because the entire cell
is exposed to the signal and timing is largely lost as the compounds find their
way inside. These effects can lead to unintended consequences that can be
impossible to sort out. The proposal aims to overcome these limitations, and to
gain control over the exact location and timing of release of specific signaling
molecules. The investigator addresses this pressing need by developing a set of
new chemical tools with which reactive signals can be selectively delivered to
specific proteins in cells at a precise time. Such a research breakthrough will
provide time-resolved information on the chemically directed signal-processing
mechanisms of fundamental importance in biology. The research enables graduate
students in the lab to acquire excellent grounding in technological development
interfacing chemistry and biology. The integrated outreach goal is to highlight
modern crosscutting chemical biology concepts and tools, specifically aimed at
K-12 educators and students from underrepresented populations.

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Assistant Professor Yimon Aye from Cornell University to
evaluate with spatiotemporal precision the fundamental protein/small-molecule
signal interactions. The non-enzymatic post-translational protein modifications
inducible by the bioactive signaling electrophiles, such as lipid-derived
aldehydes, have emerged to play major roles in redox-linked cell signaling.
Avoiding the conventional whole-cell treatment approaches, this proposal
introduces a new chemistry-driven approach to interrogate these interactions by
selective chemical perturbation of one target with one inducer at a precise time
in an otherwise native/healthy cell. The most recent data from the PI's lab
suggest that her new directed modification strategy enables quantitative
assessment of target- and electrophile-specific temporal dynamics of individual
non-enzyme-assisted protein modification events in living cells. The knowledge
of physiologically relevant reactivity and specificity will enable the
prediction of how a given reactive small-molecule signal may function within
microenvironments of a target in cellular decision-making.