* 1351672
* CAREER: An integrated research and education program on the biomechanics of blood clot growth
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2014,02/28/2021
* Keith Neeves, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 02/28/2021
* USD 465,594.00

1351672&lt;br/&gt;Neeves&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Blood clots constitute an
exquisitely engineered system, in which a complex fluid transforms into a solid
plug at the site of an injury. Stable hemostatic clots are designed to arrest
bleeding without occluding the vessel, withstand the forces of flowing blood,
and slowly dissolve in concert with the wound healing process. Instabilities in
any of these events can cause excessive clotting, or thrombosis, which is a
leading cause of death. Despite the extensive knowledge base on the biochemistry
and cell biology of clot formation, the mechanistic differences between a
hemostatic clot and a thrombotic one remain largely unknown. Recent findings
from the laboratory of the PI and from other labs suggest that impeding the
transport of solutes away from the core of a clot is one mechanism that may
prevent thrombosis. Based on this evidence, the hypothesis of the proposed
studies is that transport of coagulation factors and platelet agonists within
the interstitial space between blood cells is a key regulator of clot growth. If
this hypothesis proves correct, then targeting this biophysical mechanism in
conjunction with the conventional biochemical mechanisms could lead to more
effective treatment of thrombosis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit:&lt;br/&gt;This proposal investigates an important physiological system
through the development of quantitative relationships between clot composition
and growth. The conventional models of clot formation focus primarily on the
kinetic processes involved in coagulation reactions and platelet signaling. The
proposed studies build upon previous models by incorporating interstitial solute
transport as a key mechanism of clot growth. With more capable predictive
methods available, better drugs and drug delivery strategies can be developed.
This hypothesis will be addressed by the following specific aims: (i)
identifying the transport barriers that regulate clot growth and arrest, (ii)
mapping the pore structure of clots, and (iii) exploiting interstitial transport
to modulate clot growth. The implemented approach relies on applying theories
and methods from the field of porous media transport to characterizing transport
in tissues. In vitro and in vivo models of vascular injury will be used to
measure transport properties in clots and the structure of their interstitial
pore space. Constitutive relationships describing solute transport as a function
of clot structure and composition will be developed for a range of physiological
conditions. Results will be used to assess how known risk factors for thrombosis
lead to uncontrolled clot growth and how this process can be physically
impeded.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;The proposed studies
will develop theoretical and experimental models to predict blood clot growth
and test novel therapeutic strategies. This is a potentially transformative
outcome since controlling thrombosis is one of the grand challenges in medicine.
The research plan integrates with the education plan by creating K-12 outreach
programs and undergraduate research opportunities focused on the interface
between engineering and biology. Specific educational and outreach objectives
include (i) improving middle school students' attitudes towards science with
hands-on curriculum, (ii) developing and assessing inquiry-based learning
program in bioengineering at a high school with predominantly Latino students,
and (iii) establishing a summer undergraduate research program in cellular
biomechanics in partnership with the Children's Hospital Colorado for students
in the Multicultural Engineering Program at the Colorado School of Mines.