* 1351354
* CAREER: Versatile transcription activator-like effector libraries for genome-wide screens
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2020
* Leonidas Bleris, University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 07/31/2020
* USD 503,600.00

1351354&lt;br/&gt;Bleris, Leonidas &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability to perturb
individual genes in genome-wide screening experiments has been instrumental in
unraveling cellular and disease properties. The PI proposes to develop,
optimize, and implement novel transcription-activator like effector (TALE)
libraries and associated technologies. TALEs are proteins that can be engineered
to target specific nucleotide sequences in mammalian cells and can act as
activators or repressors of gene expression at the transcriptional level. While
the TALE library technology holds promise for a wide range of applications, the
emphasis of this proposal lies in the development and customization of TALE
libraries for induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cell reprogramming.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From disease modeling to curing genetic diseases, the
prospective iPS applications are endless. Considering the highly modular nature
of TALEs and the versatility and ease of constructing these libraries, the
technology is transformative and will spark a large number of novel
biotechnology and medical applications. The results will be disseminated through
publications in peer-reviewed journals, conference proceedings, and
presentations at national and international conferences. The PI will develop a
customized special topics class on systems biology and the role and properties
of student networks and collaborative learning in education will be explored. In
addition, the educational plan consists of several action items tightly
integrated with research, including (a) support for the UT Dallas International
Genetically Engineered Machine (IGEM) undergraduate synthetic biology team, (b)
interfacing via internship opportunities with leading US research and science
policy institutions, (c) annual seminar day at Collin Community College and a
summer internship hosted in our lab, and (d) lab community
service.&lt;br/&gt;Due to the interdisciplinary nature of the project, this
CAREER award by the Biotechnology, Biochemical, and Biomass Engineering Program
of the CBET Division is co-funded by the Systems and Synthetic Biology Program
of the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biology.