* 1351545
* CAREER: Towards Understanding and Modeling Turbulent Atomizing Liquid-Gas Flows
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2014,01/31/2019
* Olivier Desjardins, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 01/31/2019
* USD 400,000.00

Proposal Number: 1351545 PI: Desjardins, Olivier

The proposed CAREER project is focused on the computational investigation of the
fluid physics at the interface between two fluids moving in the turbulent flow
regime. This research and education project aims at improving the state of
theoretical understanding of turbulent atomizing liquid-gas flows using recently
advanced numerical methods in conjunction with high performance computing
resources. The ultimate goal is to develop a comprehensive mechanistic and
statistical theory of turbulence for interface interactions in liquid-gas flows.
The proposed theory could have far-reaching impacts in the way such flows are
approached by scientists and engineers, including new predictive models to
enable simulations of engineering devices and natural processes that were
impossible to do before. The main outcomes of this effort are expected to be a
significant leap forward in first-principle modeling of turbulent liquid-gas
flows, a new massive open online course (MOOC) on multiphase flows to maximize
the educational impact to engineering students, and an iPad multiphase flow
simulator to inspire students and the general public.

Intellectual Merit:

While a significant body of work deals with fundamental stability of liquid-gas
interfaces, a comprehensive mechanistic and statistical theory of turbulent
atomizing liquid-gas flows remains to be proposed, its development hindered by
lack of experimental data and, at least until recently, inadequate numerical
methods. The proposed work is centered upon unique, high fidelity numerical
simulations of the interactions between turbulent eddies and active interfaces.
The proposed work will not only lead to a new theory, but also to new large eddy
simulation (LES) models that will be based on the concept of optimal estimators
and on the transport equation for sub-grid scale kinetic energy. Such models can
change the way engineers make predictions for such flows.

Broader Impacts:

Complex turbulent atomizing liquid-gas flows are ubiquitous in both nature and
industrial applications, with relevance in climate modeling and oceanic
transport, fire suppression, technical devices such as pumps, combustors, and
pipelines, and applications such as fuel injection, nuclear cooling, hydropower,
and concentrated solar power among many others. Understanding the fundamental
mechanisms by which turbulence interfaces behave can lead to the design of safer
and more efficient processes in these systems. The PI plans to make code
developed in this project available to the scientific community, enabling
research elsewhere. The educational activities of the proposed project will
improve education and scientific literacy at different levels. A philosophy of
?accessibility of research? will be used to form and mentor two undergraduate
students per year, chosen from under-represented minorities. The proposed
multiphase turbulence theory will be integrated into a new graduate course on
multiphase flow dynamics. To impact a larger number of engineering students,
this course will be offered as a MOOC. Finally, an iPad app will be developed
that exploits rapid and robust schemes for real-time computation and rendering
of two-dimensional multiphase flows, providing a physics-based entertaining and
educational application to inspire and educate middle school students about
fluid dynamics science and engineering.