* 1351265
* CAREER: Lipo-cyclic antimicrobial peptidomimetics that disrupt bacterial membranes
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2020
* Jianfeng Cai, University of South Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Pui Ho
* 06/30/2020
* USD 500,000.00

The resistance of bacterial infections to antibiotic treatment is one of the
biggest public health concerns in the 21st century. Natural antimicrobial
compounds are capable of disrupting bacterial membranes, and therefore represent
a promising new approach to circumvent antimicrobial resistance. Nevertheless,
these compounds suffer from low stability and moderate activity. Lipo-cyclic
gamma-AApeptides have been under development in the investigator's laboratory as
a new class of antimicrobial compounds. They were designed to mimic the natural
materials, but to avoid their drawbacks. The proposal aims to optimize the
effectiveness of this new class of antibiotics, and to figure out exactly how
they work. This pursuit will allow graduate and undergraduate students to
acquire interdisciplinary training in organic synthesis, chemical biology and
microbiology. The design, preparation and study of lipo-cyclic gamma-AApeptides
will lead to a new class of antibiotics that can avoid antimicrobial resistance.
Moreover, this project will integrate teaching, research and outreach activities
to broaden exposure to science and research for the local youth population in
the Tampa community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award, the Chemistry of Life
Processes Program in the Chemistry Division is funding Dr. Jianfeng Cai from the
University of South Florida to explore the fundamental chemistry, structure-
function-relationship and mechanism of action of novel lipo-cyclic
peptidomimetics that act like natural antimicrobial peptides (AMPs). Building
upon preliminary results and the original hypothesis for the design of
antimicrobial peptidomimetics, the research team will: (1) Design and synthesize
novel lipo-cyclic analogues of previously prepared antimicrobial gamma-
AApeptides. (2) Through structure-function-relationship (SFR) studies, identify
lead compounds that display potent and broad-spectrum activity against a panel
of significant Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria. (3) Investigate if
bacterial membrane disruption is the general bactericidal mechanism of lipo-
cyclic gamma-AApeptides and their derivatives. The methods involved in the
project include design and synthesis of new peptide mimics, evaluation of their
antimicrobial activity and selectivity, and the study of bacteria membrane
integrity using fluorescence and electron microscopy, and membrane
depolarization.