* 1351289
* CAREER:  Engineering Three-dimensional Stem Cell Niche with  Independently Tunable Biochemical and Mechanical Properties
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2014,02/28/2019
* Fan Yang, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 02/28/2019
* USD 400,005.00

1351289&lt;br/&gt;Yang&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is
to develop a novel stem cell niche with biochemical and mechanical properties,
which can be tuned independently; and to use this niche to elucidate how signals
influence stem cell fate in three dimensions using high-throughput
strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit&lt;br/&gt;Stem cells have
the potential to revolutionize medical therapies for a number of diseases.
However, directing stem cell fate so that they maintain pluripotency or
mutlipotency, or they commit to a certain differentiation lineage, is a critical
problem in tissue engineering and regenerative medicine. Although there is ample
evidence that stem cells respond to both biochemical and mechanical cues,
understanding how the totality of signals in a given environment directs cell
fate remains a largely unanswered question, especially in three dimensions (3D).
Recent studies from the PI's laboratory indicate that biochemical and mechanical
cues interact in a non-intuitive manner to regulate stem cell fate, which cannot
be predicted from stem cell responses to individual type of niche cues. The
proposed studies are designed to advance the understanding of stem cell-niche
interactions by pursuing the following research objectives:&lt;br/&gt;Objective
1. Synthesize degradable polymers as biochemical and mechanical "building
blocks" of stem cell niche that can crosslink simultaneously and independently
to form an interpenetrating network.&lt;br/&gt;Objective 2. Develop biomimetic
hydrogel microarrays with independently tunable niche&lt;br/&gt;properties for
encapsulating cells in 3D.&lt;br/&gt;Objective 3. Examine the effects of
interactive niche signaling on stem cell differentiation in 3D combinatorial
hydrogel microarrays in a high-throughput manner.&lt;br/&gt;The systematic and
combined approach implemented by the PI has a high intellectual merit.
Additionally, the proposed studies carry multiple innovative features including
the development of interpenetrating network hydrogels with independent control
of biochemical and mechanical cues; AFM and FRET-based assays for high-
throughput characterization of hydrogel stiffness and degradation; and novel
microfabrication platforms and high-throughput screening assays for rapid
monitoring of stem cell fate in 3D.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The proposed development of biomimetic hydrogel microarrays
with independently tunable cues is expected to comprise a powerful tool to
advance the fundamental understanding of stem cell-niche interactions in 3D,
thus addressing a critical problem in stem cell biology and tissue engineering.
The outcomes of the proposed research may greatly accelerate stem cell-based
therapies by rapidly identifying optimal cues to direct stem cells into
maintaining pluripotency or differentiating into functional mature cells.
Ongoing and new educational plans target students from kindergarten to
undergraduates. An outreach program for local elementary school K-G1 students,
called "The Magic of Repairing Human Body," will be developed. The PI will also
develop a one-week summer camp for high school students on "Tissue Engineering
Fiesta, which will include interactive lectures, journal clubs and hands-on
activities and will be geared towards high school students from underprivileged
and minority background in the San Francisco Bay Area. Overall, the PI addresses
a challenging problem with broader implications and has demonstrated commitment
towards educational and outreach activities with local schools with diverse
student populations.