* 1351640
* CAREER: Provably Correct Control Software for Autonomous High-Performance Agents
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2020
* Mazen Farhood, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 06/30/2020
* USD 400,000.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program
award is to investigate a rigorous approach to control software certification
for multi-task agents with complex dynamics. The analysis tools stem from a
novel treatment of integral quadratic constraint (IQC) based uncertainty
analysis, and can handle hybrid non-stationary parameter-dependent control
systems and a wide range of uncertainties. These tools provide, at the
algorithmic level, a sophisticated method for validation of control systems by
determining ellipsoids that are invariant under task-based state transitions.
The same analysis tools will be utilized to generate annotated control program
code based on the Floyd-Hoare paradigm, migrating in the process high-level,
systemic properties down to the executable code. The annotated code can then be
checked for correctness by using a theorem prover augmented with appropriate
theories. Modules stemming from the IQC-based analysis will be introduced into
existing, public domain autocoders to enable high-level annotations with
properties. The approach will be implemented on an uninhabited aerial vehicle
(UAV) platform. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the research will apply to
complex high-performance systems such as UAVs operating autonomously in dynamic
environments and sharing space with humans and human-piloted vehicles. The
formal validation approach can be applied before the physical prototype is
tested or even built, promising reductions in time and cost of the software
development process and an expedited transition of technology to practice. This
formal validation also leads to formal safety guarantees, tackling one of the
critical barriers to the integration of autonomous vehicles into civil society.
The integration of research and education will be achieved through the UAV
testbed, which will be utilized to construct educational modules and provide a
hands-on environment for courses and undergraduate research. The educational
modules will be communicated to pre-college students, including women and
minorities, through outreach activities.