* 1351520
* CAREER: Biologically-Inspired Actuation and Control of Robotic Above-Knee Prostheses
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/2014,01/31/2021
* Xiangrong Shen, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Grace Hwang
* 01/31/2021
* USD 431,837.00

Shen&lt;br/&gt;1351520&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Overview: The research in this
CAREER proposal addresses two fundamental issues in the emerging powered above-
knee (AK) prosthetics area -- Actuation and Control -- with innovative
biologically-inspired robotic approaches. The objective is to provide sufficient
power output, long duration of operation, and reliable volitional control
capability for powered AK prostheses to enable their use in the amputee users-
daily life. By addressing these fundamental issues, this project will lay a
solid foundation for the PI's long-term research goal of creating powered
prosthetic devices with comparable functionality and appearance as biological
limbs, so that amputee patients can enjoy life like healthy persons. The
educational activities in this proposal aim to generate a synergistic impact
with a series of activities under a common theme of "Using Robotics to Help
Persons with Disabilities!" These activities will build a basis for the PI's
long-term education goal of creating a comprehensive robotics education program
that integrates education and research on multiple levels (graduate,
undergraduate, and K-12), with the emphasis on recruiting, retaining, and
mentoring students with disabilities.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Despite
recent technological advances, the majority of state-of-the-art AK prostheses
are still unpowered. Biomechanical studies show that these devices are unable to
restore the normal locomotive functions. The research in this project aims at
bringing powered AK prostheses to reality with a novel chemo-fluidic sleeve
muscle actuation system, which provides a significant advantage relative to the
traditional battery-DC motor system. The actuator in this new system, sleeve
muscle actuator, provides a superior power density compared with DC motor (at
least 10 times higher). It also enables the use of an innovative design
philosophy - integrating joint actuator with load bearing structure -- and thus
can potentially generate a highly compact AK prosthesis suitable for daily use.
The new system also incorporates a new energy-storing medium, namely
monopropellant, to provide ample energy supply for the AK prosthesis. As a
unique class of liquid fuel, monopropellant releases energy through catalytic
reaction (instead of combustion). The safe reaction products, oxygen and water
steam, can be used directly as the high-pressure working fluid to drive the
sleeve muscle actuator. As such, monopropellant can form the basis of a highly
compact pneumatic supply to support the desired long duration of operation for
powered AK prostheses. The new actuation system will be complemented with a
novel prosthesis control approach, namely fault-tolerant EMG direct control.
This new approach enables volitional (i.e., according-to-the-intent) control of
the prosthesis through the neural interface provided by electromyography (EMG).
Furthermore, to address the reliability issue of EMG interface, a fault-tolerant
control structure will be created, which reconfigures the controller in the
event of EMG failure. As such, this novel approach is anticipated to allow the
user to control the prosthesis according to his or her intention while avoiding
the hazards from a complete controller failure, such as falling and the
resulting injuries.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Currently, there are more than
400,000 AK amputees in the U.S., and this number is expected to double by 2050.
The proposed research has the potential to benefit society by significantly
improving these amputees' mobility and quality of life. Furthermore, based on
the PI's ongoing educational efforts, new education activities will be conducted
in this project by integrating research into education. These activities
include: (1) Establish a comprehensive plan for the recruitment, retention, and
mentoring of students with disabilities; (2) Contribute to graduate education in
both engineering and prosthetics &amp; orthotics with the efforts towards
bridging the gap between biomedical engineering research and clinical practice;
(3) Promote undergraduate research with a multi-year research project aiming at
developing a robotic arm exhibit for a science museum; (4) Outreach into K-12
education system to promote science and engineering with robotics-themed
activities, collaborating with the first STEAM-accredited elementary school in
the world.