* 1351112
* CAREER:Manipulating Neural Plasticity to Enable Brain-Computer Interface Learning
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2019
* Alan Dorval, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 04/30/2019
* USD 456,001.00

PI: Dorval, Alan D. &lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1351112&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
University of Utah &lt;br/&gt;Title: CAREER: Manipulating Neural Plasticity to
Enable Brain-Computer Interface Learning&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal
of this project is to develop computational systems that can teach the brain how
to interface with them in both directions. Machinery in the brain has evolved to
learn complex motor skills that endure for a lifetime, like tying a shoelace or
riding a bike. This project will examine the feasibility of systems designed to
coopt this latent learning machinery, to teach neural tissue to manage a brain-
computer interface to control external devices, like a motorized wheel chair or
a robotic arm. If neurons in a small area could be taught to generate a
coordinated signal, wearable devices could use those robust signals to reliably
control external devices. To do this, electrical stimulation will be paired to
the learning-control and motor-control centers of the rodent brain, teaching
neurons to synchronize activation with their neighbors. Once neighboring neurons
can generate synchronous activity reliably, the rodents will be let use those
signals to control external devices. Coopting neural learning mechanisms will
eventually enable long-term, reliable, and robust, brain-computer interfaces for
neural rehabilitation of people with disabilities. To expand the pool of
individuals contributing to this nascent field of neural engineering, this
project will teach relevant experimentation to undergraduates. In a standard
BioSystems Engineering course, the PI will add a laboratory component in which
students learn to manipulate the nervous systems of insects and other
invertebrates, to control their behaviors. These student experiences should be
engaging and memorable and should translate to a broader understanding of and an
interest in careers in neural engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Motor skill
acquisition is mediated via brain processes that engage both motor control (M1)
and motor learning (basal ganglia) brain centers. Efferent basal ganglia is a
preferred surgical target for deep brain stimulating electrodes, to alleviate
symptoms of parkinsonism and dystonia, and tens of thousands of multi-contact
leads have been safely implanted in humans. Given their role in motor learning,
the efferent basal ganglia are ideal sites from which to modify cortical
connectivity. The research objective of this proposal is to determine if
plasticity in the basal ganglia-thalamo-cortical loop can be coopted to teach
the brain to generate large, easily-detected, neural-field activity that could
then be used to drive brain-computer-interface devices. This objective will be
achieved through 3 tasks using a rodent model. First, the ability of coupled
electrical stimulation to modify the connection strengths between the motor
learning (basal ganglia) and motor control (motor cortex) centers of the brain
will be tested. In parallel, a closed-loop system will be built to record
selective activity from, and provide arbitrary stimulation to, 64 channels
simultaneously and independently with sub-millisecond latency. Finally, with
real-time feedback and unit-activity detection in the motor cortex, the brain
will be taught to amplify the unit activity to correlates to natural behaviors,
into large field events that can be recorded reliably for years, and thus drive
body-external devices.