* 1351414
* CAREER: Designing Engineered Systems for Resilience and Sustainability by Considering Post-design Retrofits
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2014,04/30/2018
* Pingfeng Wang, Wichita State University
* Standard Grant
* Rich Malak
* 04/30/2018
* USD 400,000.00

With increasing complexity and longer projected useful lives for engineered
systems, retrofits through partial system repair or upgrade have become a cost
effective means to maintain desired system performance. However, there is a need
to gain a better understanding of how system retrofits will impact failure
resiliency and environmental sustainability, and further how the design of
resilient and sustainable engineered system must be adapted to take frequent
retrofit activities into account. This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER)
award supports fundamental research that will provide this missing knowledge.
Specifically, it will develop of a novel design framework with tools for system
modeling, analysis and design that can be used to concurrently realize
resiliency and enhance sustainability in system designs while considering system
retrofits. Results from this research will likely stimulate growth in several
technologically advanced industries such as the green energy, aviation, or
automotive industries, which suffer from catastrophic failures and high
maintenance costs at the post system design stage. By providing new design
methods and tools for failure resilient realization and sustainability
enhancement, the total lifetime cost of ownership of such systems can likely be
reduced significantly. This research offers unique opportunities for researchers
across the fields of engineering design, failure prognosis and sustainability,
and will train students in an interdisciplinary learning environment.
Educational initiatives with a wide range of dissemination and outreach programs
will attract students, especially underrepresented groups, to engineering
careers.

This research pioneers a new design paradigm for resiliency and sustainability
by integrating design of system functions, failure prognosis, and system
retrofits in a unified design framework. Such an effort has been neglected in
the past because quantitative analysis methods for failure prognosis and system
retrofits were only applicable in the use-phase of a system and were not suited
for early-stage design. This research encompasses four thrusts: 1) resiliency
and sustainability quantification with retrofits, 2) predictive resiliency and
sustainability analysis, 3) concurrent design for resiliency and sustainability,
and 4) design validation through collaborations with three leading industry
partners. The fundamental research will be rooted in a new theory for resilience
and will specifically address the challenge of post-design retrofits in
engineering system design. This research will be the first attempt to adapt the
concept of resilience and integrate it into system design while simultaneously
considering environmental sustainability. The research outcome will open up a
new avenue for research to exploit innovative methodologies leading to design of
resilient and sustainable engineered systems.