* 1351613
* CAREER: Hierarchically-Structured, Ultra-Thin Inorganic Membranes
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2014,01/31/2020
* Mark Snyder, Lehigh University
* Continuing Grant
* Christina Payne
* 01/31/2020
* USD 424,440.00

CBET-1351613&lt;br/&gt;Snyder&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary transformative
scientific impact of this CAREER program will be the development of novel and
scalable strategies for reducing carbon molecular sieve (CMS) film thickness to
unprecedented nanometer-scale levels for orders of magnitude improvement in flux
and industrially relevant selectivities. The intellectual merit will be further
defined by the fundamental elucidation of critical synthesis-structure-function
relations governing how nanoscale confinement, through its control of CMS
microstructure, can serve as a powerful handle for tuning CMS texture and thus
selectivity. Success of this program will create a transformative shift in the
paradigm for CMS membrane synthesis, establish new insights into tunable
synergies between material structure and function, and, thereby, set the stage
for CMS membranes, and even related inorganic membranes, to realize the quantum
leap in performance that is required to meet and exceed demands for industrial
viability. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Underlying this CAREER program is the desire to
establish synergies between materials synthesis and molecular-level
understanding in order to realize rational materials design. The resulting
hierarchically structured materials and mechanistic insight into membrane
transport should lead to new synthesis paradigms in membrane technologies and
applications as far-reaching as sensing, catalysis, and storage. A keystone of
the broader impact will be the development of a novel three-tiered (i.e.,
illustration-guided demonstration-assessment) inquiry-based learning module
titled "Molecular Traffic Control" that will apply HEXBUG NanoÂ®s for a
macroscopic illustration of molecular diffusion and interactions. A multi-level
implementation strategy will leverage this module for increasingly broad
dissemination starting with a local middle school science class and Saturday
science/math academy (STAR Academy) composed of a culturally diverse,
socioeconomically challenged group of students. Subsequent extension to all
middle school science classes, district science classes, and eventual
implementation at the regional science fair for students, teachers, and parents
is planned. The CAREER program will also impact graduate students involved
directly and indirectly in the proposed work by providing them with breadth and
depth of knowledge in fields of membranes/transport phenomena, materials
synthesis, and materials characterization.