* 1351028
* CAREER: Apprenticeship Learning for Robotic Manipulation of Deformable Objects
* CSE,IIS
* 03/15/2014,02/28/2019
* Pieter Abbeel, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Reid Simmons
* 02/28/2019
* USD 500,000.00

This project considers the problem of apprenticeship learning, in which a robot
first gets access to demonstrations of a task and ought to learn from these
demonstrations how to perform that task in new, yet similar, situations. This
line of work has already shown significant promise, including in helicopter
control where it enabled autonomous helicopter aerobatics at the level of the
best human pilots. However, fundamental limitations remain, and robotic
capabilities to manipulate deformable objects are currently still well below
human level. The approach followed builds on, and extends, non-rigid
registration algorithms, which can capture how scenes with deformable objects
relate to each other. Such registration is extrapolated to morph a demonstrated
manipulation trajectory into a good trajectory for a new scene. New machine
learning algorithms are developed to enable choosing the optimal training
demonstration and the optimal morphing objective while accounting for external
constraints, such as avoiding collisions and satisfying joint limits.
Infrastructure is being built for large-scale data collection of demonstrations
and theoretical and empirical characterizations are developed for how much data
is needed for a given task. Concrete challenge tasks considered are knot tying,
cloth and fabric manipulation, surgical suturing, and small surgical procedures.
Results will be incorporated into the PI's graduate robotics course and the
source code will be shared with the robotics community.