* 1351716
* CAREER: Understanding the Role of Quantum Coherence in Exciton Transport and Separation in Molecular Aggregates
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/2014,04/30/2021
* Wai-Lun Chan, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* James H. Edgar
* 04/30/2021
* USD 550,879.00

Technical: The research component of this CAREER award explores the role of
quantum coherence in exciton transport and charge separation in organic
semiconductors. Organic photovoltaic devices are often made from complex
nanostructures. A strategy is needed to direct excitons to and separate them
effectively at the donor/acceptor interfaces. As recently demonstrated in
photosynthetic complex, the interplay between the coherent coupling and
incoherent exciton trapping could provide an effective way for exciton transport
and separation. For molecular crystals and pi-conjugated polymers, it is well
known that excitons delocalize through coherent coupling, but answers to several
important questions remain unclear. For example, how will the exciton
delocalization boast the exciton transport range? How does delocalization size
change in an ultrafast (< 1 picosecond) timescale after photoexcitation? What
are the roles of exciton delocalization in charge separation? The knowledge gap
is partially due to the lack of experimental tools that can measure exciton
motion with the required spatial (nanometer) and temporal resolution
(femtosecond). To overcome this barrier, the PI uses both femtosecond time-
resolved photoemission spectroscopy and fluorescence up-conversion spectroscopy
to measure the exciton transport range, delocalization size, and charge transfer
dynamics at interfaces.

Non-technical: The project addresses fundamental materials issues related to
organic semiconductors. The large-scale implementation of low cost renewable
energy is one of the major challenges in the 21st century. The project helps to
address the challenge through exploring the mechanisms that could improve the
efficiency of next generation solar cells. The education activities in this
project are integrated with the research activities. For example, up-to-date
research topics are incorporated into undergraduate courses. Research
opportunities are provided to undergraduates as well as high school students and
teachers. The PI and his students visit local schools and introduce basic
science related to renewable energy to K-12 students through lectures and
experimental demonstrations. Public lectures designed to increase the public
awareness of renewable energy are given through adult education programs at the
University of Kansas.