* 1351384
* CAREER: Surface Crystallization of Reactive Oxygen Permeable Hydroxyapatite-based Membranes for Direct Methane Oxidative Conversion
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2020
* Dongxia Liu, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 07/31/2020
* USD 400,000.00

1351384 - Liu&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CAREER: Surface
Crystallization of Reactive Oxygen Permeable Hydroxyapatite-based Membranes for
Direct Methane Oxidative Conversion&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI's career goal is
to create innovative catalyst and membrane technologies that enable active and
selective chemical conversions with particular focus on the catalytic conversion
of C1 and biomass feedstock. The objective is to establish reactive oxygen (O2)
permeable hydroxyapatite (HAP)-based membranes for oxidative coupling of methane
(OCM) to C2 hydrocarbons. While the field of catalytic membrane reactors has
emerged solid oxide membranes for OCM, attaining high C2 yield, which intimately
depends on the harmonization between the catalytic and O2 permeable properties
of the membrane materials has remained a challenge. The unique approach of
surface crystallization in controlling the membrane nanostructures (composition
and constitution) will enable thin and dense membranes possessing sufficient
methane activation and O2 permeation properties for OCM. Lead and carbonate
substituted HAP (Pb-HAP-CO3) is the focus on the HAP-based membranes because
Pb2+ and CO32-, respectively, endow a single HAP with good catalytic properties
for OCM and high permeance for O2 transport. The rationale of this research is
to systematically manipulate the composition (Pb2+ and CO32- concentration) and
constitution (thickness and crystal orientation) of the Pb-HAP-CO3 membranes to
tune their catalysis and transport properties, and thus, to achieve cooperative
CH4 activation and O2 permeation in OCM for C2 production. The compelling aspect
of this research is that it offers a specific strategy to create new and
potentially transformative ways of converting low cost methane to value-added
fuels and chemicals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI?s educational goal is to
provide learning experiences for students that will lead to success in educating
the next generation of scientists and engineers, particularly in the fields of
materials synthesis, catalysis, and energy. The research incorporates broad
training in materials science and chemical engineering into research experiences
and education programs for students at all levels. Particularly, this includes:
(i) a new course development for educating undergraduates and graduates based on
the PI?s research interests in materials, catalysis, separation, and energy;
(ii) research experiences for students at all levels; and (iii) outreach
programs for K-12 students and general public audiences. These educational
activities are already in progress, and are well aligned with the goals of the
PI's department and college.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The
underlying challenge in attaining high C2 yield from OCM reactions in membrane
reactors is the scarcity of membrane materials with harmonized catalytic and
oxygen permeable properties. This project will focus on fundamental studies to
enable the emergence of reactive-oxygen permeable membranes for efficient OCM
processes. The research activities will advance the understanding of (i)
manipulation of membrane nanostructures by controlled surface crystallization
approach, (ii) effects of membrane nanostructures on methane reaction and oxygen
transport kinetics in tubular reactors, and (iii) predictive correlations of
materials synthesis-structure- function for OCM performance. The fundamental
concepts and technologies obtained from this work will stimulate and open new
avenues of material discovery and technique development that can impact future
energy and chemical supplies of the world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:
The processing of methane to derive highly value-added chemicals and fuels is
one of the enormous challenges faced by science and society. The development of
efficient OCM membrane reactors will lead to new thermochemical processes to
meet the demand for high-energy density and fungible fuels/chemicals from
methane gas to address this challenge. The proposed program integrates research
on materials science and chemical engineering with an education and outreach
component designed to highlight the importance of these disciplines in the area
of energy conversion. Education will be enhanced by developing a new course
based on the research interests in materials, catalysis, separation, and energy,
by recruiting and mentoring students from under-represented communities in
research activities, and by outreach programs for K-12 students and general
public audience in Prince George's County, MD (where UMD is located).