* 1351922
* Estimating the Locations of Interests, Governments, and Justices in Legal Policy Space
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2014,02/28/2018
* Thomas Hansford, University of California - Merced
* Continuing Grant
* Brian Bornstein
* 02/28/2018
* USD 271,074.00

Organized interests are more likely to file friend of the Court briefs with the
Supreme Court when the organization and the Court agree. However, there have
been both data and theoretical limits to the ability to test this hypothesis.
Spatial understandings of the law provide a significant theoretical advance on
explaining judicial decisionmaking. For any legal dispute, there are different
legal precedents or rules that courts can adopt. By locating the ideal policy
positions of various interest groups in the same dimensions as those of the
justices, this project will allow testing of hypotheses concerning whether
legally mobilized interests are highly polarized, whether policy preferences
change over time, and whether preferences track justices' voting preferences.
Measures do not currently exist, however, for the preferences of third parties
advocating at the U.S. Supreme Court. Thus, while the rise of interest advocacy
is one of the defining features of the modern Court, researchers have been
limited in the rigor with which they can test theories of the incidence and
impact of the participation of these extra-legal actors, which range from
interest groups to businesses to state governments to the United States, the
latter represented by the Solicitor General. To map the location of these actors
in legal policy space this project proposes applying measurement innovations
from the field of quantitative psychology to data on the positions articulated
in decades-worth of amicus briefs filed at the Court. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will produce a searchable online database of the involvement of
interests and governments at the Court, which will be a useful resource for
researchers and students. The project will contribute to training students who
are members of underrepresented groups, contributing to improved retention of
students as well.