* 1351676
* CAREER: Effects of nutrients on antibiotic resistance and antibiotic subsistence
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2014,09/30/2020
* Xu Li, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 09/30/2020
* USD 400,000.00

1351676&lt;br/&gt;Li&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many people have become aware of the
issue of pharmaceuticals in water and wastewater and natural waters. With the
pharmaceutical market worldwide estimated to be $1 trillion dollars in 2015 and
with an aging population (which uses more pharmaceuticals) and water and
wastewater treatment plants never designed to deal with extremely low
concentrations of highly biologically active compounds, the problem will likely
get worse. One of the biggest, yet very subtle is the issue of antibiotic
resistance in bacteria in natural waters.&lt;br/&gt;Antibiotic resistance
constitutes a national and global public health threat. Evidence suggests that
in addition to coming from hospitals, antibiotic resistant bacteria also emerge
in the environment due to prolonged exposure to antibiotics originating in
livestock and human wastes. On the other hand, many antibiotic resistant
bacteria can subsist on antibiotics by using them as carbon and energy sources.
Because nutrients influence microbial metabolisms and vary in quantity and
composition across environmental compartments, they represent an important
environmental factor that can affect antibiotic resistance and antibiotic
subsistence in the environment. However, how nutrients affect the emergence of
antibiotic resistance and the occurrence of antibiotic subsistence in microbial
communities is poorly understood. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this
project is to build an integrated research and education/outreach program to
minimize the negative impacts of antibiotics and antibiotic resistance to
environmental and public health. The research goal of the project is to
understand the interactions between antibiotics and microbial (bacterial)
communities under various nutrient levels and types (i.e., labile vs.
recalcitrant). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research approach will investigate the
responses of bacteria to both nutrient starvation and antibiotic presence. The
results of these studies will allow implementation in municipal and agricultural
wastewater treatment to control the emergence and proliferation of antibiotic
resistant bacteria. The proposed project will use a novel analytical tool,
quantitative (meta)proteomics, which can offer new and valuable perspectives to
environmental engineering studies. The use of quantitative (meta)proteomics in
the mechanistic studies on antibiotic resistance and antibiotic subsistence will
lay the groundwork for exploring further application of this novel technology in
other environmental engineering fields such as exposure and biodegradation
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One major source of antibiotics in the environment
is livestock manure. The education goal of the project is to promote behavioral
changes in livestock producers on antibiotic administration and manure
management and to educate a new generation of environmental engineers
specializing in solving agriculture-related environmental challenges. This will
be accomplished by:&lt;br/&gt;1.) Raising the awareness of antibiotics and
antibiotic resistance as environmental contaminants among livestock producers
through outreach and education activities&lt;br/&gt;2.) Develop an integrated
course module to stimulate interest in environmental science among high school
students in rural areas, and,&lt;br/&gt;3.) Encourage rural students to pursue a
graduate degree in environmental engineering