* 1351054
* CAREER: New Foundations for Next-Generation  Reliable Throughput Architecture Design
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2014,06/30/2015
* Xin Fu, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Hong Jiang
* 06/30/2015
* USD 161,406.00

With the demand on improving performance and energy-efficiency, novel
technologies including non-volatile memory (e.g., spin-transfer torque RAM (STT-
RAM)), 3D integration technology (3D), and near-threshold voltage computing
(NTC) have been increasingly deployed in the state-of-the-art throughput
processors. Since the novel technologies are not designed for dependable
computing, the reliability challenges, which have been a crucial issue in
conventional throughput architecture design, become the major obstacle for
integrating them into next-generation throughput processors. There is a pressing
need for the investigation of innovative techniques that are able to take
advantage of throughput processors' unique features for characterizing and
improving the reliability of the next-generation new-technology based throughput
architecture design.

The paramount reliability challenges in throughput processors include particle
strikes induced soft errors, hard errors driven by aging effects, and
manufacturing process variations. The principle investigator is building new
foundations for vulnerability characterization and prediction, error detection,
and fault tolerance against those dominant reliability challenges in throughput
processors integrated with novel technologies. The project objectives include:
(1) modeling and analyzing the vulnerability of novel-technology (e.g., STT-RAM,
NTC, and 3D) enabled throughput processors in the presence of soft error, aging
effects, and process variations; (2) fast and accurate predictive model to
forecast the vulnerability phase behavior of throughput processors under new
technologies; (3) developing the light-weight error detection mechanisms; and
(4) exploring the opportunities and challenges introduced by the novel
technologies to cost-effectively tolerate various types of errors in next-
generation throughput architecture design. The proposed research will
significantly promote the capability of architecting reliable throughput
processors in future technologies beyond CMOS, making it possible to fulfill the
Moore's Law without suffering the negative effects caused by various fault
mechanisms. Moreover, this project will realize the desire of applying
throughput processors into a wide range of computing scale from mobile computing
to cloud computing, and increasing the deployment of throughput processors in
support of supercomputing in science and engineering (e.g., finance, medical,
biology, petroleum, aerospace, and geology). This project will also contribute
to society through engaging high-school and undergraduate students from
minority-serving institutions into research, expanding the computer engineering
curriculum with reliability modeling and optimization techniques on throughput
processors, attracting women and under-represented groups into graduate
education, and disseminating research infrastructure for education and training
of US IT workforce.