* 1351493
* CAREER: From Risk Aversion to Innovation: Transforming the Concept Selection Process to Maximize Product Success
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2014,08/31/2020
* Scarlett Miller, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 08/31/2020
* USD 400,000.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award
is to develop a theoretical understanding of the factors that influence the
filtering and promotion of creative ideas through the concept selection process.
Three research tasks contribute to achieving this objective. First, an
understanding of the fundamental relationship between risk aversion and
innovation is being developed through experimental investigations with
engineering design students and industry professionals. Second, novel methods
for assessing concept creativity are being developed and tested for their impact
on the promotion of filtering of creative ideas during the concept selection
process. Third, substantive and empirical studies are being conducted to
validate the utility of concept selection methods for maximizing the potential
for innovation through engineering design courses.

If successful, the results of this research will advance the field of
engineering design by developing a theoretical framework for research that
investigates the relationship between risk, innovation and concept selection.
Designers will be provided with the tools necessary to identify and promote
creative ideas throughout the design process. These design tools will also allow
companies to develop a sustainable innovation capacity. This research will have
an immediate impact on undergraduate students by providing them with concept
selection tools and a series of web-based modules to be used in project-based
design courses. Other activities, including a design training program geared at
undergraduate and graduate women in the US and Morocco, and a K-12 EngInn
(Engineering Innovators) outreach program, will disseminate the results to the
public, engineering industry, and academia.