* 1351293
* CAREER: Molecular Engineering of Charge Transfer in Polymeric Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2019
* Luis Campos, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2019
* USD 525,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A number of grand challenges have
emerged in the semiconductor industry as it moves toward the miniaturization of
the active components. Similarly, there is a need to develop polymers with well-
defined architectures, heterogeneity, and control of properties through
molecular design. To bridge the gap between polymer chemistry and nanostructured
semiconductors, this CAREER project at Columbia University is focused on the
development of photoactive heterogeneous side-chain block copolymers (HSBCPs)
bearing electron donor and acceptor molecules. The purpose is to control
heterogeneous hierarchical structures and understand their photophysics.
Fulfilling three objectives will test the central hypothesis, which is founded
on the concept that HSBCPs can be engineered to yield nanostructured donor-
acceptor junctions capable of undergoing efficient electron transfer. First, a
family of new electron acceptor mesogens with finely tuned lowest unoccupied
molecular orbital (LUMO) levels will be developed. Second, the ability to
control the microphase segregation of heterogeneous HSBCPs containing novel
electron acceptors and other donors will be characterized by several X-ray
scattering and imaging techniques in thin films and in the bulk. Third, the
overall control of polymer structure, morphology, and positioning of
heterogeneous molecular components are the key features of the materials in this
project, which will be evaluated by pump-probe techniques to characterize the
photophysics of the materials. The success of this project could impact
renewable energy, and provide a fundamental understanding of artificial
photosynthesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Elucidating the function of organic materials in
artificial photosynthesis and solar-energy generation is a challenge
encompassing multiple length scales, from molecules to nanostructures to large-
scale devices. The use of polymers can provide the means to control
heterogeneous molecular assemblies to mimic nature's photosynthetic nanoscale
machinery. With this in mind, the PI will design and synthesize new materials
with unique molecular architectures and study their resulting optical and
electronic properties. This project on new polymeric materials will expose
students to various disciplines spanning fields across chemistry, physics, and
engineering. Additionally, the students will get first-hand research experience
in National Labs and other institutions through established collaborations. The
outreach component will focus on middle-school students from The Bronx, as well
as aspiring undergraduates interested in research careers. Visiting middle-
school students will get personal exposure to the college atmosphere and running
experiments in a lab setting. Outreach to predominantly minority-serving
undergraduate institutions will be the main focus, spending time with students
to provide them with advice and guidance to become competitive applicants for
graduate school. A key outcome of this CAREER project is aimed at strengthening
the materials curricula at the graduate and undergraduate levels at Columbia
University. These components will impact multiple levels of education through
outreach and classroom activities, with the hope of instilling interest in
students to pursue higher education in the science or engineering fields.