* 1351561
* CAREER: Multiferroic Materials - Predictive Modeling, Multiscale Analysis, and Optimal Design
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2020
* Liping Liu, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* David Fyhrie
* 08/31/2020
* USD 411,723.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program
award is to establish a fundamental understanding of the mechanics and
mathematics that dictates the physical behaviors of multiferroic crystals and
composites, to predict and optimize the performance of existing and new
multiferroic devices, and to validate the theoretical predictions and designs by
experiments. By the method of Gamma convergence and homogenization analysis, the
theoretical approach starts from the fundamental principles of thermodynamics,
electrodynamics, frame indifference and material symmetries toward a hierarchy
of self-consistent nonlinear theories for multiferroic bodies in a variety of
physical and geometric limits. Based on the finite element method and multi-
level-set gradient method, the numerical approach furnishes computational models
and algorithms for predicting and optimizing desired properties of multiferroic
materials. Through a collaborative program, the experimental approach provides
validation of the predicted properties and optimal designs of multiferroic
composites. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Multiferroic materials can be stimulated by
and respond to external magnetic, electric and elastic fields, serve multiple
functions, and are broadly used in multi-actuating and multi-sensing systems.
The integrated theoretical, numerical and experimental strategy will facilitate
the engineering of multiferroic structures and composites with improved
functionalities and stimulate the discovery of novel multiferroic materials.
These progresses will offer new opportunities in areas of smart materials and
intelligent systems. Collaborations with industrial partners will ensure the
potential technology transfer. Broader social impact will be achieved by
educational and outreach efforts that are closely tied to the research,
including research opportunities for under-represented groups, high-school
visits, a textbook on elasticity with modern applications in biomechanics and
nanomaterials, an interactive visualization demonstrations project on
multifunctional materials and optimal designs to enhance students' interest and
learning experience, and dissemination of research findings in conferences and
public seminars.