* 1351883
* CAREER:  Generation of Cyanocarbenes from Alkynes and Azides
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2020
* Mitchell Croatt, University of North Carolina Greensboro
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 07/31/2020
* USD 450,000.00

For this project, Professor Mitchell P. Croatt in the Department of Chemistry
and Biochemistry at the University of North Carolina at Greensboro is funded by
the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms B Program of the Chemistry
Division to investigate the synthesis and reactions of cyanocarbenes made from
alkynes and azides. The goal of the project is to use readily available
compounds, have them undergo previously unexplored reaction mechanisms, and
generate products with significantly increased molecular complexity. An
educational goal of this project is to develop a program to help students learn
organic chemistry better and more quickly train them to visualize molecules as
if they were experienced organic chemists. The program is designed to create a
game-like atmosphere to make learning organic chemistry fun while also helping
students to learn the material more efficiently. Finally, training of
underrepresented minority researchers will actively take place through a variety
of methods including a series of discussion panels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project explores the conversion of electrophilic alkynes and nucleophilic azides
to cyanocarbenes and then studies their subsequent reactivity. The electrophilic
alkynes, hypervalent iodonium alkynyl triflates, are isolable. However, this
project will form them in situ and allow them to react with azide anions. A
series of reactive intermediates, including vinylidene carbenes and alkynyl
azides, are formed, and eventually cyanocarbenes are generated. These
electrophilic carbenes will be allowed to react with a variety of nucleophiles
to produce additional reactive intermediates which can undergo extensive
rearrangement before producing stable molecules with significantly increased
molecular complexity.