* 1351663
* CAREER: Tuning optical responses in artificial molecules of monovalent gold nanocrystals
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2019
* Ming Tang, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 04/30/2019
* USD 671,683.00

Ming L. Tang of the University of California Riverside is supported by the
Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry program in a CAREER award to
link nanoparticles together in uniquely well-defined ways. Nanoparticles made of
gold and other noble metals can exhibit surface plasmon modes that are
particularly effective at absorbing or scattering light in specific regions of
the visible spectrum. This research is to hook them together in selective ways,
the goal being to expand our ability to control interactions of light with
matter at the nanoscale level. The approach is by chemical means, so that one
can readily scale up the synthesis of these assemblies. The education component
of this CAREER project is to deliver to the greater public the excitement of the
fascinating properties of plasmonic nanoparticles. It includes the creation of a
nanomaterials-focused, discovery-based laboratory course, "Painting with
Plasmons and Polymers," for first year undergraduate students. This represents a
new addition to the University of California Riverside's (UCR's) Learning
Community program, which has been shown to increase retention rates of STEM
majors and push 4-year graduation rates from 24% to 40%. First year student
leaders from this class are expected to engage local middle and high school
students with scientific demonstrations and to inspire them with stories about
their personal path towards a STEM degree. The PI mentors students and teachers
from these schools by providing them an opportunity to work in her research
laboratory along with graduate students and
undergraduates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of controlling nanoscale light-
matter interactions in nanoparticle assemblies is achieved by inducing strong
electric and magnetic transitions, particularly the latter, which are especially
weak in the visible frequencies. Supra-molecular chemistry and solid phase
synthesis is being used to create "monovalent gold" building blocks, i.e., gold
nanoparticles each with a single binding site, as a powerful alternative to the
current state of the art DNA-based self-assembly. The self-assembly method aims
to control particles from 5-100 nm in size and to engineer inter-particle
distances on the order of 1-20 nm. First, precise control over the distance
between two nanoparticles of different composition creates heterodimers employed
to identify modes disallowed by symmetry arguments. Second, by virtue of an
inter-particle geometry dictated by a molecular scaffold, both electric and
magnetic dipoles are induced in the circulating currents within the artificial
molecule. Strong, tunable magnetic dipoles allow introduction of Fano resonances
with high quality factors that are useful for sensing. And third, 3-D
tetrahedral constructs with core-shell nanoparticles predicted to have
overlapping electric and magnetic dipoles are being investigated.