* 1351283
* CAREER: DNA Transport Through Carbon Nanotubes
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2020
* Stephen Levy, SUNY at Binghamton
* Continuing Grant
* Steve Smith
* 08/31/2020
* USD 500,000.00

DNA Transport Through Carbon Nanotubes Non-technical Summary This CAREER Award
by the Biomaterials program in the Division of Materials Research is to study
the passage of molecules through small pores. The passage of molecules through
small pores or structures plays a key role in many biological processes.
Biological molecules regularly cross through pores in nuclear and cellular
membranes to effect cell activity. This translocation process plays an essential
role in many areas of biotechnology, like drug delivery and assembling
recombinant DNA. This process can be studied experimentally by observing the
rate that DNA molecules travel through well-defined nano-structures under the
application of an electric field. There is still considerable debate concerning
the fundamental physical processes that govern this process. It is envisioned
that the results obtained from these experiments will inform the fabrication of
future devices for the separation, manipulation, and potential sequencing of
nucleic acids. The PI will measure the rate at which single stranded DNA
molecules are transported through individual carbon nanotubes, both optically
and electrically. In parallel to the research portion of this project the PI
will use the concepts of polymer physics and nanofabrication as models in
outreach efforts aimed toward increasing participation in physics by different
groups of elementary, college, and graduate students. The proposed activities
would significantly improve the physics education in local elementary schools in
high-need rural areas of upstate New York. The method for integrating the
educational plan into the research program relies on the active participation of
undergraduate and graduate students in the PI's laboratory. Much of the science
content will be taught using DNA as an example of a model polymer, which is a
rich pedagogical tool combining aspects of biology, physics, and material
science. The elementary school education will have a focus on microfabrication
and biotechnology and their impacts on everyday life. Technical Summary In this
project the PI will optically and electrically measure the rate at which single
stranded DNA molecules are transported through individual carbon nanotubes, thus
aiding in the understanding of the physical mechanisms that govern biomolecule
transport through nanopores. The combination of optical detection with
electrical detection is required to address fundamental questions about the
transport process. Fluorescent DNA molecules will be tracked as they translocate
a nanotube while the ionic current through the nanotube is simultaneously
measured. The PI will measure capture rates and transit times using
semiconducting and metallic carbon nanotubes as a function of applied voltage,
DNA concentration, DNA length, and salt concentration. Modulating the charge on
the carbon nanotubes will enable the PI to determine the critical role of
electroosmosis in the transport process. This approach will also elucidate the
dependence of the nanotube chirality and the nanotube surface charge on the DNA
transport process. This experimental program will provide a quantitative
understanding of biomolecular transport that ties together soft condensed matter
physics, chemistry, and biology. In addition to the research portion of this
project the PI will implement an integrated education plan that addresses
current needs in Binghamton University's undergraduate and graduate curriculum.
The components of the educational plan include: (1) a microfabrication module
for undergraduate biologists aimed at increasing participation of
underrepresented groups in physics; (2) entrepreneurship training for graduate
students in the physical sciences; and (3) an outreach program that provides
physics demonstrations to local elementary school children.