* 1351412
* CAREER: Wettability Engendered Templated Self-assembly (WETS) for Large Scale Multi-phasic Nanoparticle Fabrication
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2014,02/28/2019
* Anish Tuteja, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 02/28/2019
* USD 400,000.00

This Early Faculty Career Development (CAREER) Program award provides funding
for the large scale, facile and cost-effective manufacturing of a range of
different monodisperse, multi-phasic, organic, micro- and nanoparticles
possessing virtually any size, shape, and chemistry using a novel and facile
technique termed WETS (Wettability Engendered Templated Self-assembly).
Although, different routes to fabricate bi-phasic (Janus) or tri-phasic
particles have been explored in the recent past, a simple technique that allows
for the manufacture of mono-disperse, multi-phasic particles of any desired
chemical composition, with precise control over their geometries, has not been
developed thus far. This project plans to use the WETS technique to fabricate a
wide variety of such nanoparticles of complex shapes and sizes as small as 20
nm. A goal is to produce nanoparticles that are below 50 nm to benefit from the
unique properties available at that scale. Other objectives include (i)
fabrication of a prototype system for automated, rapid, large-scale
manufacturing, (ii) studying the self-assembly of the synthesized multiphasic
particles under a variety of environmental conditions, (iii) understanding the
effects of nanoparticle addition on the rheological and thermal properties of
different polymer melts, and (iv) testing the suitability of the novel
biodegradable multiphasic nanoparticles for targeting and killing ovarian and
breast cancer cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this work will allow
for the manufacturing of a range of different multi-phasic organic nanoparticles
on a very large scale that will impact a wide range of fields including, polymer
nanocomposites, semiconductor technology, drug delivery, biotechnology, energy,
chemical and biological detection. The outreach and educational activities of
the project are motivated by the PI's commitment to increasing the number of
underrepresented minorities in STEM disciplines. The activities include
conducting a five week "Saturday Engineering Exploration" program for middle
school students, multiple hands-on demonstrations for high-school students,
recruiting of undergraduates and a graduate student in the research, and
incorporating this work in different undergraduate and graduate courses.