* 1351361
* CAREER:Integrated Research &amp; Education In Stochastic Systems-Based Watershed Management &amp; Water Safety (SWMS)
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/2014,12/31/2023
* Lilit Yeghiazarian, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 12/31/2023
* USD 449,641.00

1351361 (Yeghiazarian). Sustainable management of water resources is
unattainable without addressing fecal contamination of surface waters, the
leading cause of water impairment nationally. Despite over a decade of research,
dynamics of fecal sources and contaminants in surface waters is still poorly
understood. There is a need for a systems-based theory that can be used to
analyze water-contamination patterns as part of stochastic watershed processes.
The objective of this grant is to expand the PI's ongoing research and education
program in Stochastic Systems-Based Watershed Management &amp; Water Safety
(SWMS). The objective of the research plan is to develop a Stochastic Systems-
based Watershed Reliability (SWR) theory, with reliability defined as compliance
with microbial water-quality standards, and failure as non-compliance. The
rationale for this work is that the SWR theory will make it possible to measure
probabilistically the impact of watershed components and microbial sources on
overall water quality, and to determine watershed characteristics and external
environmental parameters to which microbial water quality is most sensitive.
This will help (1) identify the "hot spots" exerting the highest impact, and (2)
quantify sustainability metrics such as reliability, vulnerability and
resilience, all of which will, in turn, guide prioritization of management
measures under various conditions. The objective of the education plan is to
promote understanding of systems-based and stochastic approaches to analysis of
environmental systems, and to facilitate a widespread use of the SWR theory in
education, research and sustainable watershed management. The rationale is that
the education plan will (1) produce a cohort of teachers and students
knowledgeable in systems analysis, and able to teach and apply their knowledge
to solve a wide range of environmental problems; (2) help water resources
researchers, practitioners and decision makers become fluent in utilizing
stochastic and systems-based tools, and engage in policy-shaping and decision-
making in the probabilistic context. The PI expects to attain her research
objective by pursuing three specific aims. Aim #1: Collect fecal contamination
data in the East Fork Watershed (EFW) of Little Miami. A targeted sampling
strategy will be used to provide data for theory testing and validation. Aim #2:
Develop the SWR theory with application to EFW. Systems reliability theory, used
for risk assessment of multi-component engineered structures, will be developed
for contaminant transport processes in watersheds, and applied to the EFW. Aim
#3: Compute sustainability metrics and index, and explore their response to
various management options. SWR will be used to compute the reliability,
resilience and vulnerability metrics and the Sustainability Index (SI) for EFW
EFW?s surface waters. Various management scenarios will be simulated, and their
impact on the metrics and SI will be analyzed. The approach taken in this
proposal integrates state-of-the-art methods from 3 different fields.
Environmental engineering provides methods for quantification and prediction of
water flow over the land and in stream networks; ecology provides understanding
of microbial population dynamics in various portions of the watershed; and
systems engineering provides a well-tested methodology for measuring the impact
of various components and system parameters in complex systems. The outcome of
this research is expected to impact the design of environmental monitoring and
sustainable watershed management strategies. They would become more targeted in
space and in time, as better understanding is gained about interactions between
different system components and sustainability metrics. SWR theory aims to
vertically advance the field towards better understanding of how watershed
characteristics, external environmental parameters, and microbial transport and
interactions in different parts of the watershed influence surface water
quality. The project aims to have a significant educational impact by
facilitating the understanding and adoption of stochastic, systems-based tools
for watershed analysis among students, teachers, researchers and water
practitioners.