* 1351760
* CAREER: Self-Sensing and Sensitivity: Advanced Composites for Traditional Non-Destructive Evaluation (NDE)
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2020
* Michael Keller, University of Tulsa
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 06/30/2020
* USD 400,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program grant provides funding
for research on the development of fiber-reinforced composite materials that are
easy to inspect using standard non-destructive evaluation techniques. Non-
destructive evaluation detects damage in structures, much as a doctor's x-ray
detects a broken bone and such techniques are critical to the safety of a wide
variety of industrial and commercial structures such as airplanes and pipelines.
Nondestructive evaluation is common for metallic structures, but its application
in non-metallic systems is much more challenging. To address this challenge,
approaches developed for self-healing materials will be adopted. Materials will
be processed that contain microencapsulated contrast agents to make damage
easier to detect during magnetic and x-ray inspection of fiber-reinforced
polymer composites. This research will take inspiration from nanoparticle-based
contrast agents used for medical diagnostics and will apply them to advanced
composites. The contrast agents will be synthesized and integrated into the
materials and, in parallel, sensing systems for these contrast agents will be
developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this research will enable
quantitative analysis of damage in composites using highly accepted, readily
available non-destructive evaluation techniques. This will improve the safety
and reliability of composites. Lighter, more efficient structures would be
enabled as engineers gain confidence based on improved damage detection in the
structures they create. Graduate and undergraduate students in this research
will be part of an interdisciplinary project combining solid mechanics,
instrumentation and materials chemistry and the results will be published in
journals and presented at national and international conferences. Educational
initiatives include peer-based instruction and other self-directed techniques in
engineering courses that will foster creativity and improve retention of STEM
students. Aspects of this research will be integrated into undergraduate and
graduate courses as well as an engineering summer camp for high school students.
All course materials and demonstrations from the research will be available
through the research group's website.