* 1351337
* CAREER: Fractal Bandstructure by Superlattice Patterning
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2014,11/30/2014
* Cory Dean, CUNY City College
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Sokol
* 11/30/2014
* USD 158,674.00

Non-Technical Abstract: This NSF Career Award will fund a research and outreach
program centered around the experimental study of the fractal Hofstadter energy
spectrum in graphene. Nearly 30 years ago, Douglas Hofstadter showed
theoretically that when electrons are exposed to both a magnetic field and a
periodic electric field, a recursive self similar behaviour results. Known as
Hofstadter's Butterfly, this complex pattern represents one of the first fractal
patterns discovered in Physics, and yet its experimental realization has since
remained elusive. In a recent breakthrough discovery, the PI developed new
techniques that enabled the first unambiguous observation of the butterfly
spectrum in graphene-based devices. The fractal system represents a new kind of
complex material that may enable new fundamental studies of patterned two-
dimensional systems, as well as new directions in device engineering at the
nanoscale. This research program is ideally suited to meaningful involvement by
junior level students, since the fabrication and measurement can be quickly
learned with limited knowledge of advanced physics. In addition to providing
research opportunities for undergraduates at The City College of New York
(CCNY), a minority serving institution located in Harlem, this program will
expand partnerships with local area high-schools to provide hands-on training to
pre-university aged students in the area of nanotechnology. Through a
combination of lectures, workshops and research placements opportunities, this
program is aimed at generating interest in nanoscience at an early age in an
effort to promote and expand America's role in developing innovative technology
in the coming decades. A unique advantage of the relationship between CCNY and
its surrounding community is the ability to further target this program towards
young students from traditionally underrepresented groups.

Technical Abstract: This NSF Career Award will fund a research and outreach
program centered around the experimental study of the fractal Hofstadter energy
spectrum in graphene/boron nitride heterostructures devices. Nearly 40 years ago
Douglas Hofstadter theoretically predicted that electrons subjected
simultaneously to a magnetic field and spatially periodic electric field exhibit
fractal behaviour. In a recent breakthrough discovery the PI demonstrated that
the moire pattern resulting from placing graphene in contact with hexagonal
boron nitride provides the ideal-sized superlattice potential for experimental
realization of Hofstadter's fractal spectrum. Combining these fabrication
techniques together with low temperature/high magnetic field transport
measurements, the PI will utilize the graphene/h-BN platform to perform the
first systematic experimental investigation of the predicted quantum fractal.
This effort will address several outstanding and fundamental questions, such as
the dependence of the spectrum on both the magnitude and symmetry of the
superlattice; the influence of disorder; the nature of symmetry breaking; and
the possibility of correlated behaviour due to strong electron interactions.
This research program is ideally suited to meaningful involvement by junior
level students, since the fabrication and measurement can be quickly learned
with limited knowledge of advanced physics. In addition to providing research
opportunities for undergraduates at The City College of New York (CCNY), a
minority serving institution located in Harlem, this program will expand
partnerships with local area high-schools to provide hands-on training to pre-
university aged students in the area of nanotechnology. Through a combination of
lectures, workshops and research placement opportunities, this program is aimed
at generating interest in nanoscience at an early age in an effort to promote
and expand America's role in developing innovative technology in the coming
decades. A unique advantage of the relationship between CCNY and its surrounding
community is the ability to further target this program towards young students
from traditionally underrepresented groups.