* 1351108
* CAREER: Algorithms for understanding data
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2019
* Gregory Valiant, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 06/30/2019
* USD 500,000.00

Given samples from some unknown distribution, what can one infer about the
underlying distribution, and how efficiently can these inferences be made?  In
many of the most fundamental settings, our understanding of the computational
and information theoretic possibilities and barriers is still startlingly poor.
 This project tackles two broad research objectives: developing efficient
algorithms for probing data, and understanding how to efficiently estimate
properties of distributions.  The first line of research seeks to understand
which questions about a dataset can be answered extremely efficiently, requiring
computational resources (time, or memory) that are sublinear in the size of the
dataset or distribution.  The second research objective is to understand the
minimal amount of information necessary to ascertain, with high probability,
whether or not a distribution or dataset possesses a given property.  In the
context of statistical property estimation, this problem asks how few samples
are needed to estimate the property in question to a desired accuracy, with high
probability.  This research pursues both new estimation algorithms, and new
information theoretic tools and lower bounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With vast and
important datasets emerging across many disciplines, from genetic, biological,
and medical databases, to databases documenting our economic and social
behaviors, the challenge of how to make sense of them has particular immediate
relevance and has rapidly become the bottleneck in scientific understanding.  
The specific problems investigated in this project arise in the analysis of
these datasets; algorithmic advances on these problems have the potential to
very quickly be adopted and transform ongoing data analysis efforts.   Beyond
the immediate implications for the data sciences, these questions are extremely
basic and foundational. As such, new techniques, perspectives, and insights
gleaned from their study are likely to have broad implications for other
problems throughout computer science, statistics, information theory, and the
data sciences.