* 1351788
* CAREER: SusChEM:  Polymers Derived from Vegetable Oils: Synthesis, Structure-Property Relationships and Sustainability
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Megan Robertson, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 08/31/2019
* USD 499,976.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to
address key scientific challenges enabling the broad implementation of
triglyceride vegetable oils as an environmentally beneficial source for polymers
with tunable physical properties. Vegetable oils are an attractive feedstock,
based on their abundance, low cost, and ease of functionalization. This research
plan is structured around four specific aims: design of synthetic techniques for
vegetable oil-derived polymers, investigation of structure-property
relationships in vegetable oil-derived polymers, development of biomass-derived
nanostructured polymers for targeted applications, and assessment of the
environmental impact of biomass-derived polymers. This approach will begin with
synthetic strategies to modify the chemical structure of the polymers, employing
metathesis chemistry and supramolecular interactions. A detailed understanding
of structure-property-function relationships for these polymers will emphasize
their thermal, mechanical, and rheological properties, targeting thermoplastic
elastomers, stimuli-responsive and shape memory materials. Characterization of
the thermodynamic interactions through spectroscopy and scattering experiments
in the biorenewable polymers will allow for the a priori prediction of the
nanoscale structure. Quantification of the environmental impacts of vegetable
oil-derived polymers will guide future material design aspects, incorporating
green engineering principles. The outcomes of the proposed work will provide a
roadmap for the design of functional polymers from vegetable oils.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A number of major challenges will be addressed in this
project. The bulky nature of the monomers may lead to synthetic challenges
relative to their petroleum-derived counterparts and have key implications for
the physical properties of the polymers. Biomass-derived materials may exhibit
biodegradability and oxidative degradation. The presence of specific
interactions may require looking beyond mean-field theories for modeling these
polymers and their mixtures. Importantly, the structure-property-function
relationships for these new materials are expected to be significantly different
from those described in the vast body of literature for petroleum-derived
polymers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The world supply of petroleum is finite and in the
future it will be necessary to utilize sustainable resources for the production
of polymers. Polymers derived from agricultural sources offer benefits to
society of enhanced biodegradability, reduced environmental impact, and
utilization of an annually renewable resource. Replacements for commodity
plastics have in many cases been successfully developed; however, relatively few
studies have focused on biomass as a source for nanostructured materials.
Polymers which exhibit nanoscale structure have tunable physical properties,
which ultimately lead to important advances in material function. The proposed
research will enable the implementation of polymers from a widely available
agricultural source: vegetable oils. Additionally, this project will cultivate
knowledge in students, educators and the general public on the relationships
between energy, sustainability and the environmental impact of materials,
through the broad participation of underrepresented groups in outreach programs,
including women, Hispanic students and students from other minority groups. The
following activities will be undertaken: a research-focused outreach program
will be developed for local community college students; hands-on educational
programs for students and teachers at targeted local high schools will be
expanded; high school, undergraduate and graduate students will be mentored in
the research project; and an exhibit will be designed for the Houston Museum of
Natural Science on sustainable polymers.