* 1351595
* CAREER: Three Region nLC-MS/MS Analysis: A Novel and Rapid Approach to Evaluate Molecular Penetration
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2014,03/31/2018
* Amanda Hummon, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 03/31/2018
* USD 511,897.00

In this CAREER project, Professor Amanda Hummon and her students at the
University of Notre Dame will develop a new mass spectrometric methodology for
the analysis of chemical compounds in cell cultures. The approach will provide
much greater chemical and spatial information in a faster and higher-throughput
fashion than is currently available with any other methodology. As part of this
CAREER educational program, Professor Hummon and her students will develop a
program focused on the recruitment and retention of women in STEM fields by
organizing lab tours with three local Girl Scout troops per year and
participation in two forums per semester to discuss issues that
disproportionally affect women. This program will encourage the participation of
younger female students in science careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
will study the penetration of chemical compounds into three dimensional cell
culture models via mass spectrometry. Using a combination of serial
trypsinization and nano Liquid Chromatography-Electrospray Tandem Mass
Spectrometry (nLC-MS/MS), the distribution of a compound and its metabolites can
be mapped with spatial fidelity. While previous studies have utilized computer
simulations to predict molecular penetration through cells, measurement of the
molecules remains the only reliable way to evaluate the effectiveness of a new
species. The approach will be tested with the compounds irinotecan, oxaliplatin,
and apoptotic imaging probes. This award from the Chemical Measurements and
Imaging program in the Division of Chemistry is made jointly with the Instrument
Development for Biological Research program in the Division of Biological
Infrastructure.