* 1352572
* CAREER: Large-Strain Deformation of Polymeric Gels: Non-linearity, Instability, and Fracture
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2020
* Santanu Kundu, Mississippi State University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 04/30/2020
* USD 533,200.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

This project is focused on the deformation behavior of swollen polymer gels
under different conditions as a function of their microstructure. The outcome of
large-strain deformation of a swollen gel depends on many factors such as
molecular architecture, elastic modulus, viscoelasticity and poroelasticity, and
length scales relevant to the process. Specific technical goals include: (a) To
establish a relationship between molecular architecture, macroscopic mechanical
properties, and large-strain deformation behavior of swollen polymer gels. (b)
To develop new measurement platforms for characterizing these gels during large-
strain deformation processes. (c) To implement a computational framework for
describing the deformation process.

To determine the similarities and differences in deformation behavior, a variety
of gels formed through covalent, ionic, and physical bonding and consisting of
both synthetic and biological polymers, will be considered. This work aims to
provide: (a) enhanced insights into gel structure formation at the molecular
level, (b) improved understanding of gel deformation as a function of polymer
architecture and gel structure, (c) advancement and development of measurement
platforms necessary to characterize these materials, (d) a novel computational
framework to describe an experimental observation and to predict an outcome for
real-life applications, and (e) unifying principles based on this knowledge to
design new gels.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

The project aims to achieve fundamental understanding of the deformation
behavior of polymeric gels, and will also be relevant to any soft materials.
Polymer gels are used in many applications ranging from bioimplants to tissue
scaffolds to oil recovery to drug delivery. Accordingly, this CAREER project
will impact the materials/polymer-science, chemical engineering, and biomedical
disciplines.

This program is also designed to have an impact on the education and future
careers of middle/high-school, undergraduate, and graduate students. The
educational and outreach component of this program focuses on three segments:
(a) incorporation and further development of course modules on polymer science
and soft polymeric materials, (b) involvement of undergraduate students in
results-driven research activities, and (c) inspiring middle and high school
students to pursue education in STEM majors through laboratory demonstrations
and participations in small research projects. To encourage the participation of
a broader population in scientific research, the PI plans to recruit graduate
students, undergraduate students, and high/middle-school participants from
diverse populations, including women and underrepresented minorities.