* 1352936
* EAGER: CIFRAM: Understanding High Frequency Trading Activity on the Nanosecond Time Scale
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Robert Sinkovits, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2017
* USD 255,851.00

The multidisciplinary project, led by Mao Ye of University of Illinois at Urbana
Champaign and Robert Sinkovits of the San Diego Supercomputing Center, funded as
part of the OFR-NSF Partnership in Support of Research Collaborations in Finance
Informatics&lt;br/&gt;aims to examine the impact of trading activity at the
nanosecond (10-9 second) timeframe on financial system. This exploratory project
aims to address two key questions: First, does competition in speed at the
nanosecond level create or destroy social value? To be more specific, does an
increase of speed improve our usual measures of market quality such as bid-ask
spread, market depth, and market efficiency or does it increase levels of
volatility and instability? Second, are there any new types of market
manipulations in the nanosecond world? The project leverages powerful
supercomputers to investigate abnormal trading activity and suspicious market
events on the nanosecond timescale by constructing an order-by-order snapshot of
financial markets with nanosecond-resolution time stamps.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to develop effective computational and
analytic approaches to exploring whether new regulations are needed when trading
occurs on a nanosecond scale, and if so, how to design optimal regulatory
policies. This is a challenging problem due to both the endogenous relationship
between liquidity, price discovery, order cancellation, and speed on the one
hand and the massive amounts of data generated on the other. The research team
plans to use exogenous technology shocks and NASDAQ channel assignment as
identification strategy. By identifying exogenous technology shocks in the data,
the team aims to establish the casual relationship between speed and market
quality measures. They also use random NASDAQ channel assignment to examine
whether there is abnormal co-movement in message flow within each channel,
evidence consistent with quote stuffing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the recent
years, equity markets experienced a number of problems related to high frequency
trading, including the May 6, 2010 Flash Crash, the initial public offerings of
BATS and Facebook, the losses by Knight Capital and more recently, the crash
which was precipitated by a rumor originating on Twitter. However, little is
known about the market impacts of trading on the nanosecond scale. Development
of effective policies and alarm systems requires understanding of the causal
relationships between trading patterns and their effects on the financial
system. The project, if successful, will help identify and characterize policy
options and market discipline to ensure a safe, sound, and fair financial system
in a world where trades are made at lightening speeds. The project fosters
interdisciplinary collaborations and research-based advanced training at the
intersection of computer science, high performance computing, and finance. It
enriches the curriculum and training of the next generation of researchers in
the emerging interdisciplinary field of Finance Informatics.