* 1352511
* CAREER: Detector Technology and Science Education in the Era of Gravitational Wave Astrophysics
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2020
* Stefan Ballmer, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 08/31/2020
* USD 860,000.00

This CAREER award funds research at Syracuse University to support Advanced
LIGO's quest to observe the gravitational wave universe. The research will
include monitoring Advanced LIGO's data quality and developing hardware for
upgrading the detectors. Specifically supported are i) The design and
development of adaptive mode-matching for Advanced LIGO's output mode cleaner,
enabling the use of non-classical squeezed-vacuum in the detector to improve the
observational range. ii) A search for rare detector artifacts and low-level
environmental correlations, prone to diminish the scientific return from
Advanced LIGO.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Einstein's general theory of relativity
predicts that violent cosmic events, such as for example colliding neutron
stars, lead to tiny distortions of space-time here on earth, measurable as
minuscule fluctuations in the distance between suspended optical mirrors. The
NSF-funded Advanced LIGO project intends to precisely measure these so-called
gravitational waves. Advanced LIGO's sensitivity is limited by the quantization
of light, but can be improved by using an additional non-classical light source.
Such light sources are however extremely sensitive to optical losses. This award
supports the development of adaptive elements in the beam path to guarantee that
all the light coming from the interferometer can be detected. Additionally,
environmental disturbances have the potential to mimic the tiny distance
fluctuations due to gravitational waves. This award supports monitoring Advanced
LIGO's data for such disturbances. The first direct observation of gravitational
waves will be a scientific break-through echoed in the news media, providing an
outreach opportunity. The award supports workshops for high school teachers to
bring the excitement of new scientific discoveries in this brand-new field of
astronomy to high school class rooms.