* 1352133
* Workshop Proposal:  Data-Driven Energy Systems:  From Data Collection to Information Technology for Sustainable Services
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2015
* Marija Ilic, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 07/31/2015
* USD 35,000.00

This project is to organize a national conference with leading engineering,
computer science and policy making thought leaders and exchange ideas on future
energy management systems (EMS). The objectives of the new EMS architectures
will particularly be discussed to support the premise that IT-enabled
distributed loosely coordinated architecture is both efficient and robust during
major unplanned natural disasters, like hurricanes and tornadoes. At present,
EMS software does not have applications that enable electricity users to pro-
actively respond to system conditions during such major natural disasters. There
are no tools for fast bottom-up restoration, either. The workshop will address
possible problem formulations for next generation multi-layered EMS
architectures capable of incentivizing the groups of users (one may refer to
them as the intelligent balancing authorities (iBAs)) to utilize resources as
efficiently as possible during normal condition, and be sufficiently adaptive
and flexible to ensure differentiated reliable service during single/double
equipment outages (planned for by the utilities now by keeping conservative
stand-by the worst case reserves) as well as during natural disasters (for which
utilities do not have methods to ensure reliable prioritized service without
requiring excessive stand-by reserve). The workshop will explore how the
distributed intelligence and the right IT signals with the right parallel
asynchronous algorithms embedded into different layers would enable both social
choice and system-level performance.