* 1352120
* CAREER: Tetrapyrrole Architectures Displaying a Multielectron Redox Chemistry for CO2 Activation and Energy Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2014,08/31/2020
* Joel Rosenthal, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 08/31/2020
* USD 650,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Catalysis program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Joel Rosenthal of the University of Delaware will develop
new catalyst platforms for the activation and interconversion of small molecule
species. Processes that have energy consequences will be targeted. This research
will focus on the synthesis and study of new tetrapyrrole complexes with unusual
photophysical and multielectron redox properties. These systems will be
thoroughly examined by a combination of X-ray crystallography, voltammetry and
several types of electronic spectroscopy. Electrochemical and chemical reduction
methods will be used to probe the ability of the tetrapyrrole complexes to
catalyze the oxygen reduction reaction and the conversion of carbon dioxide to
chemical fuels. This CAREER award also supports outreach to improve the
accessibility of inorganic chemistry and energy science to high school students
via summer research internships at the University of Delaware. The broader
impacts of this work include potential societal benefits from the development of
inexpensive catalysts that can promote renewable energy conversion and
production of fuels from carbon dioxide. Additionally, the project will provide
mentorship, education and training of a new generation of individuals in order
to prepare them for the scientific and societal challenges of the 21st century.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on the development of new inorganic
platforms that can drive chemical transformations that are important for energy
storage and conversion. To meet this challenge, new metal complexes that are
less expensive and easier to obtain than conventional ones will be prepared,
characterized and studied. This research will also demonstrate the ability of
these inexpensive molecular platforms to promote the challenging bond making and
breaking processes that are required in chemical conversions involving small
molecules. Some specific goals include developing catalysts for the conversion
of carbon dioxide into fuels.