* 1352373
* CAREER:Predicting the Surface Structures of Crystalline Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2014,02/28/2021
* Tim Mueller, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 02/28/2021
* USD 400,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This CAREER award supports the development and application of machine learning
and data mining methods to predict the surface structures of crystalline
materials in a variety of chemical environments. The PI will develop a three-
step process which is designed to minimize the computational expense of
predicting surface structures by maximizing the re-use of existing data. In the
first step, evolutionary algorithms will be used to develop a re-usable library
of likely surface reconstructions for bulk structure types. In the second step a
combination of evolutionary algorithms and data mining methods will be developed
to determine the most likely surface structures for a particular material
surface. In the third step, ab-initio calculations and cluster expansions will
be used to identify the particular surface structures with the lowest energy.
The structure prediction process will be developed, validated, and applied to
three technologically important systems: perovskite-structured oxides, Au-Pd
alloys, and spinel-structured oxides.

The research will be integrated with an educational outreach program that is
designed to strengthen the pipeline of researchers who have both the interest
and ability to discover and design new materials through computational research.
At the elementary school level, the PI has volunteered to partner with a master
teacher at a majority-minority, low-income Baltimore City public school to share
scientific knowledge, help construct an effective curriculum, and design a
hands-on exercise intended to educate and excite students about STEM activities.
At the middle school level, the PI will teach computer programming skills to
Baltimore City students who are participating in a VEX robotics competition. At
the high school level, a female student from a nearby high school will
participate in the research project as member of the research team. The PI will
work with the graduate student to develop an online tutorial that covers
fundamental topics in materials surface science, and elements of this tutorial
will be integrated into the core curriculum of the Department of Materials
Science and Engineering at Johns Hopkins University.

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY

This CAREER award supports the development and application of advanced
computational and data mining methods to predict how atoms are arranged on the
surfaces of materials. The ability to use computers to predict the properties of
material surfaces will facilitate the design of new materials for a wide range
of technologies including batteries, catalysts, and sensors. However before a
property of a surface can be predicted, it is first necessary to predict the
atomic structure, or how the atoms are arranged, on the surface. The PI will
address this challenging problem by developing a method to accurately predict
material surface structures with low computational cost. This will be
accomplished by combining a variety of computational tools in a way that
leverages existing knowledge about the surface structures to predict the surface
structure of a new material. The method developed in this research will be used
to predict the surface structures of three representative classes of materials
that were chosen for their importance in technologies such as batteries and
catalysts.

The research will be integrated with an educational outreach program that is
designed to strengthen the pipeline of researchers who have both the interest
and ability to use computers to discover and design new materials. At the
elementary school level, the PI has volunteered to partner with a master teacher
at a majority-minority, low-income Baltimore City public school to share
scientific knowledge, help construct an effective curriculum, and design a
hands-on exercise intended to educate and excite students about science and
engineering. At the middle school level, the PI will teach computer programming
skills to Baltimore City students who are participating in a robotics
competition. At the high school level, a female student from a nearby high
school will participate in the research project as member of the research team.
The PI will work with the graduate student to develop an online tutorial that
covers fundamental topics in materials surface science, and elements of this
tutorial will be integrated into the core curriculum of the Department of
Materials Science and Engineering at Johns Hopkins University.