* 1352375
* CAREER: Toward an Improved Understanding of the Sinks and Photochemical Sources of Nitrous Acid on Boundary Layer Surfaces
* GEO,AGS
* 06/15/2014,05/31/2024
* Jonathan Raff, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 05/31/2024
* USD 727,622.00

This research is focused on the investigation of selected urban and soil
surfaces for their potential to serve as sources and/or sinks of nitrous acid
to/from the atmosphere. Nitrous acid is an especially important compound in
atmospheric chemistry because of its ability to serve as a precursor to the
formation of the hydroxyl radical and thereby influence the oxidizing capacity
of the atmosphere. Current chemical models are unable to reproduce the observed
profiles of atmospheric nitrous acid, due in part to the fact that its sources
and sinks are not well understood. Recent studies suggest that significant
daytime production of nitrous acid may be attributed to heterogeneous reactions
on various environmental surfaces, such as asphalt, cement, and soils.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Laboratory studies will be conducted to generate the
kinetics and photochemical data needed to advance predictive models of ambient
nitrous acid (HONO) levels. This research will determine the reaction
probabilities for (a) the uptake of HONO on soil, asphalt, and cement; and (b)
nitrogen dioxide (NO2) conversion to HONO on iron oxides and asphalt under
atmospheric conditions. Measured uptake coefficients will help to constrain the
fraction of HONO that may be loss to boundary layer surfaces. The quantum yields
of HONO formation and molar absorptivity values measured for nitrate adsorbed to
surfaces (such as soil) are key parameters that will enable calculations of HONO
fluxes from these sources.