* 1352296
* CAREER: Mechanism as a Driving Force in Gold(I) Catalyzed Alkyne Functionalizations
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2014,09/30/2021
* Amanda Jones, Wake Forest University
* Continuing Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 09/30/2021
* USD 650,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Catalysis program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Amanda C. Jones of Wake Forest University is investigating
improving the efficiency of gold-based catalysts by examining the chemical
mechanisms by which they act. Gold catalysts are powerful and environmentally
friendly reagents that can be used for the production of pharmaceuticals and
fine chemicals. The economic feasibility of their use, however, is dependent on
the ability to use them in minimal quantities with maximum recycling. The
mechanistic understanding being pursued by this project is crucial to achieving
a high level of efficiency. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Jones is examining
the distinct reactivity of organogold compounds and the ability of cationic gold
complexes to mediate addition reactions, transmetalations, and rearrangements
via gold carbenes. The unifying theme is the current gap in information about
the formation and reactivity of alkyl gold (C(sp3)-Au) intermediates. The
approach is two-pronged and incorporates first the synthesis of organogold
compounds and gold coordination complexes, and second, kinetic studies on those
structures to elucidate mechanisms and improve future design of catalytic
reactions. Development of a rapid-injection NMR apparatus will contribute to
these studies by opening up the window of obtainable kinetic data. The project
provides training for undergraduate and graduate students who will learn to
execute chemical and scientific methods, conduct responsible research, and think
critically about reaction mechanisms. Professor Jones is also developing reading
clubs as a way to encourage early and life-long engagement with science. By
exposing community members and elementary school students to novels with
scientific themes, as well as the prose or biographical writings of "dual
personalities," individuals who have achieved success in supposedly disparate
areas (scientist vs. writer, artist, musician, activist), Professor Jones is
working to cultivate positive attitudes toward science. These efforts contribute
a non-traditional element to the recruitment of students to scientific fields.