* 1352328
* CAREER: The Rational Design of Plasmonic Photocatalysts for Efficient Solar Energy Conversion
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2021
* Wei Wei, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 06/30/2021
* USD 580,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Solid State and Materials Chemistry
Program of the Division of Materials Research will support the research and
education program of Prof. Wei David Wei at the University of Florida. Prof.
Wei's group will develop methods and strategies to address key questions
concerning surface plasmon resonance (SPR)-mediated electron transfer (SPMET) in
order to develop new materials and strategies for efficient solar-to-chemical
energy conversion. The developed methods will allow the direct probing of the
spatial distribution, diffusion mechanics, and relaxation dynamics of the
"effective hot electrons" following the SPMET process at the single-nanoparticle
level. The proposed fundamental study will clarify the specific role of SPR in
enhancing photocatalytic activity, and the obtained knowledge will lay the
groundwork for the design and construction of novel plasmonic heterostructures
for highly efficient solar photocatalysis. These unique SPR-mediated ET
strategies will be essential to a number of related energy conversion and
storage processes where ET and transport play important roles, and they will
further inform the development of technologies that improve upon the low
efficiency endemic to many contemporary methods of photocatalytic chemical
energy production. Moreover, these strategies will advance many other
technologically-relevant areas, not covered in this proposal, that exploit
photoinduced redox reactions, ranging from organic chemistry to
biochemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Discoveries from this project will lead to new
materials and technologies that promote the cleaner energy and healthier
environment that are vital to the nation's future. The broader educational
impact of this program will be the instruction and inspiration of the next
generation of scientists, particularly in the field of solar energy. Prof. Wei
and his group will specifically focus on broadening the participation of groups
underrepresented in the sciences. In conjunction with student mentorship and
curriculum development, Prof. Wei will continue his previous efforts to
implement several outreach activities to educate high school students, teachers,
and the general public on nanomaterials for solar photocatalysis.