* 1352116
* CAREER: Next-Generation Liquid Scintillator Detectors: Picosecond Timing and Quantum-Dot-Doped Scintillator
* MPS,PHY
* 02/01/2014,10/31/2015
* Lindley Winslow, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 10/31/2015
* USD 271,307.00

Even after more than a decade of great discoveries, the neutrino remains the
most mysterious of the known fundamental particles. Basic questions about its
properties endure; the most basic being whether the neutrino is its own
antiparticle. If true, this Majorana nature of the neutrino would have profound
implications to particle physics and cosmology, including an explanation for the
matter-antimatter asymmetry in the universe. The only feasible experimental
probes of the Majorana nature of the neutrino are experiments searching for the
rare nuclear process, neutrinoless double-beta decay. The current set of
experiments will probe the parameter space for Majorana neutrinos in the
inverted mass hierarchy. The next generation of experiments will need to push
into the normal mass hierarchy which requires an order of magnitude increase in
mass and background suppression.

Liquid scintillator detectors scale well to large masses but advances are needed
to obtain increased background suppression. This award will support a program of
research that focusses on combining advances in photodetectors and the use of
novel wavelength shifters in the form of nanocrystals called quantum dots to
extract a directional signal from liquid scintillator detectors.

Broader impacts: Undergraduate research is critical for recruiting and retaining
physics students. This award will be used to improve opportunities for transfer
students. A seminar series on succeeding as a physics major will be developed
and presented at UCLA. A modified version of the series will also be presented
at Santa Monica College. Furthermore, this grant will sponsor an additional slot
in UCLA's Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) program.