* 1352305
* CAREER: Empirical Analysis of Financial Markets Using Auction Data
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2014,08/31/2022
* Jakub Kastl, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 08/31/2022
* USD 450,000.00

The recent financial crisis has underscored the importance of understanding the
mechanics of the banking system and especially the mechanisms used to allocate
liquidity/short-term funds among the participating banks. Many financial markets
are organized as auctions and the goal of this proposal is to leverage the
economic theory explaining behaviour in auction markets in order to speak to the
mechanics of the financial markets themselves. For example, much of the
transactions between banks takes place over-the-counter and&lt;br/&gt;is thus
unobserved to outsiders. Nevertheless since banks participate frequently in
various transactions with the central banks, such as auctions of loans conducted
by the European Central Banks, we can construct a link between the cost of
funding a bank faces in the interbank market and its willingness-to-pay for a
loan from the central bank. The auction theory informs us how bidders would
translate their willingness-to-pay into bids given an auction mechanism. We can
therefore employ econometric techniques that allow us to do&lt;br/&gt;the
reverse: recover the willingness-to-pay from the observed bids and thus to
recover the cost of funding of every bank. This proposal consists of several
projects described in more detail below that make use of this approach to
address important issues such as quantification of systemic risk, evaluation of
the mechanism used to settle the credit default swap contracts financially or
estimation of the elasticity of demand for US Debt.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the
first part of this project the PI proposes to recover information about the cost
of short-term funding by using bids from the European Central Banks (ECB) weekly
refinancing auctions, the primary tool of European monetary policy. The PI
proposes to a novel method that utilizes the dynamics of these funding costs to
gain insights about the financial network (the unobserved exposures of banks to
one another) in order to quantify the systemic risk: the extent to which a
negative shock to one bank can affect the funding costs of other banks. This
research is thus a direct complement to parallel efforts to estimate this
important parameter, which regulators are very interested in. The PI focuses on
the time of severe distress (2007-09), which includes the onset of the 2007
financial crisis and the failure of Lehman Brothers. Using bids from main
refinancing operations of the ECB, the project will contribute to our
understanding of financial networks and it will provide methods how to uncover
the links between banks, which are typically unobserved due to&lt;br/&gt;the
over-the-counter nature of the interbank transactions, using auxiliary data. The
second part of the project focuses on auctions held after various triggering
events such as defaults that are aimed at financial settlement of credit default
swaps (CDS). Since the amount of outstanding CDS contracts greatly exceeds the
amount of covered bonds, the currently employed two-stage auction procedure is a
very important price-discovery mechanism that allows for financial settlement of
these contracts after a triggering event. Yet, the strange features of this
mechanism may cast some doubt on whether the participants have the right
incentives to behave in a way that the resulting price of the bond corresponds
to its true value. The proposed project therefore will contribute to our
understanding of this important market by evaluating the benefits and
deficiencies of the two-stage mechanism that is currently used. The final part
of this project focuses on the issuance of US Debt by the Department of
Treasury. The goal is to estimate the elasticities of demand for different debt
instruments of various maturities and their substitution patterns by recovering
the willingness-to-pay for various securities directly from the submitted bids.
These results should help the Treasury guide its decision on the mix of
maturities that are sold in a given week. The secondary goal of this project is
to analyze the costs and benefits of the primary
dealer&lt;br/&gt;system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact: The proposed
research has the potential to generate measures of financial health of
individual banks and quantify the importance of a bank for the whole system,
i.e., its ?systemic-ness?. Using the proposed methods we thus may be able to
formally identify the ?too-big-to-fail? banks, and hence we may improve
targeting of potential policy interventions. The analysis of credit default swap
auctions should shed some light on the reliability of that mechanism to discover
the correct price of bonds of defaulted issuers&lt;br/&gt;and potentially point
to its deficiencies and propose improvements to the auction mechanism. The
results should be of interest to regulators, central banks and policy-makers.
The results will be disseminated broadly to promote their application by the
relevant institutions.