* 1352836
* Mitochondrial Regulation of Calcium Signaling in C. elegans
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2014,10/31/2019
* Keith Nehrke, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 10/31/2019
* USD 939,997.00

The nematode Caenorhabditis elegans expresses a rhythmic behavior whose timing
is controlled by oscillatory Ca2+ signaling. The behavior is anatomically
simple, with the intestine, several muscle cells, and two neurons communicating
to establish the defecation motor program (DMP). The posterior cells of the
intestine are the behavioral pacemaker, and the canonical signaling cascades
that regulate basal, rhythmic Ca2+ oscillations in these cells have been well-
characterized. However, these oscillations also help to set metabolic
homeostasis and are coupled to ion transport processes that facilitate nutrient
uptake. The research supported by this award will allow us to identify the
underlying mechanisms through which these processes are integrated, focusing in
particular on the metabolic hub of the cell, the mitochondria. The main function
of mitochondria is to transduce energy through oxidative phosphorylation, a
process which generates most of the endogenous ROS in cells. However,
mitochondria are also well-recognized to contribute to Ca2+ signaling by
buffering Ca2+. Recent groundbreaking work has uncovered novel molecular
mechanisms that contribute to Ca2+ uptake by mitochondria, to maintaining
organelle-specific protein homeostasis, and to signaling through ROS. Each of
the aims in this study is intended to query these specific aspects of
mitochondria's function with respect to their effect on oscillatory Ca2+
signaling. We will investigate the role of mitochondrial Ca2+ uptake, the
mitochondrial unfolded protein response (UPRmt) and mitochondrial reactive
oxygen species (ROS) generation in maintaining behavioral rhythmicity and
metabolic homeostasis. The project will include training and research
opportunities for under-represented minority students. Furthermore, a new K-12
learning program will be developed and led by a former postdoctoral trainee from
the lab who comes from an under-represented background and has extensive
experience in this area. A website will also be developed and expanded to
facilitate communication with the stakeholder community and to disseminate
teaching modules developed through our learning program. Results will be
disseminated through publication, but the underlying data sets will be made
freely available upon request. Useful c. elegans strains developed during the
course of the project will be made publically available through the C. elegans
Genetics Consortium (http://www.cbs.umn.edu/research/resources/cgc). Novel
plasmids and molecular biological reagents will be handled by Addgene
(https://www.addgene.org/).