* 1352021
* CAREER:   Investigating Controls on Arc Flare-ups and the Growth of Lower Continental Crust
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/2014,02/29/2020
* Joshua Schwartz, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 02/29/2020
* USD 486,288.00

The proposed research program focuses on investigating the magmatic and thermal
evolution of an exhumed, Cretaceous magmatic arc in Fiordland, New Zealand with
the primary goal of determining the tempo and mechanisms of magmatic
construction of lower arc crust. Geochronologic and geochemical data will be
used to test three hypotheses: 1) magmatic fluxes into the lower and middle
crust were episodic, spatially transient, and culminated in a brief,
approximately 3 million year high flux event; 2) deep-crustal magmas were
derived from both mantle wedge and pre-existing crustal sources and generated
voluminous high-pressure eclogitic cumulates; and 3) the arc root experienced
heterogeneous heating and cooling that is not easily explained by simple
monotonic cooling models, but instead may be compatible with mafic underplating
driven by asthenospheric upwelling beneath the lithospheric arc root. Addressing
these hypotheses will be used to evaluate processes of arc root construction and
modification, and to create a 4-dimensional petrologic model for the Cretaceous
Fiordland arc. Magmatic arcs are the subduction factories on earth where large
volumes of intermediate, or andesitic, continental crust are created. A
fundamental problem in Earth sciences is that the dominant magmas generated from
partial melting of the mantle in arc environments are silica poor basalts,
rather than intermediate andesites. It has long been speculated that the
evolution of mantle-derived magmas from basalt to andesite likely occurs in the
deepest roots (25-60 kilometers depth) of arcs where fundamental processes such
as fractional crystallization of dense minerals, magma mixing and assimilation
of preexisting crust occur. Recently, high-precision isotopic dating of arc
rocks has led to the idea that large volumes of magmas may be generated during
flare-up events, characterized by intense periods of arc activity. These ideas
suggest that continental crustal construction in magmatic arcs may be highly
episodic and that much of the geochemical diversification of magmas that we see
in modern arcs may occur during brief time periods within the roots of the
magmatic arc. This project focuses on a unique, exhumed deep-crustal section of
a continental arc in Fiordland, New Zealand where the deep crust is well exposed
to 25-65 kilometers paleodepth. Preliminary data suggests that over 70% of the
arc root was emplaced during a brief, high-flux event, and this project will
allow the evaluation of the temporal and geochemical processes of continental
crust construction in the deep roots of this magmatic arc.

In addition to the scientific goals of the project, it also emphasizes the
integration of research with a dynamic teaching and mentoring program that aims
to disseminate knowledge at all academic levels from K-12 to graduate education.
California State University Northridge (CSUN) undergraduate students will
participate in field and laboratory research in the United States and New
Zealand. Latino minority and female students (both underrepresented groups in
the geosciences and STEM) will be recruited and mentored through the 'ROCs'
outreach program (Research Opportunities for CSUN students). The 'ROCs' program
is aimed at early involvement and mentoring of underrepresented undergraduate
CSUN students in research projects and providing guidance on graduate and
geosciences career paths through workshops and weekly meetings. The PI and CSUN
students will also work with the Deep Cove Outdoor Educational Trust in
Fiordland National Park (a UNESCO World Heritage site) to create hands-on,
geoscience activities for K-12 students from across the South Island of New
Zealand. Activities and short videos highlighting unique aspects of Fiordland
geology will be available on a CSUN-hosted website, YouTube and Vimeo for broad
dissemination to the public.