* 1352567
* CAREER: Searching for Dark Matter and Studying Galactic Particle Accelerators with VERITAS
* MPS,PHY
* 02/01/2014,07/31/2020
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Continuing Grant
* Darren Grant
* 07/31/2020
* USD 922,432.00

Gamma-ray astronomy impacts a broad range of key science questions: indirect
dark matter detection and tests of fundamental physical laws; cosmological
studies; jet physics associated with active galactic nuclei, gamma-ray bursts
(GRBs), and microquasars; and particle acceleration in galactic tevatrons and
pevatrons. Today, extremely sensitive instruments operate in the high energy
(AGILE and FERMI in the range 100 MegaelectronVolt (MeV) - 100 GigaelectronVolt
(GeV)) and very high energy (VHE) (HAWC, HESS, MAGIC, VERITAS at energies
greater than 100 GeV;) regimes simultaneously. Among the most exciting results
from VERITAS are the detection of emission from the Crab Pulsar above 100 GeV
(requiring the presence of a new emission component), the discovery of gamma-ray
emission from a starburst galaxy, M82 (firmly associating cosmic-ray
acceleration with star-forming regions), and the detection of correlated
variability in the radio and Teraelectronvolt (TeV) regimes in radio galaxies
(helping to constrain the emission to be originating within the jet collimation
region). The upper limit on the gamma-ray emission from the Segue 1 dwarf galaxy
set by VERITAS rules out most of the leptophilic dark matter parameter space
favored by recent cosmic-ray positron measurements. A major upgrade to the
VERITAS cameras during summer 2012 introduced high-quantum-efficiency photo
multiplier tubes to lower the energy threshold of the array by 30%, and the
array will be further augmented by the arrival in 2015 of a prototype 10 meter
class Schwarzschild-Couder telescope under development for the Cherenkov
Telescope Array (CTA).

Following the recent VERITAS hardware upgrade, great promise for further
improving the science potential of the instrument comes from a focus on data
analysis. This CAREER award provides support for developing major improvements
in VERITAS data analysis methods aimed at lowering the analysis threshold,
improving angular and energy resolution, and increasing background
discrimination. It will also support analysis of VERITAS data to search for dark
matter signals from the Galactic Halo, Fermi unassociated sources, and related
targets, as well as studies of Galactic accelerators of cosmic rays.

Broader impacts: The science of VERITAS and CTA - searching for dark matter and
investigating the most powerful cosmic accelerators - has broad applications to
both astro- and particle physics, and addresses questions that can capture the
public's imagination. Group members will share that excitement via public
lectures at area high schools and to groups in the local Morningside Heights and
Harlem areas of Manhattan and Westchester County, and by engaging undergraduates
and area high school students in the group's research activities. As a
centerpiece to tie together these outreach activities, the group plans to
develop a Visitor Center at Nevis Labs that will occupy both physical and
virtual spaces and provide a focal point for visiting groups to learn about the
history and current research at Nevis.