* 1352291
* CAREER: Arithmetic of Surfaces
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2022
* Anthony Varilly-Alvarado, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 06/30/2022
* USD 405,090.00

The PI will study the existence and distribution of rational points on algebraic
surfaces defined over global fields. The proposed research has two mayor
component projects. The first focuses on K3 surfaces: building on earlier work
of the PI and his collaborators, and with a view towards arithmetic
applications, the PI will pursue systematic, conceptual and practical methods to
explicitly construct unramified Azumaya algebras representing transcendental
Brauer classes on K3 surfaces. The second project focuses on del Pezzo surfaces:
proving new cases of a conjecture of Colliot-Thélène and Sansuc that Brauer-
Manin obstructions suffice to explain failures on local-to-global phenomena for
del Pezzo surfaces, efficient computation of these obstructions on low-degree
surfaces, and statistics on failures of the Hasse
principle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An overarching theme in arithmetic geometry is
the study of systems of polynomial equations in many variables, with the
constraint that the coordinates of the solutions be rational numbers or integers
(for example, 11/17, or -9). When no such solutions exist, one tries to
understand the phenomena behind the absence of solutions. The geometry
associated to a system of polynomials bears on the possible obstructions to the
existence of solutions, and this project seeks to make such an intuition precise
in some cases when a system of polynomial equations defines a surface. Although
this project studies fundamental questions from a theoretical point of view, the
structure of solutions to certain kinds of polynomial equations has well-
documented applications (for example, in establishing secure protocols for the
transmission of information between two parties that have never met). In
addition to research activities, the PI will run a two-week program each summer
for the duration of the grant. The goal of the program is to foster enrollment
and persistence rates in STEM majors at the college level. The target
demographic consists of rising 8th and 9th graders from the Houston Independent
School District, including students from underrepresented groups in STEM fields.
The content of the program is foundational material in the study of rational
solutions to polynomial equations.