* 1352046
* CAREER:   Research on Weather and Climate Impacts of Land Use and Land Cover (LULC) Change--Supporting Technology-Driven Science Inquiry as Pedagogy
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2014,08/31/2020
* Udaysankar Nair, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 08/31/2020
* USD 748,271.00

The impacts of Land Use and Land Cover (LULC) change on weather and climate are
expected to vary depending upon the island geometry (size, aspect ratio and
shoreline shape) and terrain. A conceptual understanding of such variations will
be established though idealized numerical modeling experiments (NME). The
concept developed will be used to analyze more realistic NME, investigating the
weather and climate impacts of observed LULC changes (2000-2010) in the maritime
continent, which exerts an important influence on tropical climate. Educational
aspects of this project is the integration of Polaris, a discovery engine
designed for operating on big data, with NME outputs generated from the
Principal Investigator's (PI) research (past, ongoing and future) to transition
from a deductive to inductive methodology for teaching of graduate level courses
in Atmospheric Dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit
:&lt;br/&gt;LULC change can have a substantial impact on weather and climate,
but varies in complex fashion depending upon geographical setting, especially
terrain and continentality. A conceptual framework for understanding the
geographic variability is gradually emerging from prior studies, including those
of the PI. The research activities will lead to an important addition to this
framework, namely the impact LULC change in the context of island settings, and
improved understanding of the effect of deforestation in the maritime continent.
Note that the influence of the maritime continent on tropical climate is
disproportionate to its land area, contributing to 40% of latent heating in the
global tropics (~twice compared to continental convection). A large portion
occurs in the vicinity of small islands as sea breeze initiated convection and
is potentially impacted by LULC changes. Thus the proposed research is relevant
and important, especially in the context of the IPCC determination that
radiative forcing caused by land-atmosphere interactions is not well quantified,
and is one of the key uncertainties. Whereas tools for big data analysis are
becoming more common in field of Atmospheric Science, incorporation of this
capability in classroom settings is lacking. Analysis of large datasets to
establish relationship between atmospheric variables relevant to a phenomenon,
and inferring the nature of theoretical framework needed to analyze it is an
effective method for teaching of Atmospheric Dynamics. Learning in such an
inductive setting mimics the natural development of the field. However, the
pedagogy required for this purpose is also lacking. The PI addresses these
critical gaps through integration of his research and educational
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts :&lt;br/&gt;The LULC change
impacts could be exacerbating or mitigating the effects large scale climate
trends in the maritime continent. For some island settings, deforestation could
lead to decrease in rainfall over agricultural regions and thus the concern that
increase in productivity gained from expanding the crop lands may be negated by
reduced rainfall caused by deforestation. Thus the results from this study have
the potential to inform and lead to better policy formulation regarding climate
change mitigation and sustainable environmental management. Atmospheric dynamics
is often a very difficult course for students in atmospheric science. The
teaching method developed via this award has the potential to transition
students from mimicry to mastery, improving research creativity and retention in
graduate programs. The proposed educational portal will document and share the
big data supported inductive pedagogy with a wider community, allowing continued
evolution from other educators and students.