* 1352218
* CAREER: Coupling nanoscale device modeling with coarse-grained biomolecular simulations
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2014,05/31/2021
* Maria Gracheva, Clarkson University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 05/31/2021
* USD 425,245.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY &lt;br/&gt;The Division of Materials Research and the
Division of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental and Transport Systems
contribute funds to this CAREER award. It supports computational research and
educational activities to study biomolecular interactions with solid-state
membrane devices. The PI will develop complex computer models and apply them to
investigate novel solid-state nanopore devices for biomolecular sensing
applications. This research will allow improvement of device performance by
optimizing material characteristics and geometry, such as membrane thickness and
nanopore shape, with a goal to maximize its sensing and detection capabilities.
This project will have an immediate impact on science and technology by gaining
insight into physical processes at the nanoscale in the strategically important
solid-state bio-sensor area. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research is
closely intertwined with educational activities, and supports established US-
based and international collaborations. This project integrates research and
education at undergraduate and graduate levels, and it will make a significant
contribution to Clarkson University outreach activities to K-12 school students
and two-year college students through teacher literacy enhancement in the STEM
intensive areas of Biotechnology and Nanotechnology. The PI will work with
minority students and women to broaden the participation of these groups in
science. Developed software, "Introduction to Visual Bio- and Nanotechnology"
will be distributed to regional schools and two-year colleges.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;The Division of Materials
Research and the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental and
Transport Systems contribute funds to this CAREER award. It supports
computational research and educational activities to study biomolecular
interactions with solid-state membrane devices. The intellectual merit of the
proposed research lies in the development of a comprehensive dynamical model of
a solid-state nanopore device together with a coarse-grained model of a DNA
molecule. The PI will develop new strategies for DNA sensing and manipulation by
altering the membrane composition, applied potential and the nanopore geometry.
This project will have an immediate impact on science and technology by
providing insights into the physical processes at the nanoscale in the
strategically important solid-state bio-sensor area. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research is closely intertwined with educational activities, and
supports established US-based and international collaborations. This project
integrates research and education at undergraduate and graduate levels, and it
will make a significant contribution to Clarkson University outreach activities
to K-12 school students and two-year college students through teacher literacy
enhancement in the STEM intensive areas of Biotechnology and Nanotechnology. The
PI will work with minority students and women to broaden the participation of
these groups in science. Developed software, "Introduction to Visual Bio- and
Nanotechnology" will be distributed to regional schools and two-year colleges.