* 1352502
* CAREER: Tuning Electronic Phases in Layered Complex Oxides
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2014,01/31/2020
* Roman Engel-Herbert, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* James H. Edgar
* 01/31/2020
* USD 575,000.00

This CAREER project is jointly funded by Electronic and Photonic Materials and
Ceramic programs.

Technical: The main scope of this CAREER project aims to synthesize and
characterize nanostructured complex perovskite oxide thin films exhibiting
strong electron correlation. Controlling electronic phase transitions in these
systems requires excellent materials quality with greatly reduced defect
densities, nanoscale carrier confinement of ultrathin layers and atomically
sharp interfaces. Research is focused on artificial layered structures to
achieve low dimensional electron liquids in the limit of extreme carrier
concentrations. Hybrid molecular beam epitaxy is employed to grow quantum well
heterostructures, where the confinement is achieved using band discontinuities
at nonpolar interfaces. The goal is to explore how materials design parameters
available in thin film growth, namely strain, dimensional confinement, chemical
doping and layering scheme, affect the stability of the electronic phases of
these two-dimensional electron liquids. Advanced spectroscopic and structural
characterization techniques are employed in combination with temperature-
dependent thermoelectric and thermomagnetic as well as magneto-transport
properties to correlate Fermi surface modifications with atomic scale design of
these artificial electronic material systems.

Non-technical: The project addresses fundamental questions and basic research
challenges in the emerging field of oxide electronics. Understanding phenomena
arising from strong electron correlation provides a path to discover, tailor and
utilize electronic materials with functionalities beyond conventional
semiconductor materials. Research results are expected to significantly impact
the development of energy-efficient and ultrafast logic devices for future
computation schemes. The project activities contain a strong educational and
outreach component embedded in the existing outreach programs at Penn State. Two
interactive demonstration packages are created to illustrate scientific and
technological concepts relevant to the research. A functional model analog of a
molecular beam epitaxy system is built allowing young students to grow layered
structures using spherical objects representing atoms. An intuitive and tangible
interactive package of metronomes is developed to help exploring various aspects
of correlation effects using the synchronization behavior of metronomes to
conceptualize coupling based on mutual interactions. The flexible design of the
demonstration packages allow versatile utilization for a variety of outreach
activities, including museum exhibits, class room and workshop activities, and
science festivals.