* 1352879
* Numerical Modeling of Three-dimensional Subduction Driven Mantle Wedge Weakening and Plate-Mantle Decoupling
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Margarete Jadamec, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2016
* USD 144,999.00

The theory of plate tectonics predicts the outer layer of the Earth is composed
of lithospheric plates that are in motion. Subduction zones occur where tectonic
plates converge and one plate subducts beneath the other, descending into the
underlying mantle. The majority of the deformation observed at the Earth?s
surface, in the form of earthquakes, volcanism, and mountain building, occurs at
subduction zone plate boundaries. However, how this deformation is manifested in
the subsurface, in the mantle and mantle wedge region between the subducting
plate and overriding plate, is less understood. The proposed research will use
3D multi-plate geodynamic models to address the controls on the rheology of the
mantle wedge, the coupling of the mantle to the overriding plate lithosphere,
and associated dimensions of complex seismic anisotropy near subduction zone
plate boundaries. The models will simulate the Earth as a highly viscous fluid
body deforming on a timescale of millions of years, with each model run on
hundreds to thousands of processors. Results from this research will have broad
scientific implications, including the transport of chemical signatures in
subduction zones which are then erupted in volcanoes, the magnitude and scale of
circulation in the mantle wedge, how the mantle couples into overriding plate
deformation and mountain building, and the viscous support of the slab and/or
viscous resistance to slab sinking and thereby the velocity of the tectonic
plates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent three-dimensional models of subduction
ranging from laboratory experiments, to semi-analytic methods, to fully
numerical simulations indicate the mantle flow field in subduction zones is
spatially variable, containing poloidal, toroidal, and trench parallel flow.
However, previous models do not address what controls the transition from a
locally decoupled mantle-overriding plate near the subduction zone to a coupled
mantle-overriding plate far from the subduction zone. Such a transition must
occur if the mantle motion is non-parallel to the surface plates near the
subduction zone but becomes parallel farther from the subduction zone as
indicated by global models. A series of 3D multi-plate geodynamic models will be
constructed to systematically test the length-scales of the emergent low
viscosity in the mantle wedge and quantify the vertical and lateral gradients in
mantle-overriding plate viscosity, velocity, and tractions. The numerical models
will systematically increase in complexity from generalized 3D models to
geographically referenced 3D models for two target sites. The relative effects
of rheology formulation and variations in the olivine hydration and melt
fraction in the mantle wedge will be tested. In order to properly span the
transition from the decoupled mantle wedge-overriding plate to coupled mantle-
plate interior, the model domain will extend farther into the plate interior
than is typically done for 3D regional models of subduction. A C/C++ code,
SlabGenerator, will be used to construct the 3D finite-element mesh, plate
boundary interface, and initial temperature. A thermo-chemical finite-element
mantle convection code, CitcomCU, will be used to run the 3D viscous flow
simulations. The lattice preferred orientations of minerals will be calculated
from the predicted flow field and used to calculate synthetic elastic constants
over the model domain. The synthetic shear wave splitting will be compared with
actual observations of shear wave splitting from the target study sites. For the
generalized 3D models, the length-scales of the complex mantle flow field will
be compared to the length-scales observed from a global analysis of shear wave
splitting at plate boundaries. Understanding the mechanisms and length-scales of
the decoupling zone in subduction zones can place constraints on what controls
the lateral variability in tractions along the base of the lithosphere, the
length-scales of complex seismic anisotropy observed near subduction zones, and
the strength of overriding plate-mantle coupling in the vertical direction and,
thus, the rheological signature of the lithosphere-asthenosphere boundary.