* 1352485
* CAREER: Development of a Multifunctional Polyester Platform and its Evaluation as an Instructive Matrix for Osteoblast Differentiation
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2020
* Abraham Joy, University of Akron
* Continuing Grant
* Randy Duran
* 06/30/2020
* USD 500,000.00

Non-technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This CAREER Award by the
Biomaterials program in the Division of Materials Research, and co-funded by the
Biomedical Engineering Program in the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering,
Environmental and Transport Systems (ENG/CBET) to the University of Akron is to
develop a modular multifunctional polyester platform with peptide-like
functional groups to be used as a matrix for stem cell differentiation. Products
derived from polymeric materials are an integral part of modern life and polymer
science has addressed several technological challenges. In addition to their
extensive use as commodity and engineering materials, polymers are also widely
used in the biomedical field to make implants, sutures, medical catheters, wound
healing products etc. In spite of such extensive use, the design and performance
of such synthetic materials lags far behind in their ability to match the
performance of natural materials such as collagen in providing the functional
cues necessary for optimum biological outcomes, such as in wound healing or
precise growth and maturation of new tissue. The project will identify the key
differences between natural materials such as collagen and widely used synthetic
materials and offers a bottom-up design of a synthetic polymeric material
platform. This modular synthetic polymer system, when fully developed, will have
the physical and biological properties that would enable their use in several
biomedical applications such as for differentiation of stem cells, as
antimicrobials and for drug/protein delivery. This CAREER award facilitates the
training of the next generation of scientists in STEM fields and provides
fundamental training at the interface of chemistry, materials science and
biology. The award specifically provides research opportunities for high school,
undergraduate and graduate students. Socially and economically disadvantaged
students from local high schools will be mentored through this program. In
addition a select group of high school students with strong credentials will
have the opportunity to engage in cutting edge research. In addition, the award
enables to create a suite of freely available online educational videos
describing the fundamental principles of polymer
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key transmitter of information between cells and their
surroundings is the extracellular matrix (ECM) and this information is processed
by specific binding and signaling events between cells and the components of the
ECM. Although synthetic biomaterials are being explored for an increasing number
of clinical biomedical needs, the ability of current biomaterials to provide the
required specificity in binding and signaling is still in its infancy due to the
complexity in balancing the material parameters of functionality, reaction
feasibility, degradability, hydrophilicity etc. The award will support the
development of a new pendant functionalized polyester system which aims to
provide the advantages of functionality and specificity as seen in peptides and
proteins while also having the advantages of synthetic reproducibility and
scalability that synthetic materials provide. As an illustrative case study,
these multifunctional polyesters will be investigated as an instructive matrix
for osteoblast differentiation with the aim of correlating the chemical profile
of the multifunctional polyester system with stem cell proliferation and
differentiation. Such a modular synthetic platform with the ability to precisely
vary the polymer composition will be useful in several biomedical applications
such as drug/protein delivery, self-assembled systems, multi-valent inhibitors
and as antimicrobial agents. Students engaged in this research will work at the
interface of chemistry, materials science and cell biology and will also have
the opportunity to understand how their research addresses fundamental needs in
the biomedical sciences.