* 1352944
* Multifunctional Nature of Protostomian Gonadotropin-Releasing Hormone-Like Molecules
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2020
* Pei-San Tsai, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 07/31/2020
* USD 480,000.00

Evolution is driven, in part, by changes in the function of molecules that
control the physiology of the organism. Studying these changes is crucial for
understanding the unique adaptations developed by organisms to survive the test
of time. One molecule whose change over time can influence evolution is a
hormone called gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH). GnRH activates
reproduction to ensure the propagation of all vertebrate species. In
invertebrates, GnRH is assumed to also activate reproduction although consistent
support for such an assumption is lacking. It is hypothesized that invertebrate
GnRH is not universally important to reproductive activation in invertebrates.
Instead, invertebrate GnRH may assume a wide range of functions in neural,
motor, and metamorphic control. The project investigates non-reproductive
function of GnRH and a related peptide in an invertebrate animal, the sea slug
Aplysia californica. These studies may reveal non-reproductive roles of GnRH
critical to the survival of invertebrate species. To study the non-reproductive
function of GnRH and the related peptide, adipokinetic hormone, a combination of
whole organism studies and molecular and biochemical techniques will be used.
The investigators will address the following aims: 1) Examine the role of GnRH
in metamorphic development, 2) Perform in vitro functional analysis of GnRH
receptor isoforms, investigate their distribution, and 3) Investigate the
function of adipokinetic hormone. The work challenges a vertebrate-centric
notion that invertebrate hormones essentially function as their vertebrate
counterparts. This conceptual shift is important for advancing our knowledge on
how changes in hormone function contribute to the survival, adaptation, and
evolution of metazoans. For broader impacts, this project will provide Dr. Tsai
with opportunities for: (1) undergraduate training, (2) minority recruitment,
(3) inter-departmental and trans-Pacific collaborations, (4) information
dissemination via the development of a novel website that uses humor and
cartoons to engage K-12 students in comparative reproduction, and (5) outreach
activities to showcase sea slugs to middle school students. Data collected from
these studies will be shared through peer-reviewed publications and the
Invertebrate Brain Platform
http://invbrain.neuroinf.jp/modules/htmldocs/IVBPF/Top/index.html.