* 1352028
* CAREER: Van der Waals Epitaxial Heterostructures: Beyond 2D Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2014,01/31/2019
* Linyou Cao, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Opila
* 01/31/2019
* USD 550,000.00

Technical: This CAREER project is to study the synthesis of large-area, uniform,
and high-quality two-dimensional (2D) van der Waals epitaxial heterostructures
with controlled band structures. The 2D heterostructure consists of multiple
monolayers of dissimilar transition metal dichalcogenide materials (TMDC)
epitaxially stacked together. Unlike other approaches for the synthesis of 2D
TMDC materials, this project explores a unique, self-limiting chemical vapor
deposition process that the principal investigator has developed. The project
involves synergistic efforts in the development of controlled scalable synthesis
of 2D TMDC heterostructures and in the understanding of correlation between the
physical features and band structures of the heterostructures. It starts with
studies of the fundamentals of the self-limiting growth mechanism, followed by
the development of techniques for the controlled scalable synthesis based on the
fundamental understanding. It also involves the development of a Raman-based
characterization metrology tool to provide high-throughput characterizations for
the compositions and structures of the heterostructures. Additionally, the
principal investigator plans to examine the correlation between the band
structures and physical features of the heterostructures. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical: This project addresses fundamental challenges in an
emerging cutting-edge area of materials science. The success of this project can
provide capabilities to rationally design a new class of artificial materials
with compositions and structures tuned at the atomic scale. It lays down the
groundwork for the principal investigator to pursue his career goal that aims to
investigate new physical phenomena of 2D heterostructures and to explore these
materials for applications in the field of optoelectronics. The new material
platform can open up unexplored opportunities for a wide range of fields
including information technology, solar energy harvesting, light emission
diodes, and flexible electronic/photonic devices. The research component of this
project is integrated into multifaceted educational and outreach activities that
aim to inspire students (high school, undergraduate, and graduate) to pursue
careers in the STEM disciplines and aim to enhance the secondary school and
university curricula in materials science. In addition to providing research
training for students at both undergraduate and graduate levels, the education
plan includes mentoring high-school students to participate in pre-college
scientific competitions and guest lectures in high schools' AP chemistry
classes.