* 1352091
* CAREER: Teflon Proteins for Protein-Protein Interaction Ligand Discovery
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* William Pomerantz, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Max Funk
* 07/31/2019
* USD 662,045.00

The Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry Division of NSF is
funding Dr. William Pomerantz from the University of Minnesota to develop
nuclear magnetic resonance methods of fluorine detection to study interactions
between proteins. The research and educational goals in the Pomerantz lab
address long-standing questions about biomolecular communications between
proteins, drawing from findings in the disciplines of both chemistry and
biology. Proteins termed transcription factors are the master regulators of
cellular function. They facilitate the complicated transfer of information that
specifies how the DNA code is used to make proteins. This research seeks to
understand the details of the interactions between proteins and their underlying
biology. The element fluorine will be used as a sensitive reporter for
difficult-to-detect interactions at protein interfaces. This method is
advantageous in view of fluorine's unique spectroscopic properties and its
absence in natural biological molecules. Given the importance of transcription
factors, this fluorine-based approach for studying protein-ligand interactions
could significantly increase the repertoire of new protein targets for study and
thereby open up avenues for improving the understanding of a wide variety of
protein function. This project will include training for students with no prior
experience of working at the chemistry/biology interface and will engage the
Osher Life-Long Learning community's interests in science literacy and the role
of chemical biology in science and technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research project is focused on the development of fluorine nuclear magnetic
resonance spectroscopy (NMR) methods for detecting, quantifying, and defining
novel modes of interactions at transcription factor-protein interfaces that
include epigenetic regulatory proteins. Due to the enrichment of aromatic amino
acids at protein-binding sites, multiple labeling strategies for sequence
selective incorporation of fluorinated aromatic amino acids will be evaluated
for reporting on protein binding interactions. The hyper-responsiveness of the
fluorine nucleus to changes in chemical environment leads to simplified
1D-biomolecular NMR spectra that can be rapidly acquired and readily
interpreted. This method will be evaluated against known ligands to characterize
their mode of interaction and also in discovery format using small molecule
libraries. These studies will be extended to acquiring mechanistic information
under physiological conditions by in-cell fluorine-19 NMR. The origins of
cellular uptake of fluorine-labeled peptide macrocylces will be investigated
using lanthanide shift reagents for differentiating extracellular versus
internalized peptides. This fluorine-19 NMR method will set the stage for use as
a structure-based tool to find new chemical probes for challenging protein-
protein interactions. Given the importance of transcription factors, the
proposed fluorine-19 NMR approach to study protein-ligand interactions could
significantly increase the repertoire of new protein targets opening up avenues
for improving the understanding of their biology.