* 1352214
* CAREER:   Seismic Imaging of Large-Scale Structure in the Lithosphere and the Core-Mantle Boundary Region
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2020
* Vedran Lekic, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Raterron
* 06/30/2020
* USD 647,000.00

I propose to obtain new constraints on the structure of the continental
lithosphere and the core-mantle boundary region, with the goal of improving our
understanding of the formation, evolution, and preservation of large-scale
structures within the mantle. Accomplishing this goal will require improving on
existing and developing new methods for modeling and analyzing seismic
waveforms, and will have implications for the understanding of the dynamics of
the Earth's deep interior and its relationship to the surface. The scientific
questions to be addressed are: 1. What is the nature of the mid-lithospheric
discontinuity and what does it tell us about the architecture, origin, and
evolution of stable continental lithosphere? 2. What processes control the
development of rifts in general, and strain localization throughout the
lithosphere? 3. What are the morphology, and elastic characteristics of
mesoscale structures in the lowermost mantle? The improved seismic imaging
methods will be built around flexible and parsimonious parameterizations that
can also reproduce the various ways in which seismic waves interact with
geological structures. The proposed work also includes developing automated
computational algorithms for analyzing and modeling seismic data, determining
optimal weighting of different datasets, and identifying new seismic
observables. Alongside this research project, I propose to undertake a
comprehensive educational project called SeismoABCs (Seismology Across and
Beyond Classrooms), whose purpose is to improve undergraduate education and
learning outcomes through the incorporation of seismological instrument
deployment, data collection and analysis across the undergraduate curriculum at
the Department of Geology of the University of Maryland, College
Park.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will develop and apply new methods
for imaging the Earth's interior using multiple seismic datasets. It will focus
on providing new images of and constraining structures in two distinct settings:
the continental lithosphere, which makes up the tectonic plates and controls the
internal deformation in continents, and the core-mantle boundary region, which
contains exotic features fundamentally related to the dynamics and thermo-
chemical evolution of the Earth. The new methods developed as part of the
proposed work will be broadly applicable to any discipline confronted with the
problem of combining different pieces of information in order to constrain
characteristics of a system or object. The SeismoABCs educational component of
the proposed work will have substantial broader impacts for undergraduate
education at the University of Maryland. SeismoABCs is a plan to (A) incorporate
the conceptualization, design, execution, and analysis of seismological
experiments across classrooms in geophysics and related sciences, and (B) to
enable research experiences in seismology beyond classrooms by scaling up
undergraduate participation in seismological research. The desired learning
outcomes of SeismoABCs include improving student's ability to formulate clear
and testable research questions / hypotheses, identify relevant seismological
observations, design a geophysical network to collect calibrated observations,
process and analyze data in a statistically rigorous way in order to accept or
reject their research hypothesis, and engage in long term research projects. The
SeismoABCs program will also furnish graduate students and postdoctoral fellows
with experience in mentoring students and designing and implementing a research
plan. Finally, the undergraduate seismological laboratory research experiences
implemented as part of this program will be targeted toward first and second
year undergraduate students, and will help improve their academic achievement
across STEM disciplines by providing them with real-world applications of the
quantitative methods taught in the classroom setting.