* 1352571
* Designing Materials to Revolutionize and Engineer our Future (DMREF) Grantees' Workshop; Arlington, Virginia; September 8 - 10, 2013
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2014
* Sean Agnew, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 07/31/2014
* USD 21,868.00

This grant funds a workshop to bring together researchers supported by the
Designing Materials to Revolutionize and Engineer our Future (DMREF) activity.
As NSF's response to the President's Materials Genome Initiative, DMREF seeks to
foster tight collaborations between materials researchers in experiment, theory,
and computation. These collaborations are founded on highly iterative feedback
loops in which experimental results directly inform theory and computation, and
vice versa, with the goal of accelerating the discovery and development of new
materials. The workshop will provide researchers a forum to share their research
results and discuss cross-cutting topics related to establishing and sustaining
research collaborations, managing digital data, and supporting long-term
simulation software development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This nascent community
can provide leadership to the broader materials research community in
implementing strategies to achieve the goals set out by the Materials Genome
Initiative, including reducing both the cost and time it takes to bring a new
material to market. The workshop will address both successes and challenges
faced at the early stages of research, particularly for highly collaborative
projects, and will help solidify newly-formed collaborations. Overarching themes
identified through presentations and discussions will be presented in a report
for dissemination to the broader materials research community and will help
inform future research programs. The workshop will be held in Arlington,
Virginia, on September 8-10, 2013.