* 1352955
* A Combined Experimental-Computational Method to Evaluate Abdominal Aortic Aneurysm Wall Stress
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,09/30/2015
* Robert Peattie, Tufts Medical Center, Inc
* Standard Grant
* David Fyhrie
* 09/30/2015
* USD 308,835.00

PROJECT ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;Abdominal aortic
aneurysms (AAAs) represent permanent, localized swellings of the aorta that
occur where the diseased vessel is weakened. AAA rupture accounts for 14,000
deaths in the US annually. A growing body of literature has developed in recent
years concerned with methods for quantitatively evaluating the distribution and
magnitude of stress in patient-specific models of the aneurysm wall, since
mechanical stress is thought to be the cause of rupture. However, the role of
blood flow in creating wall stress has not been addressed to date. Accordingly,
the research objective of this award is to develop a combined experimental-
computational physiologic wall stress analysis (PWSA) procedure that evaluates
wall stress distributions and maxima in models accurately replicating the shape,
non-uniform thickness and mechanical properties of individual patient AAAs. To
accomplish this aim, AAA wall tissue samples will be collected from patients
undergoing surgical repair. The mechanical properties of those samples will be
measured, and an elastic material replicating the diseased wall stiffness will
be used to fabricate a model replicating the shape of the patient lesion. Wall
pressure in this model will be measured under flow conditions emulating the
patient aorta. The measured wall pressure data will then be used as loading in a
corresponding computational evaluation of stress levels within the
wall.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:&lt;br/&gt;Establishment of a protocol for
accurate assessment of AAA wall stress using patient-specific information has
the potential to significantly impact clinical AAA management. The proposed
studies will provide the first quantitative measurements of pressure
distributions using aneurysm phantoms with both realistic geometries and
patient-derived mechanical properties, as well as the first quantitative
evaluation of wall stress based entirely on patient properties. Furthermore, the
project will permit us to continue to engage undergraduate as well as graduate
students in our ongoing research efforts, expanding the research training,
educational experience and opportunities available to the students involved.
Moreover, we will take full advantage of infrastructure in place at Tufts
University for recruiting and retaining women and underrepresented minorities in
research. These include undergraduate outreach programs in Computer Science,
Biomedical Engineering and robotics. In addition, the Tufts University School of
Medicine has conducted a highly successful NIH-funded minority outreach program
for over ten years, permitting underrepresented undergraduates to spend summers
at Tufts involved in biomedical science research. Research-driven training
activities generated through this project will engage students in cross-
disciplinary computational thinking, thus providing critical training for future
scientists and engineers.