* 1352006
* CAREER: Adaptive Electro-Braille: A New Tactile Sensory Substitution and Assistive Technology for the Blind and Visually Impaired
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2020
* Yantao Shen, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Grace Hwang
* 04/30/2020
* USD 418,802.00

Proposal Number: 1352006 P.I.: Yantao Shen Institution: Board of Regents, NSHE,
obo University of Nevada-Reno Title: CAREER: Adaptive Electro-Braille: A New
Tactile Sensory Substitution and Assistive Technology for the Blind and Visually
Impaired

Broader Significance & Importance:

Advanced assistive technologies are critical to the well-being of the blind and
visually impaired (BVI). Touch sensitive displays that can be operated by a
variety of users are needed to gain information by the BVI community. Currently
technology is not equipped with features that permit the BVI anytime/anywhere
access and are not adaptable and convenient for use. This research project will
develop tools that are based on electronic scanning technology adapted to a
finger-wearable touch device that can be used to scan a variety of objects
including Braille text.

Technical Description:

In order to assist the Blind and Visually Impaired (BVI) community to "see",
assistive tactile displays that are adaptive, sensorized, individualized, and
portable are required. Currently available tactile assistive displays are not
equipped with features that permit the BVI to "see" conveniently. This long-term
CAREER goal is to facilitate the advances in electrotactile sensing, rendering,
and computation into the next generation of smart, individual perception-
centered, and portable assistive display to aid the BVI as well to establish a
user-friendly and networked infrastructure for enhancing healthcare, learning
capabilities and education. In particular, the research objective of this CAREER
proposal is to investigate an electrotactile based Braille display technology
that is electronic scanning-style, adaptive tactile preference rendering, and
finger-wearable. This technology is based on electrical stimulation, and has
both online skin bioimpedance sensing and tactile preference rendering
functions, called E-Braille. This technology will allow the BVI to conveniently
perform important tasks, such as reading, typing in Braille, browsing the
Internet, engaging in online conversations, and perceiving graphics. Further,
combined with cyber-infrastructure network technology, E-Braille will allow the
BVI to conveniently access more documents, books, and libraries, anytime and
anywhere. An equally important goal is the recruitment and training of the next
generation of engineers who will emerge not only with a solid background in
engineering and science disciplines but also have the passion and ability to
contribute their expertise in multidisciplinary assistive and rehabilitative
engineering areas. The success of this CAREER project will facilitate research
to aid the BVI and will advance our fundamental understanding of electrotactile
mechanisms. The major research focus is the development of an adaptive,
individual perception-centered, and electrotactile-based Braille display for the
BVI, known as E-Braille, which is unique as a fingerwearable electronic device,
and will conveniently provide the BVI unlimited access to the information world.
The display also will be the first of its kind to include online identification
of individual tactile preferences as well as the ability for adaptive tactile
preference tuning/rendering for individuals. Currently available Braille
displays do not have these features. This CAREER proposal aims to advance the
state of the art in portable seeing- assistive devices for the BVI. It will
accomplish this goal through the development of EBraille, an affordable and
innovative electrical stimulation-based Braille tactile display. This system
will offer fast, refreshable information exchange. The proposed adaptive
E-Braille will dramatically improve the quality of life of the BVI by allowing
them to live more independently and with greater ease. As an integrative part of
this project, the PI will develop educational materials inspired by the research
results, directed toward students in multidisciplinary engineering program. The
research results also will inspire an outreach effort aimed at attracting K-12
students, women, under-represented minorities, and persons with disabilities
(e.g., the BVI) to study science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM) disciplines as well as to participate in this exciting and cutting-edge
research project. Finally, both research and educational results will be
disseminated by means of presentations at conferences, publications in peer-
reviewed journals, web portals, magazines, newspapers, TV and other media, and
to the community involved in BVI assistive technology and systems