* 1352969
* EAGER:Real-time Semantics for the ParalleX Execution Model to Enable Single-Image Multicore Embedded Computing
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2016
* Maciej Brodowicz, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 09/30/2016
* USD 255,000.00

Two extremes of modern computing are supercomputers in the Petaflops performance
regime taking up thousands of square feet and embedded computing found in cell
phones, automobiles, and TV remote controls. Yet these apparently disparate
classes of computing devices have many properties and requirements in common
and, in fact, are converging. Power, reliability, multicore, efficiency, and
programmability are among the many demands that these two historically separate
forms share. The multicore challenge demands a new strategy for organizing and
conducting concurrent tasks, which is referred to as a "model of computation" or
alternatively an "execution model". Typically embedded computers have been
programmed individually by cores to guarantee real-time operation. But as their
performance requirements grow, embedded processors will have to depend on
multiple cores to achieve needed response time. Supercomputers are relying on
multicore components with exponentially growing number of cores per socket to
deliver increased performance with technology advances. This project is
producing a new version of the ParalleX execution model to support embedded
real-time multicore operation while imbuing future supercomputers with the
semantics of real-time for introspection, enabling dynamic adaptive resource
management and task scheduling. This further advances future supercomputers, as
a current trend is to replace heavyweight cores such as the IBM Power
architecture or the Intel x86 architecture with lightweight cores similar to
embedded processors like the IBM PowerPC architecture or the Intel Xeon Phi
architecture. Other supercomputer projects are exploring the use of the ARM
embedded cores for high performance systems. The availability of the ParalleX
real-time execution model will unify both embedded control computers and high
performance computers for mutual support and benefit. Key results of this
project will be a new runtime system that can serve both embedded and high
performance computing systems and a programming interface to facilitate scalable
application development of both.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's broader
significance is that it will dramatically strengthen US competitiveness in both
realms of computing-critical domains and enhance the nation?s economic
development while addressing key challenges to the advancement of both. The
field of supercomputing is facing a major challenge in how to continue to
exploit technology advancement and the ParalleX execution model augmented with
real-time introspection is providing the guiding principles to support co-design
of architecture, programming methods, and system software and tools. Embedded
control computers need to be able to use parallel processing with a single-
system image for ease of programming and adaptive resource utilization. ParalleX
will provide this capability. Finally, through the work of this project, future
embedded processors will become the building blocks of the next generation of
high performance computing to achieve exascale performance by decade's end.