* 1352213
* CAREER:  New Developments on Experimental Designs for Pioneering Functional Brain Imaging Technologies
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2020
* Ming-Hung Kao, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2020
* USD 400,000.00

Understanding functions of the human brain is a very challenging yet crucially
important task. To advance knowledge about brain functions, pioneering
technologies such as electroencephalography (EEG), functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI), and functional near-infrared spectroscopy (fNIRS) have been
widely used in neuroimaging experiments. Focusing on such neuroimaging studies,
the investigator identifies optimal and efficient experimental designs to allow
researchers to collect informative data for rendering precise and valid
statistical inference on human brain functions. Specifically, the investigator
will develop fundamental theories to provide insights and guidance on selecting
optimal designs for fMRI studies. He will also develop efficient computational
tools for obtaining designs for modern fMRI experiments with sophisticated
experimental settings and/or advanced statistical analysis methods. Various
practical situations will be considered. These will include cases where (i) the
experimental subject's probabilistic behavior needs to be taken into account at
the design stage; (ii) the hemodynamic response function, which models the
subject's brain activity in response to a brief mental stimulus, can vary over
time; and (iii) flexible statistical approaches such as semi- and non-parametric
methods are considered for a better interpretation of the rather complex
neuroimaging data. In addition to the popularly used fMRI, the investigator will
obtain and study high-quality designs for experiments utilizing some other
pioneering brain mapping techniques such as EEG and fNIRS.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research results will allow researchers to select
experimental designs to improve the quality of neuroimaging experiments for
studying brain functions. They will benefit society by facilitating the use of
pioneering brain mapping technologies in advancing knowledge about some
terrifying brain disorders such as Alzheimer's disease, and about how the brains
work when we learn, remember and make decisions. To further broaden the impact
of the research, the investigator will provide free, user-friendly software
packages for researchers and practitioners to easily obtain high-quality
neuroimaging experimental designs. In addition, new courses on design of
experiments will be developed. These courses will help students to gain
practically useful knowledge and skills on design and analysis of modern
scientific experiments.