* 1352893
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Visualizing Event Dynamics with Narrative Animation
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2015
* Jing Yang, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2015
* USD 75,317.00

Discovering and understanding the temporal evolution of events hidden in text
corpora is a complex yet critical task for knowledge discovery. Although mining
event dynamics has been an important research topic leading to many successful
algorithms, researchers, research and development managers, intelligence
analysts and the general public are still in dire need of effective tools to
explore the evolutionary trends and patterns. This exploratory project focuses
on developing and validating a novel idea called narrative animation. Narrative
animation uses animated visualizations to narrate, explore, and share event
dynamics conveyed in temporally evolving text collections. Film art techniques
are employed to leverage the animated visualizations in information organization
and change detection, with the goals of enhancing analytical power and user
engagement. A prototype system called CityStories is being developed to generate
narrative animations of events in cities derived from web-based text.

If this novel, risky research is successful, it is expected to yield fundamental
results in narrative animation that can advance the current paradigm in
information visualization and visual analytics by developing novel techniques in
using animations for presenting and analyzing dynamic abstract data at a large
scale. The pilot system CityStories system is expected provide a novel network
platform for education, entertainment, and data analytics. It will engage
general users such as students, teachers, journalists, bloggers, and many others
in web information visualization and study. Results of this research will be
disseminated through publications, the World Wide Web, and collaborations with
researchers and analysts. The project web site
(http://coitweb.uncc.edu/~jyang13/narrativeanimation/narrativeanimation.htm)
will include research outcomes, publications, developed software, videos, and
datasets for wide dissemination to public.