* 1352627
* CAREER:   Persistence of soil organic matter in dynamic landscapes: interactive effects of fire and erosion
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2019
* Asmeret Asefaw Berhe, University of California - Merced
* Continuing Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 03/31/2019
* USD 478,789.00

Fire, erosion, and soil carbon (C) storage and persistence overlap in space and
time. There is incomplete understanding on how and why the interaction of fire
and erosional distribution of soil materials control persistence of bulk soil
organic matter (SOM) and pyrogenic C (PyC, also referred to as black carbon) in
dynamic landscapes. This work will use molecular- and nano-scale techniques to
determine how SOM persistence varies along multiple spatial (plot, hillslope,
and watersheds) and temporal scales (seasonal, annual, and decadal). The outcome
of this project will be better integration of biogeochemical and
geomorphological approaches to derive improved representation of mechanisms that
regulate SOM persistence in dynamic landscapes that routinely experience more
than one perturbation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project will develop
improved understanding on the dynamics of bulk SOM and PyC in fire-adapted
upland ecosystems and enable teaching of graduate and undergraduate students,
and K-12 teachers. This study will generate transformational results in the way
to (a) account for changes in C storage in fire-prone systems, and (b) model
response of fire-prone upland ecosystems to changes in climate and/or management
practices. Moreover, the investigator will: (1) teach undergraduate students and
high school teachers about the critical zone, and develop and publish lesson
plans for high-school level earth system science; (2) provide scientific
training for a graduate student and a postdoc; and (3) learn advanced techniques
that she will apply in her research and teaching.