* 1352311
* CAREER: An Initiative to Investigate the Near Space Interaction Region (INSpIRe)
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2014,05/31/2022
* Edwin Mierkiewicz, Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University
* Continuing Grant
* Tai-Yin Huang
* 05/31/2022
* USD 476,415.00

The upper atmosphere is defined as the region of Earth's atmosphere that
separates the lower atmosphere and the interplanetary environment. Important and
complex chemical and dynamical processes take place in this region, particularly
in the exosphere, where the terrestrial atmosphere literally merges with
interplanetary space. Understanding the processes that govern the coupling,
energetics, and dynamics of the upper atmosphere requires observations of its
mean state and its response to external forcing. These observations will provide
important constraints in developing a complete picture of the space-atmosphere
system. Although the terrestrial exosphere is populated by a number of atomic
and molecular species, neutral atomic hydrogen is increasingly dominant with
altitude and present throughout. The vertical distribution of atomic hydrogen in
the upper atmosphere and its vertical transport flux are recognized as important
parameters in understanding upper atmospheric chemistry, charge exchange between
the ionosphere and neutral atmosphere, and coupling between atmospheric regions.
Unfortunately, few direct determinations of these parameters have been achieved.
This leaves important questions incompletely answered: What is the distribution
of atomic hydrogen in the thermosphere and exosphere? How does that distribution
respond to external forcing? Is the upward flux of hydrogen from the mesosphere
constant or variable? What are the exospheric particle populations and velocity
distributions (satellite, ballistic and escaping components)?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study is called INSpIRe, for "Investigate the Near
Space Interaction Region." It is a five year career development plan to: (1)
integrate two state-of-the-art second generation Fabry-Perot annular summing
spectrometers into a remotely operable facility; (2) deploy this instrumentation
to a clear-air site, establishing a stable, well-calibrated observing platform;
(3) embark on a series of observations specifically designed to contribute to
three major areas of geocoronal research, i.e., geocoronal physics,
structure/coupling, and variability; (4) establish an adaptable facility capable
of contributing to many areas of terrestrial aeronomy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From
integration to implementation, initiative INSpIRe will provide a platform to
encourage and educate the next generation of researchers and a venue to apply
knowledge gained in the classroom to real-world science and engineering
challenges. Initiative INSpIRe will open new avenues for undergraduate
participation in research through active learning, encourage undergraduate
students to pursue independent research early in their careers, enhance the
growing Ph.D. program in Engineering Physics at Embry-Riddle Aeronautical
University (ERAU), and involve the public in the wonder of discovery through
open house events, tours, and demonstrations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When fully
operational, initiative INSpIRe will also be capable of contributing to many
areas of optical aeronomy beyond the core scientific focus of this study. The
unique capabilities of the Fabry-Perot instruments assembled as part of
initiative INSpIRe afford opportunities to extend aeronomical research into the
related field of planetary aeronomy, opening new avenues for research and
community involvement.