* 1352490
* CAREER: SusChEM: New Methods for Heterocycle Synthesis via Organic Photoredox Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2019
* David Nicewicz, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Jin K. Cha
* 06/30/2019
* USD 600,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Synthesis Program of the NSF Chemistry
Division, Professor David Nicewicz of The University of North Carolina at Chapel
Hill is developing new and highly efficient chemical reactions for the synthesis
of small cyclic organic molecules that have potential applications in
therapeutics. Purely organic dyes that harvest visible light are used as
catalysts in the development of these new and widely applicable synthetic
transformations from readily available and renewable chemicals. The appropriate
selection of these dyes and catalysts is improved by knowledge of the redox
potentials associated with single electron redox chemistry. Dr. Nicewicz and his
students are assembling and normalizing organic electrochemical redox data that
will serve as a useful compendium of reference data for practitioners of
organic, organometallic and inorganic chemistries. The broader impacts of this
award also include public outreach to the Morehead Planetarium Science Center.
Professor Nicewicz collaborates with Planetarium staff to design and develop
"The Chemistry of Cooking" targeted towards middle school students. The
SciVentures Program focuses on the chemistries of emulsions, yeast and carbon
dioxide, fermentation, and acids and bases exposing young people to the readily
accessible chemistry concepts in the kitchen. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A novel two-
component organic photooxidation catalyst system comprised of an acridinium salt
and redox-active hydrogen atom donor enables several new classes of heterocycle-
forming transformations. The classes of heterocycles forged by this method
include cyclic ethers, lactones, pyrrolidines and lactams from alkenes and
abundant chemical feedstocks such as unsaturated alcohols, carboxylic acids,
amines and amides without the need for pre-functionalization. This metal-free
dual catalyst system provides new tools to practioners of synthetic organic
chemistry. The new reaction technology developed in this proposal is applied to
the first total synthesis of the bisnortriterpenoid, rubriflordilactone B, a
molecule with documented activity against HIV-1.