* 1352699
* U.S.-China Collaboration:Exploring Assessment of 3D nanostructure and topochemical distributions of lignocellulosic biomass and their impact on biomass pretreatment
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/2014,08/31/2015
* Bandaru Ramarao, SUNY College of Environmental Science and Forestry
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 08/31/2015
* USD 24,986.00

Biomass is an important resource for the manufacture of renewable energy,
sustainable chemicals and biodegradable materials. However, the recalcitrance of
biomass is a fundamental barrier to the widespread application for biofuels.
Pretreatments serve to solubilize some of the components and although they
significantly enhance biomass reactivity, the causes or mechanisms by which this
occurs are not known. The principal objective of this work is to examine the
topochemical and nano?]structural aspects of cell walls and their impact on
subsequent enzymolysis or pretreatment reactions, by applying a variety of
leading edge topographic and chemical resolution techniques. This will show the
fundamental mechanisms of cell wall deconstruction and lead to effective biomass
conversions. The understanding of the topochemistry of the chemical reactions
will enable enhancements of these methods and recommendations of novel, more
efficient pretreatment methods. This is a collaborative work and will help
educate scientists and engineers for the bioresource industry. The application
of novel microscopic techniques in concert with biomass pretreatment will cover
a wide range of engineering and scientific disciplines and academic institutions
and help foster interdisciplinary research leading to broader impacts in
education and dissemination of knowledge internationally.&lt;br/&gt;Wood chips
will be used as models for this preliminary study on account of their wide
prevalence and use in pulp and paper. Explorations of the 3D nanostructure and
topochemical distributions will be performed using TEM imaging, advanced
computed tomography, Raman spectroscopy, and immunoassays as follows: 1)
Recently developed immunochemical labels with nanoparticle tags and TEM to
determine pore structure (SUNY), 2) 3D nanostructure digitally visualized and
characterized using TEM and advanced computational tools (UMN), 3) AFM with
functionalized probes coupled with the TEM for correlative imaging of the
spatial chemical distributions within cell walls (UMN), 4) Raman spectroscopy
will be applied to obtain lignin distributions inside the cell walls (in
collaboration with Beijing Forestry University, China). The changes in the three
dimensional nanoporous structure of the cell wall, porosity and pore size
distributions and their impact on biomass pretreatment and the spatial
distribution of the cell wall components will be obtained for two samples. This
award supports three U.S. investigators and two U.S. students for travel to
China to initiate this collaboration.