* 1352972
* The Atmospheric N Cycle:   Biospheric Emissions and Chemical Transformations
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2018
* Ronald Cohen, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 06/30/2018
* USD 546,994.00

This research is focused on the atmosphere-biosphere exchange of nitrogen
compounds in the environment. The emphasis is on nitrogen compounds in forests
and areas with abundant plant material. Forests can emit volatile organic gases,
known as biogenic emissions, that can react and condense to form very small
particles, known as secondary organic aerosol. This project includes laboratory
studies to identify the chemical reactions of the biogenic emissions that can
occur in the presence of nitrogen compounds. The results will improve models
that predict air quality and climate change.

Laboratory flux measurements will focus on investigating the fate of nitrogen
species as they are emitted from the plant/forest canopy to the free atmosphere
and the chemical, physical, and/or biological mechanisms for the formation of
oxidized compounds. Data from the SAS campaign, held in Alabama in the summer of
2013, will be analyzed with the use of chemical transport models and compared
with data from other field campaigns. The resulting information will provide a
comparison of the sources and sinks of nitrogen species, the observations of
oxidation products and secondary organic aerosol, and the influence of
anthropogenic emissions on the concentration and distribution of oxidized
species. Finally, laboratory experiments will be conducted in the Caltech
chamber to improve understanding of the production of organic nitrate from the
oxidation of isoprene and other compounds produced from biogenic emissions.