* 1352507
* CAREER: Plasmon-mediated photo-absorption and carrier recombination dynamics in semiconductor/metal hybrid nano-systems
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2019
* Marcus Jones, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Continuing Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 06/30/2019
* USD 509,778.00

In this project, funded by the Chemistry Division's Macromolecular,
Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program, Marcus Jones from the University of
North Carolina at Charlotte is investigating how the interactions between nano-
sized quantum dots and metal particles in the presence of light can be used to
enhance the function of optoelectronic devices such as solar cells and light-
emitting diodes (LEDs). Quantum dots are tiny semiconductors whose color depends
on their size: larger particles appear redder than smaller ones. Metal
nanoparticles can act as miniature antennas that channel light energy into or
out of the quantum dots. This research program aims to unravel the complex
interplay between nanoscale metals and semiconductors that could potentially
enable technological advances such as thinner, more efficient solar cells and
brighter LEDs. This work is also being integrated into a teaching and outreach
program, which, in collaboration with the Charlotte Teachers' Institute, aims to
educate local schoolteachers about the amazing world of nanoscale science and
facilitates their participation in short term projects where they can do
cutting-edge research for themselves. Inspired by the activities of the NSF
ADVANCE initiative at UNC Charlotte, Marcus is also organizing a seminar series
at UNC Charlotte, aimed at improving the retention of women in science, at which
female science professionals are invited to discuss the challenges and rewards
of being a woman in science.

This research program aims to develop our understanding of the photo-absorption
and emission effects caused by resonant coupling between excitons in quantum
dots and surface plasmon modes in nanostructured metals. Acting like local
antennae, surface plasmon resonances can enable efficient coupling of
electromagnetic energy into or out of a chromophore. This can manifest as
increased photoluminescence intensity, which is ascribed to either increased
photo-absorption, or radiative recombination. The ability of coupled surface
plasmon modes to capture and concentrate electromagnetic energy presents a
tremendous opportunity to enhance the role of quantum dots in light harvesting
or LED applications by improving multi-exciton generation yields, increasing
biexciton emission efficiencies and eliminating fluorescence blinking. Unlike
previous studies, this work is primarily focused towards understanding the
effects of plasmonic coupling on the photo-absorption and carrier recombination
rates of multi-excited quantum dots. A combination of single particle and newly
developed ensemble techniques is being used to distinguish multi-exciton
fluorescence dynamics occurring in fabricated hybrid nanosystems that have been
designed to enable good control over exciton-plasmon interactions. Successful
completion of the proposed research tasks will (i) establish the dependence of
photo-absorption and radiative recombination rates on the distance between
semiconductor and metal nanoparticles; (ii) resolve effects due to changes in
quantum dot size, shape and composition; and (iii) identify the differences
between photo-absorption and emission enhancements induced in single exciton
versus charged and multi-exciton states.