* 1352892
* Collaborative Research: Testing a microbial-association-distribution hypothesis to explain spatial distributions and species co-existence in a community of epiphytic plants
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Andrew Taylor, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 08/31/2019
* USD 98,845.00

Nearly all wild plants depend upon beneficial fungi, called mycorrhizal fungi,
to obtain adequate nutrition. This relationship between plants and fungi may
help solve a key puzzle in the study of biodiversity, how so many species of
plants can compete for the same resources of water, light, and soil nutrients
and yet co-exist in the same natural community. This project will conduct
experiments in a highly diverse tropical forest in Costa Rica to test if: 1)
different plant species associate with different fungi; 2) species only occur
where the appropriate beneficial fungi for that species are present; and 3)
association with different fungi reduces competition between plant species and
promotes co-existence. The research will focus on the rich array of orchids that
grow on the trunks and branches in the forest, since it is already known that
these species form close associations with mycorrhizal fungi. Results will
advance understanding of the mechanisms that maintain natural diversity, and the
project will disseminate findings to the public as well as to the scientific
community to promote conservation of the diversity in tropical forests. The
project will also train undergraduate and graduate students and postdoctoral
researchers, including members of groups under-represented in science, and
promote international scientific collaboration.

The proposed conceptual model for how plant-fungal associations could shape
orchid communities and their niche structures is that fungi are themselves
resources exploited by the plants, as well as the means by which plants acquire
resources such as water and nutrients, and thus determine plant spatial
distributions and species coexistence. This hypothesis will be addressed through
two integrated studies that will (1) conduct the first such spatial sampling of
orchids, fungi, and environmental variables in a tropical forest and (2)
experimentally determine whether orchid seed establishment is limited by the
distribution of fungi by placing seed packets in locations with and without
suitable fungi. Both studies will employ next-generation sequencing methods to
identify fungi in the environment and will include novel statistical analyses of
the niches and interaction networks of orchids and fungi. Findings will show
whether (1) fungi are patchily distributed, (2) orchids differ in their fungal
associations, (3) orchid seedling establishment and adult distributions are
limited by fungal distributions, and (4) co-occurring orchid species show niche
partitioning in their use of fungi and in the substrates from which their
associated fungi draw resources.