* 1352279
* CAREER: Biomimetic Metal-Organic Super-Containers
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2020
* Zhenqiang Wang, University of South Dakota Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 06/30/2020
* USD 658,543.00

Dr. Zhenqiang Wang of the University of South Dakota aims to develop effective
approaches to assemble complex functional architectures from small molecular
building blocks. Inspired by the structure of spherical viruses, which feature
an endo (internal) cavity for storage of genetic materials and exo (external)
cavities for recognition of targeted hosts, Dr. Wang designs a new class of
synthetic container molecules by linking cup-shaped structures to create a new
enclosed hollow space while retaining the free voids of the cup-shaped building
blocks. He develops a general approach to synthesize a family of these container
molecules and investigates their properties. A fundamental understanding of the
properties of this new class of containers could lead to the development of
novel materials with applications in many different fields, such as gas
separation and water remediation. This research is integrated with educational
and outreach initiatives that specially aim to promote scientific literacy among
underrepresented students including Native Americans.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under the support of this CAREER award from the
Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program of the Division of
Chemistry, Dr. Wang develops a general synthetic approach to structurally and
functionally diverse metal-organic super-containers (MOSCs), a new class of
synthetic receptors, from sulfonylcalixarene-based building blocks, metal ions,
and organic carboxylate linkers. This novel synthetic approach utilizes the
largely unexplored lower rim of calixarenes to construct hierarchical
supramolecular assemblies that contain both endo and exo cavities potentially
suitable for selective and allosteric binding of different guests. Another
objective of this research is to investigate the structure-property relationship
and the guest-binding behavior of functionalized MOSCs in both solution phase
and the solid state.