* 1352535
* CAREER: Multifunctional Polymer Coatings of Virus Particles for Safer and More Efficient Gene Delivery
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2020
* Joshua Ramsey, Oklahoma State University
* Continuing Grant
* Randy Duran
* 03/31/2020
* USD 490,000.00

This CAREER award to Oklahoma State University by the Biomaterials Program in
the Division of Materials Research is to investigate how the material properties
of multifunctional and aptamer-derivatized polyethylene glycol-grafted-
polylysine copolymer would affect the gene delivery efficiency of a
polymer/adenovirus vector. Earlier studies have shown that a hybrid vector
possesses advantages over current viral and nonviral vectors. Determining how
the hybrid vector could be further improved to better mimic the efficiency of a
viral vector with none of the drawbacks, however, remains a significant
challenge. The proposed study is expected to provide new insight into the design
of hybrid, and eventually, non-viral gene delivery vectors. This in turn would
guide the development of new materials to overcome current bottlenecks in the
gene delivery system. These expected outcomes will be achieved by comparing the
mechanisms by which the hybrid vector and native adenovirus transform cells and
comparing the efficiency and rate at which the viral and hybrid vectors deliver
genetic material. Through these efforts, the research investigator will be able
to determine limitations of the currently used materials and would provide a
better understanding of how to design material properties to overcome the
current limitations. The proposed outreach activities would also directly impact
Native American, African American and homeschooled students in exposing them to
STEM related topics and would encourage them in STEM related higher studies and
careers. Further, the proposed broader impact activities included assistance to
school teachers in developing laboratory practices and curriculum development,
thereby encouraging students to see the ways in which science and engineering
shape their future. As part of teaching, training and education, the graduate
and undergraduate students in cutting-edge research techniques for discovering
and studying novel biomaterials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Gene therapy has long
promised to change the way we prevent and treat disease in this country. The
field, however, has largely failed to advance beyond the clinical trial stages
due to difficulties encountered in delivering genes in a safe and efficient
manner. The focus of this project would be in discovering and characterizing
novel biomaterials that would help to transition from virus-based delivery
methods to synthetic particle-based delivery methods. The project will develop a
hybrid polymer/virus delivery method to help better understand how these
materials would affect gene delivery. The project is expected to improve the
basic understanding on how to design novel materials for gene delivery that will
potentially transform the field from a fringe medical treatment to common
practice. The project will also help train the next generation of scientists and
engineers by working with high school teachers in integrating biomaterials
teaching and training into current curriculum and laboratory practices. The
project also involves two-week summer research studies in the PI's laboratory,
primarily intended for Native American, African American and home-schooled high
school students.