* 1352326
* CAREER: A Physical Understanding of Secrecy
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2014,03/31/2019
* Eric Chitambar, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 03/31/2019
* USD 500,000.00

From intelligence briefings to ecommerce, nearly all levels of society rely on
the secure transmission of private information. When two or more parties share
secret data, often there are certain actions they can perform to strengthen
their information security. For example, sometimes revealing partial information
to an unwanted eavesdropper can actually improve the overall security. This
project seeks to develop a quantitative picture of how secrecy evolves as the
trusted parties manipulate their data and publicly share part of their
information with one another. A novel approach to this problem will be adopted
through the use of recently developed techniques in the study of quantum
entanglement and the theory of entanglement transformations. The notion of
secrecy will be placed on the same fundamental level as quantum entanglement in
that both will be viewed as precious physical resources that can be manipulated
and used for various information processing tasks. Investigating the connection
between classical secrecy and quantum entanglement will not only offer a new
level of unification between quantum mechanics and classical information theory,
but it will also yield a fresh perspective on how quantum and classical physics
differ. Ultimately, the deeper understanding of classical secrecy developed in
this project will lead to improved security analysis and new methodologies for
securely transmitting information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research program
investigates fundamental questions in quantum information theory and classical
cryptography. A typical quantum key distribution (QKD) protocol (like those
employed by commercial QKD machines) consists of two separate phases - called
Alice and Bob - who use a quantum channel to exchange quantum information
between them. However, in this process an eavesdropper - named Eve - may
interact with their state so that all three systems are described by the joint
quantum state &amp;#961;ABE. Eventually the parties measure their respective
systems and obtain measurement outcomes, i.e. classical data. But due to the
indeterminism of quantum mechanics, this measurement data can only be described
by some tripartite probability distribution PABE. The second phase of the QKD
protocol is purely classical and now consists of Alice and Bob using local
operations and public communication to convert the distribution PABE into secret
key states, which are perfectly correlated bits shared between Alice and Bob,
yet completely hidden from Eve. This process is known as public key agreement,
or secret key distillation. Using secret key states, Alice and Bob will be able
to transmit data secretly from Eve, regardless of her computational power. The
distribution PABE is said to possess "secret correlations" since using public
key agreement, it can be converted into secret key states.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Classical systems that share secret correlations behave
remarkably similar to quantum systems that share entanglement. In particular,
both quantum entanglement and secret correlations are capable of being
transformed, degraded, and enhanced through local physical processing and global
classical communication. In this project, a mathematical framework will be
constructed that is suitable for studying the most general physical
manipulations of secret correlations, something currently lacking in the
research literature. Within this framework, new analytic tools will be developed
to study the crucial problem of secret key distillation and the broader question
of when one type of secret correlations can be transformed into another. A
particular focus will be on generating new secrecy monotones and measures that
do not rely exclusively on information-theoretic quantities such as entropy and
mutual information. Additionally, novel cryptographic paradigms will be
introduced that are inspired by similar primitives in quantum information
theory, such as random entanglement distillation and entanglement combing. An
underlying goal of this project will be to unify classical secrecy and quantum
entanglement as physical analogs. Under such a correspondence, known techniques
and results in entanglement theory can be applied in the study of secrecy, and
vice versa.