* 1352081
* CAREER:Probing the Quark Gluon Plasma with Jet Tomography
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2021
* Sevil Salur, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 04/30/2021
* USD 710,000.00

According to the fundamental theory of how protons and neutrons form atomic
nuclei, these particles are expected to melt into a soup of quarks and gluons
known as the quark gluon plasma (QGP) at the high densities and temperatures
that are created in relativistic heavy ion collisions. At the Relativistic Heavy
Ion Collider (RHIC) at Brookhaven National Laboratory, a new phase of matter has
been discovered. With its unprecedented reach in energy, the Large Hadron
Collider (LHC) explores new regions of this phase transition and will reveal its
signatures. The PI's research investigates the properties of this new state of
matter at high density and temperature in a quantitative manner through a study
of internal probes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;Jets are
collimated sprays of decay products of hard-scattered quarks and gluons. Because
their expected yields are calculable using the well understood theory of strong
interactions, they provide calibrated probes of QGP. Since their propagation
through the QGP is affected by strong interactions, an energy loss measurement
of jets is an ideal probe to study the key features of this new state of matter.
The PI's research group at Rutgers will determine the fundamental properties of
this dense and hot matter via various complimentary jet measurements by
utilizing the Compact Muon Solenoid (CMS) experiment at LHC.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts:&lt;br/&gt;The PI proposes a three-tiered
approach to cultivate a diverse and competitive work force via integration of
active research and education. She will encourage female middle and high school
students to pursue university education in STEM fields by bringing them to
Rutgers for full-day sessions of demos and experiments, recruit undergraduate
physics majors by incorporating cutting-edge LHC research into her introductory
physics courses and by organizing Women in Physics Conferences at Rutgers, and
mentor women and minority students and include them in all phases of research.