* 1352443
* CAREER:  Discovering the Underpinnings of Statistical Language Learning in Infants
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2014,02/29/2020
* Jill Lany, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Leher Singh
* 02/29/2020
* USD 765,239.00

A longstanding question in the developmental and cognitive sciences concerns how
infants learn their native language. It is known that talking and reading to
infants helps them to make sense of the rapidly changing speech sounds that they
are hearing, and results in better language outcomes. It is also known that
infants are good at detecting statistical regularities in the language they
hear, such as how particular sounds occur together to form words. Becoming
familiar with statistical regularities helps infants acquire key aspects of
language structure, such as finding individual words within spoken sentences,
learning the meanings of those words, and discovering grammatical patterns.
However, very little is known about the learning mechanisms that support
infants' use of statistical regularities. This research will test how infants'
statistical learning ability is determined by their language input and their
ability to process that language. Talk to infants is typically about the here-
and-now, so language learning involves connecting the speech infants hear with
the visual world. The proposed research will examine how developments in
infants' ability to extract auditory and visual information are related to
statistical learning, and whether these abilities predict when infants will
reach language milestones such as the onset of word learning and combining words
in their own speech. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Infants and toddlers who struggle
with language are vulnerable to long-term language and academic difficulties.
This research investigating infants' ability to extract patterns and learn from
speech will promote early identification of infants at risk for language delays,
which is crucial to effective language interventions. Dr. Lany will also work
with a local organization focused on increasing awareness of the importance of
talking to children for their language development. This partnership will allow
for the inclusion of infants at risk for developing language delays in the
proposed studies, and will provide an opportunity to share knowledge and to
impact the local community.