* 1352608
* CAREER: Computing accurate free energies for solubility, solvation, and transfer
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2020
* David Mobley, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 06/30/2020
* USD 601,354.00

David Mobley, of the University of California, Irvine is supported by an award
from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the
Chemistry Division and the Division of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure to develop,
improve and use computer techniques to predict the properties of new molecules
before they are created. Currently, in many cases, new molecules of interest
must be made and tested to determine their properties such as their solubility,
their likely distribution into the environment, or their interactions with
important biomolecules. But the process of making (synthesizing) new molecules
can be slow and expensive, and with the right computer tools (such as those
advanced in this project), their properties can be predicted computationally in
advance of their synthesis. This can result in substantial savings of time and
money, since only compounds with desirable properties can then be synthesized.
This project focuses on developing and applying computer tools to predict these
properties, with a particular emphasis on three specific areas: Predicting
solubilities, automating calculations to predict binding interactions, and
predicting partitioning into different environments (i.e. in understanding
environmental distribution and effects). A long-term goal is to provide
researchers with well-validated computational tools which they can use to help
guide research efforts designing new
molecules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work develops and
applies promising first-principles computational methods to predict
thermodynamic properties such as solubilities (e.g. for dissolving a solid in
water) and solvation thermodynamics for molecules in solution. This work builds
on Dr. Mobley's previous methodological innovations in the area. Major new
developments include a framework for physical, force-field-based solubility
predictions, which will be tested with multiple force fields, and a new
automated approach for conducting relative free energy calculations. A
substantial emphasis is placed on software and workflow development to ensure
the techniques developed and applied are easily accessible to other researchers.
Methods and improvements from this work will be disseminated through the
collaborative alchemistry.org website, featuring tutorials and background, and
through software tools the investigator will release via Simtk.org,
alchemistry.org, and elsewhere.