* 1352405
* CAREER: Massive Stellar Explosions and their Host Galaxy Environments
* MPS,AST
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2020
* Maryam Modjaz, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Sarah Higdon
* 03/31/2020
* USD 500,000.00

This award will enable Professor Maryam Modjaz of New York University to infer
the properties of stripped supernovae (SNe) progenitors by measuring the
properties of the local environment within their host galaxies. She will use the
sample of 89 stripped supernovae from the Palomar Transient Factory survey, in
order to reduce the known biases in previous samples toward high-metallicity
galaxies. She will obtain spectra of the host galaxies and the portion of the
host containing the supernovae. The mean metallicity in the host galaxy and in
the SNe environments will be inferred from the Oxygen abundances measured from
these spectra. The PI and her collaborators will also obtain high-resolution
images of the more distant galaxies in order to map the blue-light distribution
in the host galaxies. These will be used to characterize regions of active star
formation and to determine the overall galaxy mass. The color and metallicity of
the spatially-resolved region around the SNe will also be used to draw
conclusions about the mass and metallicity of the progenitors.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Long-duration gamma-ray bursts and stripped supernovae are
among the most powerful explosions in the universe. Both are signals of the
cataclysmic death of massive stars, but they contribute differently to the
creation of heavy elements. The research funded with this award will lead to a
better understanding of the chemical evolution of the universe by providing
tools to determine which properties of stars determine their ultimate fate. This
research will be integrated with the PI's education plans through two projects
in cooperation with the American Museum of Natural History. Professor Modjaz
will teach an after-school course entitled "Explosions in the Universe". The
curriculum will be structured around teaching pedagogy that is likely to change
student perceptions of the scientific process, using strategies and mentoring
that enhance the learning of young women and underrepresented groups. In
addition, the PI will coordinate astronomers at New York City area astronomy
departments to participate in the Science Research Mentoring Program through
AMNH. Through this program, high school students will participate in cutting-
edge research and present their results at a workshop.