* 1352008
* Response of the Labrador Sea and south Greenland Ice Sheet to the mid-Pliocene climate optimum: sedimentary, magnetic and geochemical evidence from the Eirik Drift
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Anders Carlson, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 07/31/2017
* USD 399,956.00

In 2013, atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2) concentrations reached 400 ppm,
raising questions as to how the Earth will respond to this unprecedented forcing
in human history. A major concern is the response of Earth's remaining ice
sheets to present-day (and future) CO2 levels, and their attendant contribution
to sea-level rise. In the case of the Greenland Ice Sheet (GIS), models suggest
a threshold behavior where the GIS will completely melt once a certain
temperature is exceeded. However, different models suggest different thresholds,
so it is unclear whether the Earth has already crossed an ice-free Greenland
tipping point. The last period when atmospheric CO2 reached ~400 ppm was during
the mid-Pliocene climate optimum 3.3-3.0 million years ago, providing a past
analogue to Earth's present climate. Climate and ice-sheet models simulate a
warmer Earth with a smaller GIS, but show a range of responses. Pliocene sea-
level records are significantly complicated by movement of the crust from
advance and retreat of later ice sheets, preventing clear documentation of
global ice volume. This project will investigate the response of the south GIS
and adjacent Labrador Sea to elevated CO2 in the mid Pliocene using marine
sediment archives preserved in the Eirik Drift off of south Greenland. Specific
questions to be addressed are: 1) How warm was the Labrador Sea during the mid-
Pliocene optimum?, and 2) Did south Greenland completely deglaciate in response
to this warmth? Results of this study will help establish whether the Earth has
already crossed a tipping point that will lead to an ice-free
Greenland.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will answer these research
questions using methods developed for tracking GIS behavior during Quaternary
interglacials. Question 1 will be addressed through foraminifer census data and
measurement of d18O and Mg/Ca on planktonic foraminifera in the Eirik Drift
across the mid-Pliocene optimum sequence recorded in International Ocean
Discovery Program (IODP) Site U1307. Question 2 will be answered through the
tracing of the sources of mid-Pliocene detrital sediment in the Eirik Drift
using silt-size Sr-Nd-Pb isotopic signatures and silt- and clay-size magnetic
properties. The team's extensive provenance work has shown that silt-size
particles with Precambrian isotopic signatures, high magnetic concentrations,
and coarse magnetic grain-sizes are only produced on Greenland through GIS
erosion of the bedrock; Iceland has distinctively different magnetic and
isotopic signatures. GIS melting provides the mechanism to deliver these silt
particles to the Eirik Drift. If a south Greenland terrane deglaciates removing
the erosive agent and transport mechanism, the terrane's isotopic and magnetic
signatures are largely absent in Eirik Drift sediment. These records will
determine the Labrador Sea and south GIS response to present-day CO2 levels
including the impact of long-term feedbacks necessary for assessing Earth-system
sensitivity. The combination of ocean climate and south GIS records will test if
the climate threshold necessary to deglaciate Greenland lies at ~400 ppm
atmospheric CO2 concentration. This project will support a postdoctoral
researcher and undergraduate students in multi-proxy approaches in the fields of
paleoceanography, paleoclimatology, geochemistry, environmental magnetism, and
glacial geology to address societally relevant climate/sea-level questions.
Under-represented groups in the geosciences will take precedent in recruitment
of the postdoctoral researcher and undergraduate students.