* 1352672
* CAREER: Gesture and Learning: Implications for Children's Language Development Across Race and Socioeconomic Status
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2019
* Makeba Wilbourn, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Peter Vishton
* 04/30/2019
* USD 749,936.00

Multi-modal communication -conveyed both verbally (e.g., speech) and visually
(e.g., facial expressions, gestures)- can facilitate children's language
learning and development. In particular, accompanying auditory speech with
visual cues (e.g., gestures) enhances children's vocabulary development,
especially children from racial/ethnic minority groups and lower income
households. Typically, these children possess substantially smaller vocabularies
than their White middle-class peers. This pervasive "word gap" is evident before
children enter school and has potent implications for later achievement and
education attainment. Thus, exposing at-risk children to interventions involving
multi-modal communication, such as gesture-accompanied speech, may be
particularly effective in increasing vocabulary knowledge and bridging the
persistent word/achievement gap.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research
examines the relationship between gesture and language across racial and
socioeconomic status (SES) groups from infancy through first grade.
Observational studies will examine how 10- to 24-month-old infants and their
mothers communicate through gesture and language during naturalistic
interactions (e.g., book reading, play). Experimental studies will examine the
impact of multi-modal communication (i.e., gesture + words) on preschool
children's ability to learn new words. Finally, a classroom-based intervention
study will assess the efficacy of multi-modal (i.e., gesture-accompanied speech)
vocabulary instruction with low-SES African American children, who continue to
be at risk for poorer academic and educational
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will provide valuable insights into
the utility of multi-modal communication (i.e., gesture-accompanied speech) in
children's early vocabulary and language development. Moreover, this research
has the potential to transform educational practices by creating early and
effective learning interventions for all children at risk for language delays or
deficits. Furthermore, this program of research will increase research
participation of underrepresented, racially and economically diverse groups and
provide undergraduates students from underrepresented groups with hands-on
laboratory- and community-based research experience through a collaborative
partnership with North Carolina Central University, a historically black
university.