* 1352696
* EAGER: Student Outcomes in a Computer Science MOOC (SOCSMOOC)
* EHR,DUE
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2017
* Philip Sadler, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 07/31/2017
* USD 299,995.00

This EAGER project seeks to study a Massive Open Online Course (MOOC) offered by
HarvardX, an experiment created in response to a need by Harvard faculty for a
central resource to help them push the boundaries of learning through re-
imagined teaching and to take advantage of new possibilities for educational
research in the online era. The topic of the study is "Introduction to Computer
Science", a course with the largest initial enrollment of all of Harvard's MOOCs
(150,349), as well as the second largest enrollment of all of Harvard's
traditionally taught courses (714). Two versions of this course, CS50x and CS50,
share many features (lectures, problem sets, exams, and projects), but differ in
grading, student feedback, and classroom interactivity. Unlike the traditional
course which has a 99.6% completion rate, CS50x awards completion certificates
to only 6.3% of those who enroll. This presents an opportunity to study high
attrition rates in MOOCS, a problem that plagues online courses nationwide.
Little is known about why students do not finish MOOCs. Are there disparities in
completion rates by gender, minorities underrepresented in STEM, age of
students, language fluency? The project gathers empirical evidence in the CS50x
MOOC to create a profile of the enrolled students and to determine which factors
in their background, in their prior experience with computing, and in their
learning behaviors during the course, predict successful completion of the
course. Statistical survival analysis will be used to model the risk of dropping
out. The broader impact of the project is that, by characterizing factors that
positively and negatively influence students' success in MOOCs, it will allow
for more informed, and hence more potentially effective, pedagogical and
institutional policies aimed at increasing student success and broadening
participation.