* 1352990
* MPWR: Mentoring and Partnerships for Women in RUME
* EHR,DUE
* 11/01/2013,10/31/2014
* Megan Wawro, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* John Haddock
* 10/31/2014
* USD 44,148.00

This project is to support Partnerships for Women in RUME (Research in
Undergraduate Mathematics Education) and create a sustainable support system for
women at all career stages in undergraduate mathematics education research.
Stemming from the need articulated in national reports and research findings,
the project will initiate face-to-face mentoring and partnership system that
targets participation amongst women researchers within undergraduate mathematics
education. The project will be a clearinghouse for opportunities for established
women to mentor newcomers into the field, and to build partnerships among women
researchers of undergraduate mathematics education at all career stages.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project goals are to provide an environment for women
in the undergraduate mathematics education research community to discuss issues
specific to them; and informally provide or expose women to mentorship and
partnership opportunities among graduate students and faculty, both junior and
senior, within the research community. The project will initiate the process
with a seminar which will occur in conjunction with the annual RUME conference.
The project will have sixty participants, who will arrive one day prior to the
start of the National RUME conference. This will allow one full day of meetings
for the MPWR seminar, followed by three days of informal contact. The structure
of the MPWR seminar is panel discussions followed by organized break-out groups.
The panel discussions will target various topics of interest, such as the work-
life balance and climbing the academic ladder. Invited panel discussants, chosen
from within and beyond the RUME community, are women that represent various
stages in career, type of career path, institution type, and lifestyle choices.
Each panel discussion will be followed by organized breakout group discussions
about the panel topic. Following the RUME conference, participants will submit
requests for formalized mentoring and partnership networks composed of one
senior faculty, two junior faculty, and three graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aligns with the national effort to
support the careers of women and minorities within the STEM disciplines. It
takes up specific recommendations for this support in the form of fostering
personal, face-to-face mentoring and partnership opportunities. By supporting
women in undergraduate mathematics education, the project seeks to increase the
number of graduate students pursuing undergraduate mathematics education
research who will go onto academic positions, as well as increase the
productivity of female junior and senior faculty who already hold academic
positions. The MPWR seminar will further expand the role of women pursuing
research in undergraduate mathematics education within in the broader Discipline
Based Education Research (DBER) community.