* 1352660
* CAREER: Mechanical Control of Single Spins for Sensing and Quantum Information Processing
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2020
* Ania Bleszynski Jayich, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* James H. Edgar
* 08/31/2020
* USD 600,000.00

This CAREER project is co-funded by the Electronic and Photonic Materials
Program and the Condensed Matter Physics Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-
technical: With advances in materials processing at the nanoscale, it is now
possible to form macroscopic mechanical devices that exhibit quantum mechanical
effects, behavior typically observed only in atomic-scale systems. This CAREER
project builds on these advances to probe the fundamental interactions between
the macroscopic motion of billions of atoms moving in unison, a phonon, and a
miniscule quantum object, a single electron spin. The single spin is a nitrogen-
vacancy center in diamond: a model quantum system with atom-like properties that
are uniquely accessible and controllable. With its exquisite sensitivity, the
nitrogen-vacancy center can be used as nanoscale quantum probe of spin-
mechanical coupling; furthermore, harnessing this coupling could enable advances
in quantum metrology and quantum information processing. Finally this
juxtaposition of two systems existing at vastly different size scales enables
fundamental explorations of macroscopic quantum mechanics and decoherence at the
interface of quantum and classical worlds. This research is tightly coupled with
a strong educational plan focusing on cultivating a passion for science in
students of varied backgrounds by preparing them to attack the nation's
challenges through innovative thinking and dedication. The Principle
Investigator (PI) actively involves undergraduates, especially women and
community college students, in her laboratory and establishes herself as a
formal mentor throughout the years in their higher education. The PI partners
with the UCSB School for Scientific Thought, in which graduate students teach
Saturday classes to high-school students from diverse backgrounds, disseminating
research discoveries to a wider audience. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Technical: This
project investigates how a single highly coherent spin and a macroscopic
mechanical degree of freedom interact, what implications the interaction has for
the quantum behavior of the spin, and whether spins and phonons can be
functionally integrated. Single-crystal diamond cantilevers with embedded
nitrogen vacancy (NV) centers are a novel platform to study spin-mechanical
coupling. Motion of the cantilever generates large-amplitude strain fields with
precisely controlled magnitude and direction. Single NV centers are used as
quantum nanoscale sensors to measure the strain coupling coefficients and the
results will guide a more complete theoretical treatment of the relevant ground-
state spin interactions. Enhanced NV magnetic sensitivity is explored through
strain tuning. Novel quantum sensing techniques based on spin relaxation are
investigated in order to measure fluctuating fields of various origins. High
quality-factor nanomechanical resonators containing NVs with long spin coherence
times (about 10 ms) are formed via engineered diamond growth with nanoscale
depth control of NVs. With this combination of excellent mechanical and spin
properties, the quantum regime of spin-phonon coupling and phonon-mediated spin-
spin interactions are explored.