* 1352995
* A mechanistic framework for bottom-up biodiversity effects: riparian forest invasion impacts on headwater stream microbial and macroinvertebrate communities
* BIO,DEB
* 04/15/2014,03/31/2018
* Mark Benbow, University of Dayton
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 03/31/2018
* USD 526,964.00

Freshwater streams are a critical natural resource and are ecologically linked
to the surrounding landscape. Due to their nature, streamside forests are highly
vulnerable to invasion by plant species which aggressively displace other
species. This project will test the hypothesis that the ecology of aquatic
microbial and macroinvertebrate stream communities are regulated by bottom-up
processes altered through terrestrial plant invasion along headwater streams.
The investigators will use the invasion of headwater stream forests by the
exotic shrub Amur honeysuckle (Lonicera maackii) to assess alteration of
materials that enter the stream, and how those alterations change the in-stream
habitat. The project will further assess how invasion influences stream
microbial biofilm (bacteria and fungi) and macroinvertebrate communities. Field
assessments along a gradient of L. maackii density will be complemented by field
manipulation experiments to test mechanisms. Overall, the project tests the
broad hypothesis that the loss of biodiversity in streamside forests due to
invasion is mirrored by a loss of biodiversity in the aquatic community. The
foundation for the proposed work includes an extensive suite of published
studies and preliminary data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will directly
benefit traditionally underrepresented groups in science by creating paid
internship opportunities for urban students from a charter school that serves
poverty-stricken parts of urban Dayton. This project will directly inform
management of aquatic habitats and riparian zones throughout the region by
involving managers from a variety of park systems. The findings could influence
management on thousands of miles of headwater streams in North America. This
funding will facilitate scientific training of undergraduate students through
paid internships, support a PhD student, and provide an excellent training
platform for a postdoctoral researcher.