* 1352095
* CAREER: Field Studies of Precambrian Impacts and Implications for the Early Crust and Environment
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2014,01/31/2020
* Alexandra Davatzes, Temple University
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 01/31/2020
* USD 445,359.00

Two geologic processes fundamentally shaped the early history of the Earth:
large, frequent meteor impacts, and formation of crustal material and initiation
of plate tectonics. The larger and more frequent impacts to the early Earth
would have significantly affected the atmosphere, oceans and surface of the
planet. Many of these impacts vaporized the top several meters of ocean water
world-wide, excavated and vaporized rock as deep as the upper mantle, and
occurred at a frequency that ensured that they influenced the early evolution of
life. More than 10 large impacts from 3,500 to 2,400 million years ago excavated
different parts of the crust into the upper mantle, and the vaporized rock
formed a global plume that condensed and deposited this material as spherule bed
deposits. These deposits are still preserved in South Africa and Australia
today. Unfortunately, the early Earth's exposed rock record is limited to small
regions and is largely comprised of crustal rocks that are dissimilar to modern
crustal rocks, most importantly in lacking any clear indication of oceanic crust
forming at spreading centers, or of continental crust creating stable platforms.
Thus, studies of the early Earth are commonly limited to models and proxies to
determine the early crust formation, timing of initiation of plate tectonics,
and continental crust extraction. This CAREER research project will investigate
the geochemistry of the preserved meteor impact deposits to determine crustal
and mantle composition at the impact sites, and identify plume processes in the
atmosphere associated with impact. Many of the concepts intrinsic to the
research are spaciotemporal, such as deep time and penetrative thinking. Because
STEM performance is highly linked to spatial skills, in parallel with the
geological research program, the pedagogic component of this research focuses on
developing tools to improve 3D thinking in undergraduate and graduate students,
and testing the tools to determine the efficacy in
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching scientific questions that guide
the geological component of this research are: (1) What is the ocean crust and
upper mantle composition at the site of numerous large impacts from 3.5 to 2.4
billion years ago and what can that tell us about the Precambrian crust? (2) How
do impact plumes form, condense, and crystallize and what effect do the plumes
have on the atmosphere? This CAREER project will address these questions through
an integrated program of fieldwork in the Pilbara craton of Australia and the
Kapvaal craton of South Africa, modeling, petrography, micro-computed
tomography, scanning electron microscopy, and other geochemical analyses to
characterize the ocean/mantle target rock and impactites. This research will
provide a unique insight into the composition of otherwise unpreserved
Precambrian ocean crust and mantle, and will constrain the geochemical and
mechanical processes that occur in impact plumes, to improve our understanding
of the impact process as a whole and the environmental effects of these impacts.
The pedagogic component of the research plan focuses on the communication of
large-scale 3D concepts that are a struggle for students, and helps students
move from 2D information typical of a classroom to 3D understanding. Because
communicating complex spatial concepts is difficult with language alone, this
project studies the effect of gesture in large classrooms, which is a
particularly useful tool for early undergraduate learners. In addition, this
research investigates the use of 3D printing technology to improve 3D
visualization and promote universal design for learning.