* 1352207
* EAGER: Using Crowdsourced Virtual Students to Create Intelligent Tutors
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2015
* Andrew Olney, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2015
* USD 163,830.00

This project will develop and evaluate the potential of a new human-computer
system that bridges the roles of virtual student and virtual teacher to allow
humans and computers to take turns teaching and learning from each other. The
key insight is that reading comprehension activities (e.g., vocabulary building,
summarizing, question generation, concept mapping) closely parallel the
knowledge engineering required to create virtual teachers for intelligent
tutoring systems (ITSs). The system links these activities so that when students
read online, they engage a virtual student in educational tasks that both
improve their reading comprehension and simultaneously contribute to the
creation of ITSs for future students. An important aspect of the proposed
research is to find the optimum balance between student learning (which benefits
the individual) and the creation of ITS knowledge representations (which
benefits many). Specific research objectives are: (1) to develop a baseline
platform (called BrainTrust) such that students can create ITS knowledge
representations by teaching a virtual student; (2) to study the relationship
between the student's ability, the virtual student's ability, the student's
learning outcomes, and the quality of knowledge representations produced. A
distinctive characteristic of the proposed research is the study of these
questions in ecologically valid conditions, as students engage in authentic
study, while also participating in randomized experiments.

The research may lead to the development of systems that improve reading
comprehension, which may have broad benefits given the centrality of reading
comprehension to all learning. In particular, problems with reading
comprehension have been linked to first-year college student dropout that
disproportionately affects African-American students. The research will also
enhance infrastructure for research and education through the development and
dissemination of the BrainTrust platform, a next-generation computing
infrastructure to rapidly create and deploy ITSs tailored to specific needs. If
this exploratory project demonstrates that the dual outcomes of human learning
and high-quality knowledge representations can be achieved, it will open a new
area of research that brings teaching these virtual students full circle with
learning from their derived intelligent tutoring systems.