* 1352435
* CAREER: The Impact of Poverty Mapping on the Geography of Development
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2014,09/30/2021
* Mona Atia, George Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Tom Evans
* 09/30/2021
* USD 466,739.00

For decades, the eradication of poverty has been a primary goal of policy-
makers. Poverty mapping is an important tool that experts contend can enable
institutions to more effectively and efficiently target poverty interventions.
This project investigates the production, use and impact of poverty mapping. The
project investigates the forms of measurement, the types of knowledge and
expertise mobilized, and how these maps may capture or mask layers of scaled
politics regarding the poor. The research bridges the gap between geographers
who use Geographic Information Science (GIS) to advance policy interventions and
those who critically analyze poverty and governance using qualitative and
contextual methods. This project contributes to the education of university
students on both these tools and these critical questions of poverty governance,
and builds capacity in how local people can understand such assessments or
interventions taking place in their own localities. The research also has broad
implications for policy-makers and NGOs engaged in poverty identification and
policy alleviation of this problem. Together, researchers and participants will
produce maps of interventions that could be used by local stakeholders, policy-
makers, development practitioners, and governments of multiple scales to
understand the impact of geographical targeting areas in most need of immediate
assistance. An online, open-source map of development interventions,
infographics and a k-12 teaching module will expand the impact of the research
to a wider public. The research creates a framework for analyzing the spatial
patterns of successful intervention and remaining challenges resulting from the
geographical targeting of poverty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is informed
by relational poverty, critical cartography and actor network theory; it
approaches poverty mapping as a network consisting of a tool, a set of actors
involved in its production, and specific sites and subjects of intervention. The
project analyzes the field of poverty interventions and the spatial patterns
associated with this technique of poverty alleviation. Using multi-sited
research and case studies from North Africa, the researchers will employ oral
surveys, interviews, ethnographic village assessments and spatial analyzes to
generate a localized and contextualized understanding of poverty. The research
will reveal the aspects of poverty that may have hidden behind aggregate
indicators, highlight how the spatial patterns associated with poverty mapping
act as an intervention, and illustrate how poverty reduction strategies impact
the geography of development.