* 1352439
* CAREER: Synthesis of Bridged Polycyclic Natural Products via Intramolecular C-H Insertion
* MPS,CHE
* 04/15/2014,03/31/2019
* Jeremy May, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Tarek Sammakia
* 03/31/2019
* USD 600,000.00

Through this award, supported by the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Division
of Chemistry, Prof. Jeremy A. May of the University of Houston is developing a
general method for the chemical synthesis of a variety of biologically active
bridged polycyclic natural products. While such structures in the past have
required disparate strategic approaches, the use of a cascade reaction sequence
efficiently provides a variety of these molecules with control over the
molecular bonding. Highly reactive carbene intermediates, carbon-carbon triple
bonds that are covalently linked, and dimeric rhodium catalysts allow multiple
chemical bonds, including highly strained cyclic structures, to be synthesized
in one reaction. As the reaction sequence forms its final chemical bond through
a C-H bond insertion, no prior modification of the substrate at the site of this
insertion is required, which greatly increases efficiency, maximizes
flexibility, and minimizes waste. The controlling elements for the reactivity
are under study, and new catalysts for the transformation are being
designed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The structural motifs produced by this synthesis
technology are found in numerous biologically active compounds produced
naturally in minute quantities. Since these natural products display
antimalarial, anticancer, antimicrobial, and other useful properties, the
synthetic strategy is being applied to these targets to obtain sufficient
material for further study. Moreover, the rapid nature of the chemical synthesis
allows modifications to the parent structure to be made so that the key
molecular elements for biological activity may be identified. Thus, this effort
has a broader impact on disease mechanisms, natural product biology, and several
fields of chemistry. The research effort under this award is integrated in
multiple levels of education, as the graduate, undergraduate, and junior high
students who participate learn principles of biochemistry, organic chemistry,
medicinal chemistry, catalysis, and scientific analysis.