* 1352882
* Neuroendocrine modulation of sleep under starvation stress in Drosophila
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2014,12/31/2017
* Toshihiro Kitamoto, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 12/31/2017
* USD 565,000.00

Sleep and feeding are both indispensable for life and are strictly controlled
for their own need. However, these essential behaviors are mutually exclusive,
and therefore their regulatory processes significantly influence one another.
Sleep loss leads to stimulation of appetite, and food deprivation leads to a
suppression of sleep. Elucidation of the basic mechanisms underlying these
interactions between sleep and feeding is highly significance, as it is expected
to provide insights into fundamental principles by which animals efficiently
adapt their behaviors in response to changes in external environments and
internal states. The focus of the study is on steroid hormones and their
involvement in starvation-induced sleep suppression (SISS), an evolutionarily
conserved behavioral response to starvation. The outcome of this research is
expected to make an important general contribution to the field of behavioral
neuroendocrinology, given the universal importance of the molecular components
studied (steroids, dopamine and G-protein coupled receptor), and the adaptive
behavior of interest (SISS). The project will also provide unique training
opportunities for undergraduate, with an emphasis on broadening participation
through involvement of underrepresented minorities, as well as graduate students
and promote outreach activities targeting local students and general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses the fruit fly, Drosophila
melanogaster as a model system and investigates how the endocrine system
regulates the nervous system to control sleep and feeding. The research will
elucidate how the G-protein coupled receptor DopEcR interacts with
neuromodulators to control sleep under the stress associated with starvation.
The central hypothesis is that dopamine acts on DopEcR in the context of
starvation, counteracting the effects of ecdysone on DopEcR by reducing the
strength of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) signaling, and that this in
turn induces SISS. This hypothesis will be tested through two specific aims: 1)
Identify the critical sites of DopEcR action in regulating SISS, and 2)
Determine the roles of ecdysone, dopamine and EGFR signaling in DopEcR-mediated
SISS. Preliminary studies in the PI's group have revealed that Drosophila
DopEcR, a unique G-protein coupled receptor (GPCR) that responds to both the
major insect steroid hormone ecdysone and the catecholamine dopamine plays a
critical role in SISS. The study will identify the critical anatomical sites of
DopEcR action in regulating SISS, and determining the roles and mechanisms of
ecdysone and dopamine in DopEcR-mediated SISS.