* 1352080
* CAREER: Metal-Catalyzed Alkene Hydroacylation: Establishing a New Platform for the Synthesis and Functionalization of Heterocycles
* MPS,CHE
* 03/15/2014,02/28/2019
* Levi Stanley, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Tarek Sammakia
* 02/28/2019
* USD 600,000.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Synthesis program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Levi M. Stanley of Iowa State University is developing new
catalytic methods for the synthesis and functionalization of heterocyclic
compounds. The research involves the development of metal-catalyzed alkene
hydroacylation reactions and additions of aldehydes across alkenes, to enable
the synthesis and functionalization of nitrogen heterocycles. This research
program encompasses the identification and development of transition-metal
catalysts that control regioselectivity and enantioselectivity of the alkene
hydroacylation reactions. This award is supporting educational programs led by
Professor Stanley to expand the Chemistry Learning Community for upper-level
chemistry students to improve retention, achievement, and engagement among
chemistry students at Iowa State University and the implementation of an
authentic research experience with practical applications through an
experimental organic chemistry laboratory.

This project focuses on the establishment of alkene hydroacylation reactions as
a platform to synthesize, and further functionalize, classes of medicinally
important nitrogen heterocycles. The broader impacts of this work include
potential societal benefits from the discovery of heterocyclic compounds with
new and/or improved properties and the identification of catalyst design
principles leading to more stable and selective catalyst structures. The project
provides opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students to gain
experience in modern synthetic organic and organometallic chemistry research
while improving retention, achievement, and engagement through expansion of the
Chemistry Learning Community at Iowa State University.