* 1352717
* Conference: Finding Common Ground: Social, Ecological, and Cognitive Perspectives on Language Use
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2016
* Carol Fowler, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 04/30/2016
* USD 25,000.00

Project Overview&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award funds a three-day conference
that is planned for June 2014 at the University of Connecticut. The conference
will bring together a distinguished group of researchers from a variety of
disciplines and perspectives to share their theoretical and methodological
approaches to the study of language as a socially and physically situated
interaction that is public, meaning observable and accountable. The conference
will offer three full days with presentations, posters, and discussions. There
will be a pre-conference workshop intended to introduce graduate students to
pioneering work on language that will be unfamiliar to most. The conference is
entitled: "Finding Common Ground: Social, Ecological, and Cognitive Perspectives
on Language Use."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dramatic developments across an array of disciplines
and theoretical perspectives in the past decade are challenging influential
views of language as private, individual, biological, and designed for thinking.
These developments have generally emerged largely independently of each other,
and researchers with similar concerns often do not know of each other's work.
These new methodological and theoretical approaches to understanding language
are exciting and promising, but they have yet to achieve the coordination and
collaboration necessary to lead to major changes in how most scientists and
scholars view language. This conference will enable various researchers to
engage in face-to-face conversations in order to develop an appreciation for
other theoretical approaches and methods that can amplify and strengthen their
own, and serve to promote collaborations that could in time transform the
language sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Potential Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will use conference proceeding to produce an
edited book, a special issue of a journal, and a website resource center. These
outcomes will allow a broad array of language researchers and cognitive
scientists to benefit from discussions that take place at the conference. The
most significant effect of the meeting may be the challenge and inspiration it
will provide to graduate students in ecological psychology, cognitive
psychology, linguistics, philosophy, and related areas of cognitive science, to
go beyond the successes and failures of the current generation of scholars. The
outcomes of the meeting will also be of interest to members of the broader
public who have a serious interest in the important role of language in social,
political, and economic life.