* 1352417
* CAREER:   The Role of Mineral Dust in Atmospheric Ice Formation, and its Impacts on Past, Present and Future Climate
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2020
* Trude Storelvmo, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 06/30/2020
* USD 663,463.00

This is a CAREER award in which the research component examines the climatic
impacts of dust particles due to their role as ice nuclei (IN) in mixed phase
clouds (clouds containing both liquid water droplets and ice particles). Mineral
dust particles (particles composed of soil minerals, as opposed to soot and
biological materials) are the most important IN in the atmosphere, and they can
change the radiative properties of clouds by increasing the concentration of
cloud ice particles at the expense of supercooled liquid water droplets.
Measurement from ice cores suggest that atmospheric dust concentration varies by
a factor of three to four between ice ages and interglacials, thus the
modulation of clouds by dust could have important climatic consequences. In
addition, the anthropogenic contribution to atmospheric dust, through changes in
land cover including desertification, is estimated to be as high as 25% of the
total burden, so that the role of dust in ice nucleation could lead to
anthropogenic influences on climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first task of the
project is to improve the representation of the effect of mineral dust on cloud
ice nucleation in atmospheric general circulation models (AGCMs, including the
atmospheric component models of coupled climate models). Preliminary work for
the project shows that AGCM-simulated clouds are deficient in supercooled liquid
water droplets in comparison to satellite observations. Work in this project is
based on the hypothesis that this deficiency is due to an exaggeration of the
Wegener-Bergeron Findeison (WBF) process, in which cloud ice particles grow at
the expense of neighboring supercooled droplets due to the difference in
saturation vapor pressure over liquid water and ice. In nature the process is
limited by its dependence on small-scale updraft and downdraft motions, which
create local atmospheric temperatures which can be unfavorable to the process.
Work under this project will develop a parameterization the effect of these
small-scale vertical motions, which occur on spatial scales too small to resolve
in current AGCMs. Once the parameterization is developed, it will be used to
address several questions regarding the effects of dust on clouds and the
climatic consequences of these effects, including: What is the net radiative
effect of mineral dust perturbations in Earth's atmosphere when dust-ice-cloud
effects are taken into account? Have the dust perturbations in past climates
significantly impacted those climates via dust effects on ice-containing clouds?
Have variations in atmospheric dust loadings over the twentieth century acted as
an important climate forcing via effects on ice-containing clouds? Under the
current atmospheric mineral dust loading, how sensitive are ice-containing
clouds to IN perturbations?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational component of
this CAREER proposal is organized in collaboration with the Yale Science
Collaborative Hands-On Learning and Research (SCHOLAR) program, which offers a
two-week on-campus residential summer learning program in STEM fields. Students
in the SCHOLAR program come from the New Haven public high school system, and
more than half of the students are from underrepresented groups, in many cases
from families in which they would be the first to complete college. Work under
this award will develop a module for the SCHOLAR program to introduce students
to the fields of atmospheric and climate science, and more specifically to the
roles played by aerosols and clouds in shaping weather and climate. The module
includes both classroom and laboratory activities, and each summer a group of
four students is selected to participate in a field experience at the Storm Peak
Laboratory (SPL) in Steamboat Springs Colorado, during the following Spring. The
students spend four days at SPL making measurements of aerosols and clouds under
the PI's supervision, and make presentations of their research at their schools
and at the next SCHOLAR session. In addition, the PI maintains a blog to which
students contribute before, during, and after their visit to SPL.