* 1352883
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Holistically Application-Aware Multi-dimensional Cognitive Radio (HAMCR)
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2015
* Huseyin Arslan, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Wenjing Lou
* 09/30/2015
* USD 50,632.00

The overarching goal of the Holistically Application-Aware Multi-dimensional
Cognitive Radio (HAMCR) research is to create a set of transformative and
holistic technologies that enable substantial growth in the capacity of wireless
networks, with support for diverse applications, but without increasing the
available spectrum. The project is based on the observation that in today's
wireless networks the spectral allocation of resources is either independent of
the applications' Quality of Service (QoS) requirements and of the user's
perceived QoS, or at best relies on a set of pre-defined fixed priorities. HAMCR
maximizes spectrum utilization by trading off the spectral resource allocations
of connections for the application-level QoS, while still maintaining acceptable
levels of QoS for the individual users of the underlying applications, thus
satisfying an increased number of users in times of shortage of spectral
resources. Such an application-aware cognitive radio significantly advances
spectrum utilization by intelligently supporting the expected traffic growth and
by dynamically satisfying the changing demands in traffic. To achieve the above
goal, the objectives of the proposed research are to: 1) Develop the fundamental
design of middleware to optimize the allocation of the available physical
resources by characterizing the applications' parameters and by trading off
application-level QoS for spectral resources, while minimizing the degradation
to the user-perceived QoS, thus maximizing the spectrum utilization; and 2)
Design and implementation of a simulated wireless testbed to assess the
feasibility of the application-based resources allocation by evaluating the
complexity and the gain of the proposed approach for a number of realistic
communication scenarios. The results of this project are expected to forge a new
direction in the cognitive radio field, i.e., application-aware cognitive radio.