* 1352722
* EAGER: Define and Construct an Enhanced Graph Representation for Multiscale Vector Field Data Summarization
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2015
* Guoning Chen, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2015
* USD 150,000.00

Vector field data analysis is indispensable for many applications in science and
engineering, ranging from climate study, physics, chemistry, automobile design,
to medical practice. Most existing analysis techniques for vector field data are
not scalable to the real-world data with ever-increasing sizes and complexity.
More importantly, the inherent limited visual perception channel largely
constrains the ability to understand the complex geometric and physical
behaviors of vector fields as a whole or in detail. To address these challenges,
this exploratory project investigates a graph-based vector field data reduction
for the subsequent extraction of a multi-scale vector field data summary. The
summary serves as a condensed, yet informative, representation of the original
vector field, supporting data interpretation and interaction and shielding the
user from the underlying complexity of the flow dynamics. The key to computing
such a summary representation is the construction of a novel, enhanced graph
representation that encodes both the global structural information and local
characteristics of the vector field, as well as other derived information. The
approach focuses on development and validation of critical issues in graph-based
vector field data reduction , including; (1) identification of the key
information of a vector field for the construction of the enhanced graph: (2)
efficient storage of the graph; and (3) new graph algorithms for extracting
features of interest from the obtained graph. To address these issues, theories
and algorithms from dynamical system, algebraic topology, tensor calculus,
information theory, and graph theory are extended and integrated in a novel
framework. To validate the approach, the PI is working closely with domain
scientists from mechanical engineering and aerodynamics to receive advice on the
representation of the summary and its utility in specific applications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The expected results in vector field summary represents
will yield an important addition to the existing summarization techniques for
various data forms. The analysis and abstraction are based on the enhanced graph
and can enrich the conventional graph theory and graph algorithms. The ability
to handle both steady and unsteady vector fields improves the theory and
practice of dynamical systems in describing fluid dynamic phenomena, benefiting
a wide variety of disciplines. Knowledge learned from the vector field
summarization can be adapted to the study of summarized representation of more
complex geometric data, such as tensor field data. In addition, the research on
vector field summary represents one step towards a unified framework of
knowledge discovery and integrity from heterogeneous data forms. The developed
techniques are expected to be implemented as a software tool that will be
applicable in a wider range of scientific and engineering domains. Furthermore,
the new theory stemming from this work is expected to enrich the existing
education on data analysis and visualization, enabling the development of new
courses at both undergraduate and graduate levels in many academic disciplines.
The project web site (http://www2.cs.uh.edu/~chengu/vf_summary/vf_summary.html)
will provide access to project results, including developed software tools.