* 1352184
* CAREER:  Flow, Failure, and Migration in Glassy Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2020
* M. Lisa Manning, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 05/31/2020
* USD 450,000.00

Technical Summary:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports theoretical
and computational research and education to investigate how disordered materials
and biological tissues flow and fail. Understanding these flows is of immediate
practical importance. For example, bulk metallic glasses show great promise as
structural materials but have not been widely adopted because they fail via
poorly understood localized shear bands. Similarly, rates of cell migration help
govern embryogenesis and cancer tumorigenesis, yet it is unclear how these rates
are influenced by single cell mechanical properties. Although non-biological
disordered and glassy solids flow when forces are applied at a boundary, and
biological tissues flow when individual cells apply forces to their neighbors,
there is a surprising universality in the way that these "materials" flow and
deform. The PI will use tools from statistical and soft matter physics to
exploit this universality and make verifiable predictions about flow, failure,
and cell migration. To achieve this goal, the PI will focus on three approaches:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(1) Exploit a new universality class of random matrix
ensembles to make first-principles predictions about the vibrational modes and
localized defects that govern plasticity in jammed solids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
(2) Identify flow defects, or soft spots, in disordered solids and test the
assumptions made by three well-known continuum models for plastic flow. This
will determine which model, if any, correctly describes the defects. This will
allow testing the behavior of defects under shear reversal, their statistics as
a function of the degree of structural disorder, and their evolution inside the
shear bands leading to catastrophic failure. The continuum model will then be
parameterized using only microscopic information from simulations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(3) Develop a new theory that makes predictions for the
rates of cell migration in confluent tissues, addressing how packing topology,
boundaries between two tissue types, and abnormal cell mechanics affect
migration rates; predictions will be directly tested in
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will be integrated with several
education initiatives that focus on students in the last years of high school
and the first years of college. Specifically, the PI will partner with a high
school program to develop and deploy modules in high schools that (a) "tune-up"
the math skills of marginal students, and (b) connect introductory physics
concepts to research at the frontier of materials science. At the introductory
college level, the PI will (c) work with an economics education professor to
implement a weekly self-assessment for students to help them internalize class
expectations and social norms, and (d) collaborate with physics education and
science teaching professors to improve training for graduate assistants in a
newly developed "Teaching Fellows" program. The PI will also (e) use online and
classroom technologies to develop social networking and discussion platforms
that help students build a sense of community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical
Summary: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports theoretical research
and education with the aim of understanding how disordered solids deform and
fail. Making predictions about these materials is challenging because they
respond like a solid when a small force is applied, and yet the atoms,
particles, or cells that comprise them are arranged like those in a liquid. When
larger forces are applied, these materials exhibit interesting flow patterns
that are important in both nature and industry. For example, bulk metallic
glasses show great promise as structural materials but have not been widely
adopted because they fail via poorly understood localized shear bands. Recently,
researchers have also discovered that biological tissues behave like a
disordered solid, and therefore cell migration in embryonic development and
cancer metastasis can also be thought of as flow within these "materials".
&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the proposed work is to develop predictive, verifiable
theories for flow in disordered solids. To achieve this goal, the PI proposes to
analyze the dynamics of the defects that govern flow, and characterize their
properties. Although identifying a "defect" in these solids is non-trivial
because the systems are disordered, the PI has developed several tools based on
ideas from statistical and soft matter physics to do so. Armed with these new
techniques, the PI aims to answer questions such as: how do defects self-
organize to cause catastrophic failure? How many defects should one expect in a
given material? Is it possible for a mechanically abnormal cell, such as a
cancer cell, to act as a defect inside a biological tissue and thereby migrate
more quickly?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A second part of the proposal aims to
increase retention in Science, Technology, Engineering and Math (STEM)
disciplines. It focuses on students in the last years of high school and the
first years of college, because many students leave the science fields during
this time period. The PI will partner with a high school program in Syracuse, NY
to deploy teaching modules, made freely available online, that connect
introductory physics concepts to research at the frontier of materials science,
highlighting their relevance in the real world. Additional modules will "tune-
up" the math skills of marginal students, giving them a chance to succeed in
physics classes. The PI will also implement several initiatives in an
introductory college course, including a weekly self-assessment, training and
fellowships for graduate teaching assistants, and online and social networking
technologies to help students build a sense of community.