* 1352703
* Workshop on Mapping and Engineering the Brain to be held on August 13-14, 2013 in Washington, D.C.
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2014
* Bin He, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Athanassios Sambanis
* 07/31/2014
* USD 49,999.00

PI: He&lt;br/&gt;Proposal ID: 1352703&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this
project is to organize the Workshop on Mapping and Engineering the Brain which
will identify and discuss "grand challenges" facing the scientific community in
the multi-scale mapping and engineering of the brain. 30-40 leading experts will
be invited for a two day workshop, with selected presentations by leaders in the
field and discussions by all participants. The workshop will focus on
identifying major challenges and opportunities in mapping, modeling, interfacing
and ultimately understanding the brain over the next 10 years and beyond,
through advanced neurotechnology. The Workshop will address questions including
the following:&lt;br/&gt;1) How should the functional brain be imaged at multi-
scale levels to enable a comprehesive and integarted view of brain activity and
function? 2) What are the major challenges for developing noninvasive brain
mapping technologies that can image brain activity at high spatial and temporal
resolution? 3) What are the most pressing challenges to establish noninvasive
brain mapping capabilities that can translate findings from basic research in
animal models to human brain mapping? 4) What computational and physical
principles are important for undertsanding network behavior of neuronal networks
consisting of millions of neurons? 5) What are the challenges for developing
noninvasive brain-computer interface technologies that enable broad application
as well as a deeper understanding of brain-based communication? and 6) What are
the challenges in informatics, computation, and robotics, to enable reverse
engineering the brain? The goal of the Workshop is to provide expert advice to
the scientific community, government and industry with regard to how to move
forward in the scientific endeavor of mapping brain activity and reverse
engineering the brain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The Intellectual
Merits of the Workshop will be to identify grand challenges facing the
scientific community in brain mapping in the next 10 years or beyond, provide
guidance to the scientific community, government and industry with regard to how
should we map and reverse engineer the brain with advanced
neurotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts : The broader impacts of
the Workshop will include identification of important challenges for the larger
society, broad dissemination of the Workshop outcome by publishing the workshop
report in a well circulated international journal, and participation by women
and underrepresented minorities.