* 1352705
* When and how can Group Composition be locally adapted? A test with Social Spiders.
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2014,01/31/2015
* Susan Riechert, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Elekonich
* 01/31/2015
* USD 160,817.00

Whether or how societies are able to sense poor-performing group compositions
and respond to them adaptively across different environments remains unknown.
Group composition, or the relative representation of individuals with different
traits, is often thought to be a major determinant of social group organization
and success. Some groups naturally exhibit compositions which help them flourish
and others express mixtures that yield their demise. A tractable society (social
spiders) will be used to assess how variation in group composition influences
the growth, reproductive rate, and extinction risk of entire societies.
Societies of different mixtures will be generated and deployed at different
field sites, and the success of these societies will be tracked over time.
Additionally, the shifts in societies' composition will be monitored over time,
in order to see whether societies are able to sense their ailing compositions
and shift them adaptively. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will further
our understanding of how societies, as collective entities, evolve and adjust
adaptively to current challenges. This has implications in fields ranging from
medicine, to agriculture, and conservation. Virtually every aspect of biology is
interested in understanding the drivers of extinction: farmers want to eradicate
pests and preserve cultivars; epidemiologists want to drive world pathogens to
extinction; while conservation biologists hope to eradicate invasive pest
species while preserving dwindling natives. Understanding how groups of
organisms (like social spiders) sense and respond to pending extinction risk
under normal circumstances might help us predict the factors that can
accelerate, slow, or circumvent extinction in other taxa where rigorous
experiments are not generally possible. Finally, numerous undergraduates and
K-12 students will be involved with elements of the project's implementation as
well as the dissemination of the findings. Each year more than a dozen high
school teachers help to collect, analyze, and disseminate the findings of these
studies, and undergraduates from the University of Pittsburgh gain on-site
training on field ecologists and the scientific method.