* 1352524
* CAREER: Interface Deformation and Compatibility in Shape Memory Polycrystals
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2019
* David Duquette, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Yang
* 05/31/2019
* USD 540,000.00

Technical Summary:

Shape Memory Alloys (SMAs) are unique multifunctional phase-change materials.
They can switch between two shapes under thermal or mechanical cycling by a
reversible martensitic phase transformation, and are promising for applications
in sensing, actuation, energy conversion and harvesting, and damping. This
CAREER project bridges two thus far separate research areas, (i) grain boundary
science and engineering and (ii) displacive martensitic transformations in SMAs,
and seeks to understand mechanical interactions across interfaces during
martensitic transformations in dual-phase SMA polycrystals. This research will
use experiments, analytical theory, and mesoscale computational modeling to
explore two major interface effects: (1) the effects of grain boundary
crystallographic character on strain transfer, accommodation, and compatibility
at grain boundaries; (2) how a non-transforming, ductile phase precipitated
along grain boundaries accommodates transformation strains from across phase
boundaries. Grain boundary engineering will be explored to enhance strain
compatibility at grain boundaries, thereby improving the ductility and
applicability of SMA polycrystals. The fundamental understanding on strain
transfer and compatibility at interfaces gained in this research will also be
relevant to similar problems in many other polycrystalline metals and compounds.

Non-Technical Summary:

Shape Memory Alloys (SMAs)are unique multifunctional materials. They can fail by
brittle fracture along internal planar defects or interfaces called grain
boundaries and this problem has significantly limited their applicability. This
project will quantitatively elucidate the mechanisms for failure in SMAs by
performing experimental characterizations and computational modeling. This work
will also exploit grain boundary engineering strategies to improve grain
boundary properties and enhance the ductility of SMAs, which will enable
practical applications of SMAs in advanced technologies in both commercial and
military sectors. This project will also involve substantial education and
outreach efforts. The education activities include transforming both
undergraduate and graduate core mechanical properties courses, contributing to
computational materials course, and training undergraduate and graduate
researchers who will become experts and leaders in mechanical properties,
metals, and computational materials science. The outreach activities will
attract young students to science and engineering, promote public interest in
engineering, and support professional development and advancement of women
engineering students.