* 1352299
* CAREER: Biologically Inspired Platforms: Finding The Tricks Worth Mimicking In The Extracellular Matrix
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Delphine Gourdon, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 07/31/2017
* USD 253,966.00

Non-Technical Section&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER Award supported by the
Biomaterials program in the Division of Materials Research seeks to study the
structural and mechanical properties of the extracellular matrix (ECM). The
extracellular matrix (ECM) is a multi-protein network used by cells to
communicate with their environment. The research objectives of this Faculty
Early Career Development (CAREER) project are (i) to characterize both structure
and mechanics of the ECM from the protein (nanoscopic) to the cell (microscopic)
level, and (ii) to exploit such fundamental understanding to engineer cell
culture platforms for investigating vascularization mechanisms in functional and
pathological (cancer) environments. Given the extensive interdisciplinary nature
of this research, the primary educational goals of this program are to introduce
students (K-12, undergraduate, and graduate) and teachers (GK-12 program) to the
fields of (and the tools used in) materials and biomaterials science,
biomechanics, protein physics, and cell biology. The PI will also train
undergraduate and graduate students for future jobs in biomaterials science
and/or engineering through (i) mentoring students from freshman to graduate
level in research and (ii) integrating research into her three undergraduate and
graduate level interdisciplinary courses taught across seven departments at
Cornell.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Section&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Living cells sense and respond to their
microenvironment through chemical and physical interactions determined by the
adjacent cells and by the surrounding extracellular matrix (ECM) fibrillar
network. The main goal of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project
is to study both structural and mechanical properties of the two major building
blocks of ECM structures (fibronectin and collagen) from the fiber to the
cellular/tissue level. The strength of this program lies in the
interdisciplinary approach that combines the PI's demonstrated expertise in (i)
FRET (Fluorescence Resonance Energy Transfer) conformational mapping, and (ii)
mechanical characterization of biomaterials at the nano-, and the microscopic
scales. By combining these efforts, the PI will generate a fundamental
understanding of the regulatory mechanisms governing ECM composition,
conformation and mechanics, which will then enable the design of 2D and 3D cell
culture platforms with controlled mechanobiological properties for investigating
vascularization mechanisms in physiological and pathological (cancer)
environments. This project has implications not only in biomaterials science but
also in regenerative medicine and tissue engineering due to the fundamental role
of the ECM in development and diseases such as cancer; it will also be of
importance in its capacity not only to promote new approaches in cell-matrix
interactions research, but also to expose K-12, undergraduate, and graduate
students to a wide range of technological innovations.