* 1352271
* CAREER: Topology and Symmetry in Physics Beyond the Landau Paradigm
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2014,12/31/2019
* Fiona Burnell, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 12/31/2019
* USD 450,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports theoretical
research and education to investigate quantum mechanical states of electrons in
materials and transformations among them that require new theoretical concepts
for their description. Experimental discoveries and theoretical advances reveal
novel properties and electronic states of matter that lie outside the standard
conceptual framework used to describe the transformation from one state of
matter into another, and used to describe the state of electrons that interact
strongly with each other in materials. &lt;br/&gt; To advance understanding of
these and other predicted new states of matter and the transformations among
them, the PI will focus on three major activities: &lt;br/&gt;(1) developing
theoretical and computational tools to understand what happens as physical
conditions are changed to drive transformations between phases that owing to the
collective behavior of the electrons appear to be made of particles with a
charge that is a fraction of a fundamental electron charge; &lt;br/&gt;(2)
developing theoretical models to advance understanding of a fundamentally new
kind of material system, in which a 3 dimensional material hosts interesting
electric states that exist only at the boundaries; and&lt;br/&gt;(3) proposing
new experiments that can detect fractional particles that are predicted to occur
in specially engineered materials. &lt;br/&gt;The research provides simulating
training for graduate students. The PI will help convey the excitement of
materials research through outreach activities aimed at inspiring interest in
the science among students at the secondary school level. In collaboration with
local high-school teachers, as well as students, the PI will develop web-based
learning tools allowing students to explore the materials science underlying
many of the technologies familiar from daily life. The objective is to allow
students to explore at their own pace and in an intuitive, rather than
mathematical, way some of the more astonishing properties of systems of many
interacting quantum particles, such as superconductivity, and emergence of
particles with charges that are a fraction of an electron
charge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports theoretical research and
educational activities focused on understanding phases of matter beyond the
Landau paradigm; systems whose physics cannot be fully understood either by
Fermi liquid theory, or by considering possible symmetry-breaking ordered
states. Specifically, this project focuses on two types of phenomena not
captured by either of these frameworks: topological order in 1D and 2D, and
symmetry protection in strongly interacting 3D systems. &lt;br/&gt;The research
has three main components: &lt;br/&gt;1.) To advance understanding of the phase
diagrams and phase transitions in 2D topologically ordered systems. The PI plans
to build on existing numerical and theoretical tools to better understand
criticality between phases of different topological order in 2D. These
transitions are interesting and challenging to study because the topological
character of the critical degrees of freedom implies that no local order
parameter exists, and fundamentally new tools are needed. Experimentally
realistic systems where such transitions occur will be sought.&lt;br/&gt;2.) To
advance understanding of strongly interacting symmetry-protected phases in 3D,
the PI will develop theoretical models and identify the relevant field theories.
The particular focus will be on the topological character of defects and surface
states in these strongly interacting systems, building on methods applied
successfully to non-interacting systems.&lt;br/&gt;3.) The PI aims to quantify
new experimental probes that can help identify excitations with non-abelian
statistics. Recent proposals for realizing these in new ways in the laboratory
have raised the challenge of understanding feasible and reliable detection
techniques for these systems. The research will build on existing knowledge of
how finite-frequency responses in these systems characterize their topological
nature.&lt;br/&gt;The research provides simulating training for graduate
students. The PI will help convey the excitement of materials research through
outreach activities aimed at inspiring interest in the science among students at
the secondary school level. In collaboration with local high-school teachers, as
well as students, the PI will develop web-based learning tools allowing students
to explore the materials science underlying many of the technologies familiar
from daily life. The objective is to allow students to explore at their own pace
and in an intuitive, rather than mathematical, way some of the more astonishing
properties of systems of many interacting quantum particles, such as
superconductivity, and emergence of particles with charges that are a fraction
of an electron charge.