* 1352604
* CAREER: Interactions and Quantum Effects in Nodal Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Bruno Uchoa, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2019
* USD 402,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports theoretical
research and education, and will explore new ways to realize new quantum
mechanical phenomena in materials that emerge from the interplay of atomic
structure, geometry, dimensionality, and interactions among electrons. The PI
will focus on a class of materials that are related in a fundamental way to an
atomically thin form of carbon known as graphene. The PI will investigate how
stacking graphene layers in different ways or including other two-dimensional
materials in the stack can lead to a layered material with novel electronic
properties. The PI will also study whether distorting graphene can lead to
superconductivity, a state of electronic matter which can transport electric
current without resistance. The PI will further explore whether the
superconducting state can coexist with other novel states where the motion of
the electrons is strongly correlated as a consequence of their interactions. The
PI will also study theoretically predicted three dimensional materials that are
analogs of two dimensional graphene. These materials known as Weyl semimetals
would share the property of having electronic excitations that in a fundamental
sense appear to move at the speed of light. The PI will study the properties of
these predicted materials which might be realized in compounds made of iridium,
a rare earth, and oxygen. While of fundamental interest, the study of the
properties of these new states of matter also contributes to the intellectual
foundations of future electronic device technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
PI will seek close integration among research, experiments and education. In
order to disseminate information to the general public and contribute to the
general science education of society, the PI will give a series of public
lectures about novel materials. The integration of teaching with research will
be structured in the form of an advanced graduate course on Condensed Matter
Physics, which will combine the many-body physics curriculum with current
research topics. At the undergraduate level, the PI will offer a short summer
course for REU students, which is designed to stimulate them to think critically
about physical models and the modeling process. The PI will also seek to
modernize the science curriculum of high schools through a collaboration with
physics teachers. The collaboration will incorporate current research topics in
the science curriculum of high schools and has the goals: to stimulate students
to pursue research careers, and to increase the enrollment of high school
students in physics courses. This activity is aimed to have a measurable impact
in the education of high school students in the area of Oklahoma
City.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports theoretical research in the
physics of correlated quantum systems with nodal Fermi surfaces, and aims to
propose new ways to observe emergent quantum phenomena. Nodal materials are
many-body Fermi systems where the Fermi surface can be continuously deformed
into a set of points or lines. The structure of the bands about these nodes may
have any density of states and may support a variety of different many-body
states. The research will be focused on studying correlation effects, quantum
phenomena and possible topological order in three classes of systems:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Correlated atomic multi-layer systems. Correlation
effects will be investigated in twisted bilayer quasicrystals and in atomic
multilayer systems, such as ABC stacked graphene trilayers. The PI will use
renormalization group and non-perturbative methods to calculate physical
observables in the low-energy sector and identify possible new ground states.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. Many-body states in flat bands. The PI will study and
characterize new superconducting ground states in topological flat bands and in
time reversal symmetric Landau levels, which can be produced by strain in
graphene and in optical lattices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. Quantum phenomena in
Dirac and Weyl semimetals. This project will address basic questions about
collective modes, transport and electronic interactions in this class of
systems, whose elementary quasiparticles are Weyl fermions, which are three
dimensional analogs of the chiral massless quasiparticles in graphene.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will seek close integration among research,
experiments and education. In order to disseminate information to the general
public and contribute to the general science education of society, the PI
intends to give a series of public lectures about novel materials. The
integration of teaching with research will be structured in the form of an
advanced graduate course on Condensed Matter Physics, which will combine the
many-body physics curriculum with current research topics. At the undergraduate
level, the PI will offer a short summer course for REU students, which is
designed to stimulate them to think critically about physical models and the
modeling process. The PI will also seek to modernize the science curriculum of
high schools through a collaboration with physics teachers. The collaboration
will incorporate current research topics in the science curriculum of high
schools and has the goals: to stimulate students to pursue research careers, and
to increase the enrollment of high school students in physics courses. This
activity is aimed to have a measurable impact in the education of high school
students in the area of Oklahoma City.