* 1352437
* CAREER: Binuclear Chemistry of Heterogenized Molecular Catalysts in Solar CO2 Reduction
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2020
* Gonghu Li, University of New Hampshire
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 06/30/2020
* USD 526,727.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Catalysis program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Gonghu Li of the University of New Hampshire is
investigating recycling carbon dioxide into chemicals, materials and fuels.
However, carbon dioxide is thermodynamically stable, and its conversion often
requires high energy. This research project constructs innovative catalytic
systems to enable carbon dioxide activation via low-energy pathways, in which
two metal centers work together to reduce carbon dioxide into fuels under light
irradiation. The low-energy pathways will be investigated using both
experimental and theoretical methods. This project will also provide excellent
opportunities for educating the current and emerging workforce in energy-related
fields to increase the national talent pipeline in clean energy, materials and
catalysis science. The broader impacts of this project include the development
of efficient and robust catalytic systems for carbon dioxide utilization, which
will subsequently reduce dependency on fossil fuels and help to mitigate climate
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Li is investigating cooperative interactions of
surface metal centers in photocatalytic carbon dioxide reduction. In particular,
heterogenized molecular catalysts will be synthesized by grafting coordination
complexes of Rhenium, Manganese, Nickel and Cobalt onto mesoporous silicas via
covalent linkers. The linkers and porous surfaces will be optimized to achieve
proper intermolecular distances and geometry. Advanced spectroscopic techniques
and density functional theory calculations will be employed to investigate low-
energy, binuclear pathways in carbon dioxide reduction using the heterogenized
molecular catalysts. The proposed research focuses on fundamental issues in
surface chemistry and carbon dioxide -reduction photocatalysis in confined
environments. This CAREER award also supports educational activities, including
annual solar energy workshops, to effectively disseminated sustainability
concepts to K-12 students and the public. The broader impacts of this work
include potential societal benefits from the development of innovative catalytic
systems for efficient solar energy conversion and sustainable carbon dioxide
utilization.