* 1352132
* CAREER: Coordination Chemistry of Zinc-Chelating S100 Proteins and Biochemistry Partnership with a Regional University
* MPS,CHE
* 03/15/2014,02/28/2019
* Elizabeth Nolan, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Max Funk
* 02/28/2019
* USD 600,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Elizabeth M. Nolan from the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology to study the zinc-binding properties of several human metal-chelating
proteins that are implicated in physiological processes that include
inflammation, the innate immune response, cardiovascular disease, and
carcinogenesis. Protein biochemistry, analytical biochemistry including
thermodynamic measurements, and various spectroscopic techniques are employed to
characterize the zinc binding sites and measure the affinity for zinc of these
proteins. In education and outreach, a biochemistry partnership between the
Nolan Laboratory and the Department of Chemistry at Framingham State University
is established with the long-term goals of (i) improving undergraduate
biochemistry research and mentoring at Framingham State University (FSU) and
(ii) increasing the numbers of FSU biochemistry concentrators continuing on to
graduate school in the chemical/biochemical sciences. To integrate research and
education, FSU faculty and students learn protein purification techniques and
conduct biochemistry research in the Nolan Laboratory, and develop a protein
purification laboratory manual.

Zinc is a metal ion that is essential for many processes of life. The basic
research developed with this award provides molecular-level insight into a
family of human zinc-binding proteins and into the contributions of these
proteins to zinc homeostasis in humans. The research and outreach activities
provide training in the scientific method, research, and communication of
science to a diverse group of undergraduate and graduate students from MIT and
elsewhere. MIT graduate students mentor undergraduates from FSU, which is an
important component of graduate education and training. These activities serve
the local community by enhancing biochemistry at a regional university and
motivating FSU students to continue studies and pursue careers in the chemical
sciences.