* 1352740
* EAGER: Enhancing Recruitment and Retention of Underrepresented Populations Through PLTL (ERRUPT)
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Jason Wiles, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Connie Della-Piana
* 07/31/2018
* USD 202,505.00

This exploratory project will examine the influence of peer mentoring on (a)
students participating in learning activities facilitated by peer leaders and
(b) students participating as peer leaders in learning environments in which
they serve as role models and assist in bridging the transition from a two-year
institution to a four-year program of study in the life sciences. The study will
examine how participation influences student engagement in and identification
with the life sciences and test the hypothesis that peer mentoring activities
influence the retention and success of students who participate in these types
of learning environments, especially students who are underrepresented in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the research team will conduct a quasi-
experimental research study investigating the influence of instantiations of
Peer-Led-Team-Learning on students and peer leaders. With well-matched treatment
and control groups the research team will compare treatment group outcomes and
patterns of outcomes with control group outcomes and past performance of similar
students on measures of retention, course content, and course performance.
Patterns of outcomes associated with student and institutional demographics,
such as gender, race/ethnicity course grades, and retention in the life sciences
will be investigated. This early stage research project is exploratory and will
inform the design of future quasi-experimental studies by identifying (1)
plausible threats to internal validity not directly encompassed by standard
threats and (2) alternative explanations of the outcomes to be addressed and
controlled for in future studies. In addition, qualitative data from focus
groups and interviews will provide a rich source of information on students'
experiences that will inform the analysis and interpretation of the quantitative
data. The exploratory project will provide foundational information that will
inform the development and testing of manuals and guidance for implementing PLTL
in learning environments in institutions with Louis Stoke Alliance for Minority
Participation projects and with similar comprehensive projects focused on
broadening participation in STEM.