* 1352422
* CAREER:   Lagrangian investigation of upper ocean turbulence
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2014,02/28/2021
* Tobias Kukulka, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Baris Uz
* 02/28/2021
* USD 400,456.00

Turbulent processes in the upper ocean play a key role in weather and climate
systems by coupling the ocean and atmosphere. Upper ocean turbulence also
distributes nutrients, pollutants, plankton, and bubbles in the ocean mixed
layer. The fate of chemical and biological substances in the mixed layer depends
on the history of advective turbulent fluid paths. Besides being dispersive,
ocean turbulence also aggregates substances to increase encounter rates between
them. Upper ocean turbulence is driven by surface waves: Wave-current
interactions lead to wind-aligned vortices, called Langmuir circulation (LC),
and breaking waves are a source of near surface turbulent kinetic energy.
Together, LC and the stochastically breaking wave field lead to complicated
nonlocal and intermittent transport. To better understand the dynamics of the
complex oceanic boundary layer and to educate students about upper ocean
processes, the PI will carry out an interwoven research and education program.
This project is a systematic Lagrangian investigation following trajectories of
fluid parcels with the Research Objectives to: 1) Develop a Lagrangian analysis
framework of the upper ocean with realistic surface wave effects to investigate
fundamental mechanisms of fluid exchange in the presence of surface waves, 2)
Examine the role of LC and breaking waves in upper ocean transport to assess
systematically the accuracy of common upper ocean boundary layer
parameterizations, 3) Apply the Lagrangian analysis to quantify plastic marine
debris that has emerged as a major ocean pollutant and to revisit related
classic ideas of particle trapping in the upper ocean. Tracks of particles will
be computed from state-of-the art upper ocean large eddy simulation models with
LC and breaking wave effects. As part of the Lagrangian analysis, this project
will apply a new and integrative dynamic systems approach to the wave-driven
upper ocean boundary layer. To directly utilize knowledge gained from this
study, the PI will examine observed distributions of plastic marine debris. The
project involves two related education activities that are linked to the
research activities on upper ocean dynamics with the Education Objectives to: 1)
Educate students about ocean physics and its role in climate change and global
pollution, 2) Inspire students to pursue STEM education and careers by engaging
students in problem-based learning and implementing Next Generation Science
Standards, 3) Involve underrepresented students. The first educational activity
will involve the PI's participation in the active education programs on marine
debris at the Sea Education Association, reaching out to undergraduate students
and the general public. The second education activity is centered on developing
a hands-on laboratory educational unit, which will be incorporated into regular
curricula of high schools with a large number of underrepresented students and
also into the University of Delaware's Forum to Advance Minorities in
Engineering Program, which is aimed at increasing the effective participation of
minority students in engineering and other science professions. Both activities
incorporate the PI's expertise in geophysical fluids dynamics, upper ocean
physics, and ongoing research collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: By revealing regions of attraction, repulsion, and intense mixing, the
Lagrangian framework provides a natural approach to investigating turbulence
that has yet to be systematically explored in the context of wave-driven upper
ocean dynamics. Thus, the study bears high potential to uncover a novel, highly
physical description of upper ocean turbulence that will ultimately enhance the
parameterizations of turbulent transport in larger scale ocean
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The PI will advance coupled ocean-
atmosphere models of weather and climate by improving the ability to
parameterize air-sea fluxes and ocean turbulence. The research will facilitate
communication between the ocean physics and marine debris research communities,
a necessary step in effectively quantifying and ultimately managing ocean
pollution. Because the topic of marine pollution is accessible to a broad
audience, the project activities present a unique opportunity to educate the
general public, high school minority students, undergraduate students, and
graduate students about ocean turbulence and fluid dynamics in a collaborative
environment with experts in upper ocean dynamics, numerical modeling, dynamic
systems theory, and sea-going oceanography.