* 1352368
* CAREER: New States of Strongly Interacting Matter in Heavy Ion Collisions
* MPS,PHY
* 03/01/2014,02/28/2019
* Jinfeng Liao, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 02/28/2019
* USD 440,000.00

Exploring new states of matter is a fundamental quest. The strong interaction
sector of the Standard Model is described by the Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD) as
a quantum field theory of quarks and gluons. Such quarks and gluons are deeply
confined in normal matter. However when normal matter is heated to a high enough
temperature, it changes into a new deconfined form of QCD matter directly made
of the quarks and gluons. Such a quark-gluon plasma (QGP) briefly occupied the
Universe at about a few microseconds after the "Big Bang", and has now been
(re-)created as the hottest matter ever in laboratory by heavy ion collisions
("Little Bang"). Its properties are measured at the Relativistic Heavy Ion
Collider (RHIC) as well as the Large Hadron Collider (LHC). Theoretical and
experimental studies have suggested that the quark-gluon matter created in heavy
ion collisions is strongly-interacting both prior to and after reaching thermal
equilibrium. Exactly how such strongly interacting nature arises in the many-
body setting from the fundamental QCD theory, is a challenging problem that
lacks a deep understanding. This project will investigate this missing link and
seek to develop effective descriptions of the matter both in and out of
equilibrium. The results will advance our understanding of QCD confinement,
provide fresh insights into jet quenching mechanism, make significant progress
in search of QCD topological effects, and reduce existing uncertainties on the
pre-thermal stage. The expected outcome will contribute to our understanding of
fundamental questions such as "how the color confinement phenomenon arises", and
"how the experimentally observed properties of the quark-gluon matter in and out
of equilibrium emerge from QCD".&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study supported by
this award concerns the exploration of new forms of strongly interacting matter
under extreme conditions. These activities embody important interdisciplinary
aspects, as they are expected to have a profound impact on other areas of
physics, ranging from cosmology, supernova, compact stars, to supersymmetric
theories, string theories as well as condensed matter physics. This project
integrates research with education through mentoring of graduate, as well as
undergraduate students. This project will actively pursue a five-year
educational outreach plan to develop educational software for computer desktops
and mobile devices that utilizes visualization and simulations to demonstrate
concepts related to the "Physics of Extreme Matter" in an interactive, engaging,
and children-friendly manner.