* 1352040
* CAREER: Elucidating the Mechanism and Role of Globin-Coupled Sensor Signaling
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Emily Weinert, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Max Funk
* 07/31/2019
* USD 605,077.00

This CAREER award from the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Division
of Chemistry will support the work of Dr. Emily Weinert at Emory University to
determine the mechanism of signal transduction and the role of globin-coupled
sensor signaling in diverse bacteria. Bacteria form three-dimensional
communities, termed biofilms, in response to environmental signals, which
protect the bacteria from predation and environmental stress. To understand how
bacteria sense and respond to their environment, a detailed knowledge of the
environmental signals, proteins, and pathways that affect bacterial growth,
metabolism, and biofilm formation is required. The results from the proposed
research will elucidate the role of oxygen concentration in controlling
bacterial phenotypes, determine the molecular mechanism of oxygen sensing, and
potentially highlight novel methods to alter oxygen-dependent signaling. The
broader impacts emanate from teacher-scholar activities, which are integrated
into the research plan. These activities will pique student interest in the
scientific process and encourage students to pursue and remain in careers within
the sciences. Proposed activities include 1) mentoring of high school,
undergraduate, and graduate students, 2) development of an undergraduate
chemical biology class to introduce students to the primary literature and grant
writing, and 3) establishment of two new organizations at Emory, a graduate
chapter of Advancing Women in Science and an undergraduate Chemistry research
honor society.

This research project is centered on determining the mechanism of signal
transduction and the role of globin-coupled sensor signaling in diverse
bacteria. Globin-coupled sensors (GCS) are heme-containing signaling proteins
proposed to serve as oxygen sensors in vivo. A number of GCSs are predicted to
contain diguanylate cyclase domains, which catalyze production of c-di-GMP, a
bacterial second messenger that regulates biofilm formation. To understand
complex, heterogeneous biofilms found in the environment, the factors regulating
biofilm formation, such as gaseous environment, must be understood at both the
molecular and organismal level. Although putative oxygen-sensing GCSs have been
identified in the genomes of many bacteria, the mechanism of signal transduction
within the protein, the role of the middle domain, and the downstream effects of
oxygen signaling are poorly understood. Therefore, understanding the mechanisms
by which bacteria sense oxygen levels will help to illuminate how bacteria
respond to changing environmental conditions and potentially allow for
reengineering of these pathways. The aims of this research proposal are to 1)
investigate the ligand-dependent activity of GCSs with varying middle domain
lengths from diverse bacteria, 2) identify the mechanism of signal transduction
and role of the middle domain, and 3) characterize interacting partners and
downstream phenotypes controlled by GCS signaling in vivo. By understanding the
effect of varying oxygen levels on bacterial phenotypes at the molecular level,
it will be possible to elucidate the role of GCSs in oxygen-dependent biofilm
formation and metabolic changes in a wide variety of organisms.

This project is co-funded by the Systems and Synthetic Biology Cluster in the
Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences