* 1352978
* RCN: Insect Genetic Technologies
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2020
* David O'Brochta, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 03/31/2020
* USD 499,060.00

Insects are second to no animal in their importance to humans; consider their
roles in pollination, devouring crops and transmitting diseases. Our success in
living with or without insects depends upon the depth of our understanding of
insect biology. Molecular and genome sciences are revolutionizing our
understanding of human biology and medicine, and it can do the same for the
study of insects. There is a major problem; developing advanced molecular and
genetic technologies for one species, humans, has been challenging but
developing similar technologies for hundreds of important insect species
currently studied intensely by scientists is immensely more challenging. For
some insects the technologies are well developed and knowledge of their
application is deep (fruitflies), while for other insects the technologies are
nonexistent and technical knowledge is shallow (honeybees). This NSF-Research
Coordination Network fosters the development and sharing of molecular and
genetic knowledge and technologies across diverse research groups. The Network
fosters cross-disciplinary interactions by convening training workshops and
classes, sponsoring symposia, promoting collaborations and assembling an online
knowledge emporium for insect scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will have four major impacts: 1) enabling solutions to society's most vexing
insect-related problems, e.g. overuse of insecticides and reemergence of insect-
borne diseases, 2) maximizing the value of research-dollars by encouraging
collaborations and leveraging existing resources, 3) preparing for the future by
training students, 4) enhancing participation of underrepresented groups in
science.