* 1352361
* CAREER: The Evolution of Local Food Organizations
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2020
* Timothy Waring, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Tara Behrend
* 06/30/2020
* USD 523,900.00

Humanity is challenged to integrate the critical and malleable role of human
organizational behavior with our efforts toward sustainability. Environmental
conservation frequently comes at a cost to individuals, and sustaining resources
often requires cooperation between users. But cooperative, durable organizations
that manage resources sustainably do sometimes arise. Therefore, an examination
of the processes that influence the emergence and persistence of cooperative
organizations that maintain conservation practices should be of value for
advancing sustainability science and organizational theory alike. Linking theory
on the evolution of organizations, institutions, cooperation and culture, this
career development plan assembles a conceptual framework for the emergence and
persistence of organizations that support costly conservation practices. The
plan then applies this framework to a case study of cooperative local food
organizations in Maine, employing formal and informal education to transform the
capacity of citizens, students and stakeholders to conceptualize and engage in
organizational change necessary to shape sustainable
solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The planned research uses an evolutionary
framework to explore the patterns of institutional emergence associated with
costly conservation. The integration of three research elements will supply
convergent validity to a contextual study of the evolution of sustainable
institutions: (1) Theoretical models will develop insights about which
combinations and sequences of institutional features tend to emerge in stable,
conservative groups. Model development will be interleaved with (2) a case study
of cooperative, self-organized local food organizations using interviews,
surveys, economic games and a randomized controlled trail to characterize
institutional variation and change. (3) Local food organizations will be treated
as stakeholders in a collaborative facilitation process designed to empower
groups to set and meet self-identified goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The planned
educational effort engages students, stakeholders, and citizens in learning,
measuring and improving the ability of organizations to achieve cooperative
goals. Five cohorts of ~30 students each will be directly engaged in the
research through a student-driven statewide survey. New cross-listed courses
will bridge economics, psychology and anthropology by focusing on endogenous
organizational dynamics and methods for measuring them quantitatively.
Constituents in local food organizations will be provided educational materials
designed to improve their institutional efficacy. Finally, theory, methods and
findings will be shared through web-based educational simulations with high
school to graduate students, and an ongoing collaboration with a local
children's museum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;This plan
supplies an evolutionary theory of the emergence and persistence of conservation
behaviors and seeks to identify the institutional features that stabilize them.
Methodologically, the research bridges social-science boundaries, by
synthesizing evidence from experiments, models, surveys, interviews and a
randomized controlled trial. This multi-disciplinary approach aims to provide a
dynamic model that contributes to evolutionary organizational science and
promises to make nascent sustainability theory more predictive and
generalizable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;The plan includes
two major investments in stakeholder driven-research. First, a collaborative
stakeholder facilitation process will empower local food groups to self-identify
goals and benchmarks to improve group efficacy. The facilitation will be
rigorously evaluated via randomized controlled trial, and supply information on
how recent research may help groups achieve their goals. Second, an iterative,
multi-year collaboration with state-level food industry and food policy
organizations such as the Maine Food Strategy will enable these stakeholders to
co-direct the research efforts, shaping the research questions addressed in a
summative local foods analysis conducted in year five. This collaboration
increases the likelihood that the research described here will be of direct
value for the development of food policy in Maine, New England and beyond.