* 1352301
* CAREER:   Development of a broadband acoustic system for quantifying the flux of free gas in methane seeps
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2014,02/29/2020
* Thomas Weber, University of New Hampshire
* Continuing Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 02/29/2020
* USD 690,785.00

In this CAREER proposal the PI requests funding to develop a broadband acoustic
system to quantify the depth dependent bubble size distribution and gas void
fraction in methane seeps, and to measure the flux of methane gas escaping the
seabed and rising through the water column. Inversion of acoustic measurements
for these quantities will exploit the mechanical resonance of bubbles by
observing the bubbles response at a wide range of frequencies (1-100 kHz). The
acoustic system will employ a constant beamwidth transducer for much of its
frequency range (10-100 kHz) in order to accurately treat bubble plumes with
different size distributions that are in close spatial proximity, as is
sometimes observed to happen. The system will be designed to integrate into a
deepwater remotely operated vehicle (ROV) and to function at full ocean depth. A
second operational mode will be established where the system can be towed from a
ship of opportunity as part of a more rapid, wide-scale acoustic survey
strategy. The development and use of a wideband acoustic system can directly
address hypotheses about the fate and evolution of methane gas bubbles escaping
the seabed. The use of the proposed system has the potential to provide
transformative results including 1) refined estimates of the global flux of
methane escaping the seabed, 2) increased understanding of the oceans capacity
as a methane sink, and 3) estimates of the global flux of methane reaching the
atmosphere from seabed seeps.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broacer
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The data provided by the proposed instrument could
be of considerable benefit to the wider scientific community. Methane seeps are
thought to affect ocean chemistry, ocean microbial life and atmospheric
chemistry, with consequences for ocean productivity, radiation balance in the
atmosphere and paleoclimate studies. Basic information on these seeps is
lacking, and the proposed instrument could make a significant contribution to
plugging this hole in our understanding. Several undergraduate and graduate
students would benefit from the experience of helping with the development and
testing of a novel device. The idea of having undergraduates do the development
work for the schools echo-sounder kit is excellent. The outreach component would
reach the pupils at several local schools, and has the written support of both
local teachers and the New Hampshire Sea Grant. The collaborations with
industry, Sea Grant, and other agencies provides evidence that the project will
have a wide spread and lasting impact and that it is perceived by many other
scientists as an important problem and a good approach to the problem.