* 1352106
* CAREER: Neutrino Interactions in Matter
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2020
* Camillo Mariani, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* James Shank
* 04/30/2020
* USD 661,468.00

Among the key areas of study currently in particle physics are precision
measurements of neutrino oscillation parameters, the neutrino mass hierarchy and
measurement of CP violation in the neutrino sector. To address these requires a
more detailed understanding, both experimentally and theoretically, of neutrino
interactions in nuclear matter. With the emphasis long baseline experiments, in
which matter effects are important, and on Liquid Argon Time Projection Chambers
as the detectors of choice for many experiments, where the relevant atomic
number is A=40 for Argon, such understanding is not only necessary, but
fundamental.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The research effort at Virginia Polytechnic
and State University is aimed directly at these questions and is based on a
complementary approach using experiment, theory and simulation. The objectives
include: (1) to compare event generator predictions with experimental data,
focusing on comparisons with measurements that the Virginia Tech group and
collaborators will perform in Liquid Argon using the MicroBooNE detector; (2) to
determine the impact of nuclear models, correlations and neutrino interaction
uncertainties on the discovery of CP violation in the lepton sector and the
experimental determination of the neutrino oscillation parameters; (3) to
include state-of-the-art nuclear models in the neutrino interaction simulation
and (4) to determine the level of detail needed in these models to achieve the
required sensitivity to observe CP violation. The proposed research is
potentially transformative, by altering and refining the scope of the GENIE
neutrino event generator to predict events more precisely and interface it with
the GLoBES simulator to understand the effect of neutrino interactions on the
determination of neutrino oscillation parameters for past and future neutrino
experiments worldwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In parallel with the research, the
program includes important educational components, directed at high school and
more advanced levels. The group will build upon an already active PhysTec
program at Virginia Tech and will create a QuarkNet center to attract high
school teachers and students, with initial emphasis on neutrino physics. The
group also actively encourages the participation in the research of students
from underrepresented groups through the Virginia-North Carolina Alliance for
Minority Participation (VT-AMP) program.