* 1352065
* CAREER: Development of Mesoporous Metal-Organic Frameworks as a New Type of Platform for Enzyme Immobilization
* MPS,DMR
* 03/15/2014,02/29/2020
* Shengqian Ma, University of South Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 02/29/2020
* USD 575,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;With the support of the Solid State and Materials
Chemistry program in the Division of Materials Research, Professor Shengqian Ma
at the University of South Florida will develop mesoporous metal-organic
frameworks (mesoMOFs) as a new type of host matrix materials for enzyme
immobilization, which will not only circumvent the drawbacks of existing host
matrix materials but also offer new platforms for "tunable" enzyme
encapsulation. The aims of the proposed research include (i) design and
synthesis of water-stable functional mesoMOFs; (ii) development of protocols to
immobilize enzymes into mesoMOFs, characterizations of enzymes@mesoMOFs, and
evaluation of their performances in enzymatic catalysis; and (iii) tailoring
functional mesoMOFs as platforms for chemo-enzymatic and multi-enzymatic cascade
catalysis. Mechanistic studies will also be performed to investigate the
behavior of enzyme encapsulated within the mesoMOFs and to unveil the specific
interactions between enzyme molecules and mesoMOF frameworks.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;With the support of the
Solid State and Materials Chemistry program in the Division of Materials
Research, the proposed research aims to advance mesoporous metal-organic
frameworks as a new type of host matrix materials for enzyme immobilization,
which would impact chemical/fine chemical, pharmaceutical, and food industries:
it will formulate new methodologies to construct functional metal-organic
framework materials for a wider range of applications and help our understanding
of enzymatic reactions in nature. The award will help the PI to establish a
multidisciplinary research program of materials, solid-state chemistry,
catalysis and biochemistry that will lead to the discovery of novel functional
materials with profound relevance to energy sustainability and green chemistry.
The proposed research will thereby provide the type of professional scientific
training that would be desirable for STEM students. The integrated research and
educational activities and proposed outreach programs will specifically target
participation of minorities and underrepresented groups thus providing a
platform to motivate and foster them for pursuing careers in STEM fields.