* 1352663
* CAREER: Strategic Advancement of Chemical Theory and Computations towards Complex Synthetic Transformations
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2020
* Ha-Yeon Cheong, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 05/31/2020
* USD 547,149.00

In this CAREER award funded by the Chemical Catalysis program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor (Paul) Ha-Yeon Cheong of Oregon State University is
developing new software methods for applying computational chemistry to study
reactions that form complex compounds useful for pharmaceutical technology and
the study of biochemical processes. Many catalytic reactions are important for
the synthesis of molecules that display useful pharmacological or biological
properties; however, it is often a challenge to devise experimental methods to
define the fundamental details of how these reactions proceed. Very often,
computational methods can be used to provide such deeper insights. In this
research project, new software and computational methods are being developed to
improve the level of detail at which a catalytic reaction can be studied. The
longer range impacts of such work would be to allow the chemist to use a
computer to design a catalytic reaction to make a specific product, thus saving
the time and expense of performing preliminary laboratory work.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Cheong's research project is expanding the reach
of computations and theory towards the efficient elucidation of mechanisms and
factors that control the reactivity and selectivity of chemical transformations
involving structures with significant conformational flexibility and where the
interactions responsible for the reactivity and selectivity are largely non-
covalent, weak, and/or complex. Specifically, Professor Cheong is developing
theoretical tools and applying these methods in order to determine the central
factors that determine the mechanism and the stereoselectivity of: (i) site-
selective desymmetrization of cis-1,2-diols by scaffolding organic catalysts;
(ii) kinetic resolution of beta-amino alcohols by beta-hairpin peptide-catalyzed
acylation, and (iii) phosphine-catalyzed nucleophilic coupling of allenoates.
Ultimately, this line of research will inform experimentalists with an intuitive
understanding of the key factors in order to design better reactions and
processes. The developed software platform and the scientific discoveries are
being shared with the public and experts alike via an online gallery. An
introductory undergraduate course in academic and career development for
students planning for a career in science and technology is being offered at the
university. Finally, a student organization has been created where the goal is
to provide peer mentorship and support structures between student peers across
the post-secondary education strata.