* 1352099
* CAREER: Multi-Functional Organic Electronics Through All-Conjugated Block Copolymers
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2019
* Rafael Verduzco, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2019
* USD 501,730.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: Organic materials broaden the scope and reach of electronic
applications and devices by enabling their fabrication in previously
inaccessible locations, surfaces, and applications. A common example is organic
light-emitting diodes, which are widely used in commercial displays and have
been demonstrated on flexible, transparent, and large-area surfaces. The
capability to perform a range of functions, including light-emission, computing,
sensing, solar energy conversion, energy storage, and catalysis is constrained
by inherent disorder, especially at interfaces between organic semiconductors,
and by a limited understanding of optoelectronic processes that occur at these
interfaces. The central hypothesis of this work is that an emerging class of
polymeric materials known as all-conjugated block copolymers can give enhanced
energy and charge transfer, controlled nanoscale structure, and fundamental
insight into the electronic properties of organic semiconductor interfaces. This
hypothesis will be tested through the following research objectives: (1)
quantify the role of crystallization, micro-phase segregation, and interfacial
energy on the microstructure of all-conjugated block copolymer films, (2)
develop a logical framework for improving the performance of OPVs, and (3)
elucidate the role of interfacial structure and electronic properties on charge
transfer between donor and acceptor organic semiconductors. This will be
accomplished through polymer synthesis, structural characterization using
grazing-incidence X-ray scattering, device fabrication and testing, and both
steady-state and transient photophysical measurements.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

Organic electronic materials are widely used in applications such as lightweight
LED displays and efficient, low-cost lighting. The work proposed here aims to
increase the functionality of organic electronics for more ambitious targets,
including affordable solar energy, printable computers, and rechargeable
batteries. This will be accomplished through the development of novel materials
capable of absorbing light, generating electricity, and transporting both
positive and negative charges. Additionally, recognizing that community colleges
educate large and diverse pools of future scientists and engineers, the
Principle Investigator plans to establish a program for increasing the
scientific literacy of community college students and encouraging their
participation in undergraduate research programs. The outreach activities will
provide community college students with knowledge of current research,
familiarity with scientific writing and journal publications, and teamwork to
discuss and solve problems. Students will also enhance their experience in
chemistry, physics, and engineering through summer research.