* 1352665
* SusChEM: CAREER: Catalytic Methods for Direct Access to Tetrasubstituted Nitrogen-Containing Molecules
* MPS,CHE
* 04/15/2014,03/31/2019
* Catharine Larsen, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 03/31/2019
* USD 599,832.00

The Chemical Catalysis (CAT) Program in the NSF Division of Chemistry is
supporting the research of Professor Catharine H. Larsen at the University of
California, Riverside. The project focuses on developing a new series of
catalysts to prepare amine-bearing tetrasubstituted carbon centers in a single,
efficient, catalytic process. The reactions minimize waste with the sole by-
product being one equivalent of water. The resulting molecular building blocks
form the core of therapeutic natural products, biomedical probes, and
pharmaceuticals. The outreach activities integrate green chemistry principles,
bringing chemistry to students and the wider public through
art.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Larsen's project develops a one-step
catalytic methods to synthesize amine-bearing tetrasubstituted carbon centers. A
dual metal system is being used to overcome the high energy barrier required in
forming key molecular intermediates for direct access to highly hindered
compounds. The approach uses sustainable catalysts to access asymmetric,
tetrasubstituted carbons in a single step to provide hindered organic amines.
Professor Larsen showcases the influence of green chemistry and catalysis
through lectures, laboratory courses, presentations to the Women in Science
Engaging Riverside (WISER) club, and "The Science of Art" program, which is
integrated into the Riverside Art Museum's "Walk and Wonder" tours. The latter
outreach inspires socioeconomically disadvantaged 2nd- and 5th-grade students
through tactile experimentation with the chemistry involved in the creation of
paintings, sculptures, and other media, providing a positive reaction to
science.