* 1352478
* Defining transcriptional and post-translational regulatory networks in retrogradw stress signaling
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/2014,09/30/2016
* Katayoon Dehesh, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* elsbeth walker
* 09/30/2016
* USD 670,000.00

Plants are persistently challenged with numerous biotic and abiotic stresses. To
cope, they have evolved an intricate network of mechanisms to link these stress
response pathways. Identification of master regulators that prime these response
pathways is fundamental to providing opportunities for developing broad-spectrum
stress-tolerant plants. Recently, it was discovered that a novel plastid-
produced stress-specific signaling metabolite, methylerythritol cyclodiphosphate
(MEcPP), serves as a sensory hub that synchronizes multiple regulatory steps
that are key to plant responses to environmental perturbations. This discovery
has led to construction of a unique platform for identification of the general
stress response regulators. The aims of this project are two-fold: 1) to
identify the molecular and biochemical components engaged in the MEcPP signaling
cascade that relay plastid-perceived stress signals to a central hub responsible
for expression of key regulators of biotic and abiotic stress responses. 2) to
identify the cellular interactomes that might connect the integrative network of
sensory systems required for plants adaptive responses to multiple environmental
stresses. As such, this project provides a unique opportunity to unambiguously
identify and functionally characterize an ensemble of a general stress cluster
of genes key to plant adaptive responses to biotic and abiotic stresses.
&lt;br/&gt;This project provides a multidimensional educational platform for
mentoring scholars and particularly underrepresented college and high school
students in a vertically integrated state-of-the-art interdisciplinary
translational research. The results of this project will be stored daily on the
departmental server and widely disseminated through publications and public
presentations, and all of the tools developed will be made available to the
community. The global impact of this project is the development of new targets
for generation of broad-spectrum stress-tolerant crops, thereby alleviating
pressures caused by climate change and global food security.