* 1352239
* CAREER: Selective Thiol-Ene and Thiol-Yne Chemistry, From First Principles to Organic Materials
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2014,07/31/2020
* Brian Northrop, Wesleyan University
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 07/31/2020
* USD 537,561.00

In this project funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Program of the Chemistry Division, Brian Northrop of Wesleyan University is
investigating how to direct chemical reactions to form specific linkages between
molecules and form polymers. Polymers are long chain organic molecules and are
found in many facets of everyday life that utilize plastics, including food
packaging, structural materials for automotive and aerospace transportation, and
lightweight electronic devices. These insights will provide more efficient
methods for making a variety of materials and for creating new types of
materials with novel properties. The results of this research are expected to
impact applications such as the development of materials for the targeted
delivery of drugs, new consumer care products, and new plastic materials.

In this project Brian Northrop is investigating the fundamental reactivity of
thiols with alkenes and alkynes. The research objectives include first
principles computational modeling of thiol-ene and thiol-yne reaction
mechanisms, small molecule model studies for synthetic testing of selective
thiol-ene and thiol-yne reaction conditions, and implementation of these new
methods in the synthesis of organic macromaterials. The project integrates these
research goals with outreach programs that include hands-on workshops in polymer
science for elementary school students and the development of an
interdisciplinary program in materials chemistry that will increase the
participation and retention of undergraduate students in the sciences. While
both thiol-ene and thiol-yne reactions have found broad utility across multiple
areas of polymer and materials chemistry there are, at present, few known
methods for carrying out selective thiol-ene and thiol-yne reactions, which this
research project addresses. This research should enable the development of more
efficient means to prepare complex, multifunctional materials with selectively
tunable properties.