* 1352060
* CAREER: Nonparametric Eigenanalysis of High Dimensional Data
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2020
* Zongming Ma, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2020
* USD 400,016.00

This research project contains a specific research agenda that aims at a general
understanding of high dimensional nonparametric eigenanalysis through three
fundamental and complementary directions: (1) regularized estimation and
variable selection, (2) statistical inference of eigenstructure, including
hypothesis testing and confidence statements, and (3) minimax rates and
complexity theoretic limits. The first direction will offer flexible
regularization and variable selection of eigenstructure through regression based
techniques, regularized power methods and other efficient algorithms. The second
direction will lead to valid nonparametric testing procedures and confidence
sets for eigenstructure with intrinsic sparsity. The third direction will
characterize the fundamental limits of inferential accuracy in high dimensional
eigenanalysis and its difference from what can be achieved by computationally
efficient algorithms. The research will bring in new perspectives from other
disciplines such as convex geometry, information theory and theoretical computer
science to break new ground in high dimensional statistics. An effort will be
made to seek out collaborations with scientists in topics that are related to
the methodological and theoretical work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advances in
science and technology have generated datasets of increasingly high
dimensionality in many fields such as medical imaging, climate studies, and
bioinformatics. When processing data arising in these applications,
eigenanalysis of certain matrix objects, such as the covariance matrix, plays a
central role in summarizing and unveiling the underlying structure of data,
which often has intrinsic sparsity. This research project spans multiple
directions, each aiming at advancing the methodological development and the
theoretical understanding of high dimensional eigenanalysis from a different
fundamental aspect. Upon completion, it will lead to a comprehensive general
understanding of high dimensional eigenanalysis that will significantly enhance
the ability to employ it in a wide range of scientific settings. The
methodological development will be disseminated to the broader scientific
community through user-friendly software packages that will serve as the basis
for potential applications. The research output will also be effectively
integrated with educational activities such as course development and mentoring
at both undergraduate and graduate levels.