* 1352579
* CAREER: Characterizing Electrochemical and Photocatalytic Reaction Pathways via Nanostructured-Photoelectrodes
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2019
* Isabell Thomann, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 06/30/2019
* USD 243,180.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program of the
Chemistry Division, Professor Isabell Thomann of Rice University is developing
novel instrumentation to follow the often complex, multi-step reaction pathways
of heterogeneous photocatalytic reactions that are relevant for solar fuel
generation, environmental remediation, and chemical synthesis in general.
Femtosecond time-resolved Raman techniques will be developed to probe the
chemical identities of short-lived reaction intermediates. These will be
complemented by concomitant analyses of the reaction products via
electrochemical mass spectrometry and nuclear magnetic resonance. Using these
techniques, novel concepts for efficient carbon dioxide photoreduction will be
investigated. Both plasmonic and dielectric photoelectrode nanostructures will
be explored for their potential to open up distinctive reaction pathways and to
overcome limited conversion efficiencies and product selectivities.

The fundamental knowledge about photocatalytic reactions gained in this work
will, among many other applications, aid in improving the selectivity and
efficiency of CO2 reduction. The technological capabilities developed here will
in addition serve to recruit, educate and train students (both undergraduate and
graduate) in a highly interdisciplinary research field. As part of this award,
an outreach program is being developed that includes opportunities for K12
teachers and undergraduates to learn about and contribute to this research in
the Professor Thomann's lab.