* 1352780
* IDBR: Type A:Development of a Digital Ion Trap Mass Spectrometer for Resolved Mass Analysis of Intact Singly-Charged Proteins, Complexes, RNA, DNA and Viruses
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2019
* Peter Reilly, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 05/31/2019
* USD 685,800.00

This award to Washington State University by the Instrument Development for
Biological Research, in the Division of Biological Infrastructure (Biological
Sciences Directorate), is jointly funded by the Chemical Measurements and
Imaging program, in the Division of Chemistry (Math and Physical Sciences
Directorate).

Non-Technical description Mass analysis of biological molecules was enabled in
the late 1980s with the advent of new ionization techniques that extended the
mass range from 1,000 units to 20,000 units. Unfortunately this technology is
limited because the size of proteins, complexes, RNA, DNA and viruses greatly
exceed 20,000 units, so they are not easily analyzed. The proposed development
of a new digital ion trap mass spectrometer will extend the mass range out to
10,000,000,000 units and beyond, allowing direct and quantitative measurement of
massive biological molecules and complexes, and to observe interaction of these
massive species with others small or large. The effect of this technology will
be felt across a wide range of disciplines including chemistry, biochemistry,
biology, physics, medical, veterinary and plant science. It will provide
opportunities for students to collaborate and broaden their scientific knowledge
beyond their specific disciplines. The results of this work will be disseminated
through publications, collaborations, teaching and outreach that include
undergraduates and high school students. Publications and collaborations will
create a demand for this instrumentation, which the instrument manufacturers
will eventually fill.

Technical description The three-year project will develop a digital ion trap
(DIT) technology to extend the working range of ion trap mass spectrometers by
five orders of magnitude. In the first phase of the project, a prototype that
will enable direct analysis of intact singly-charged proteins and protein
complexes and their interactions with small molecules will be developed. The
second phase of this project will install a mass independent Faraday detector,
and methods will be developed to analyze intact singly-charged proteins,
complexes, RNA and DNA and their weak non-covalent interactions.