* 1352306
* CAREER:   Microphysical evolution of highly sheared polymineralic rocks
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2014,01/31/2020
* Philip Skemer, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 01/31/2020
* USD 600,000.00

The theory of plate tectonics is the basis for most Earth science, providing
context for interpreting such diverse phenomena as earthquakes and volcanoes,
mountain building, and global climate. In spite of its broad scientific and
societal importance, there are still fundamental unanswered questions about the
underlying physical mechanisms of plate tectonics. The basic differences between
the manifestation of tectonics on Earth and other terrestrial bodies are a major
outstanding question in geophysics and planetary science. This research applies
novel experimental approaches to study how rocks deform at the pressures and
temperatures of planetary interiors to help understand the origins of plate
tectonics on Earth.

To fulfill these research objectives, large strain torsional deformation
experiments will be conducted on rocks of crustal and mantle composition. These
experiments will be performed in the PI's newly built Large Volume Torsion
apparatus (LVT), which has been optimized for experimental investigations at
pressures of up to 6 GPa and temperatures of up to 1300 C. The focus of these
investigations will be on the microphysical interaction between various mineral
phases, in polymineralic rocks. The goal is to better understand how large shear
strains modify the rheological properties of realistic rocks, and identify the
conditions where these data deviate from experiments conducted to small strains
on monomineralic material. Microstructural data will be incorporated into
numerical models to simulate how variations in rheology influence the dynamical
evolution of tectonic plates. This project also includes an integrated plan for
teaching and research in rock mechanics at the undergraduate level. Few
undergraduate curricula incorporate rock mechanics, and more exposure is needed
to broaden research capabilities in this critical area. The PI will be
developing a research-grade bench-top rock deformation apparatus that will be
incorporated into the curricula of several undergraduate colleges with strong
programs in Earth Science. Through curriculum and infrastructure development,
this effort seeks to expand the number of undergraduate students who consider
further research in experimental rock deformation.