* 1352668
* CAREER: Intraplate tectonics and deep crustal faulting in Rural Alaska
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2022
* Carl Tape, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Hearn
* 06/30/2022
* USD 522,430.00

This project applies earthquake modeling and seismic wavefield simulations to a
new seismic data acquisition in order to characterize a major, yet unknown,
fault zone within one of the most active intraplate regions of North America.
Located 700 km north of the Alaska-Aleutian trench, the Nenana basin is a 7 km
deep, active sedimentary basin aligned with the 200 km long Minto Flats seismic
zone. The seismic zone contains the highest concentration of deep (&gt;15 km)
crustal seismicity in central Alaska. Two deep events include a 2012 triggered
earthquake with a 24 s nucleation phase, and also a 1995 Mw 6.0 earthquake that
ruptured a small portion of the fault zone and strongly shook the region. The
three-dimensional fault zone structure and the relationship between the active
sedimentary basin and the sub-basin faulting are unknown, in part because no
seismic station has ever been deployed in this remote region. The Tanana river
provides access for a strategic 12-station deployment targeting the fault zone.
Seismic waveforms from local earthquakes will be used to develop a catalog of
accurate earthquake locations. A new moment tensor catalog for local events will
characterize the style of faulting. Seismic wavefield simulations of earthquakes
within the fault zone will be used to explore the influences of fault
complexity, earthquake ruptures, and basin structure on the regional seismic
wavefield. Modeling of the seismic data will help determine whether the
anomalously deep crustal seismicity is related to overlying basin formation, to
underlying slab-driven processes, or to laterally driven
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The seismic waveforms collected during this
experiment will be the first ever recorded in this active tectonic region, and
they will provide a valuable resource for future geophysical studies in central
Alaska. Characterization of the Minto Flats fault zone will provide fundamental
constraints on the competing tectonic models for basin formation and deformation
within central Alaska. The project has a substantial education component that
includes high school students from Nenana, as well as undergraduate and graduate
students. Field-based teaching modules, classroom-based teaching modules, and
annual field trips to science exhibits in Fairbanks will engage Nenana high
school students in earthquake science and active tectonics of Alaska.