* 1352602
* CAREER: Coherent Structures in Ionospheric-Thermospheric Flows
* GEO,AGS
* 05/15/2014,04/30/2020
* Seebany Datta-Barua, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* John Meriwether
* 04/30/2020
* USD 507,599.00

Examining and comparing the flow field structures of both ionosphere and
thermosphere can tell us why they might be aligned at certain times but not at
others. As part of this CAREER award, the PI will integrate geospace science,
plasma dynamics and remote sensing education to a diverse range of backgrounds.
Educational activities include 1) Earth and space science outreach to
underrepresented minorities at area high schools through the Boeing Scholars
Academy; 2) undergraduate education through interdisciplinary project-based
learning via the IIT Interprofessional Projects program (IPRO); 3) undergraduate
research training and undergraduate mentoring of the IIT AIAA student chapter
high altitude balloon project; 4) curriculum development at the graduate level;
5) graduate mentoring for multiple Ph.D. and M.S. theses. These activities will
be undertaken in addition to dissemination efforts via publications,
presentations, and workshops to the broader scientific community.

A common problem in many areas of physics is the motion of material in a moving
medium. In recent years, a mathematical technique called Lagrangian Coherent
Structures (LCS) has been used to model how these materials drift and spread
with time. LCS represent the material surface in an unsteady flow separating
regions that evolve in qualitatively different ways. Whether the dynamical
equations are unknown or unsolvable, the LCS can be an organizing structure in
the flow that provides a new context and framework for understanding the system
interactions. LCS analysis draws upon the latest knowledge in other disciplines,
and it treats the unsteady flow, a historically complex and unpredictable
phenomenon. LCS can help to refine our understanding of the underlying dynamics,
by providing evidence of the physical processes that lead to unsteady flow
divergence. Although LCS has been used to study the motion of clouds of material
in wind, aerodynamic flows, and fluids, it has never been applied to the upper
atmosphere. In this study, the investigators will use LCS to investigate the
behavior of structures (e.g., meteoric smoke particles; climate change-related
pollutants; space debris) deposited in the upper atmosphere. The goal is to use
LCS to determine the mid-to-high-latitude flow fields and their time evolution,
the ability to detect and follow these structures during disturbed conditions,
and the seeding and propagation of turbulent mixing at equatorial latitudes,
which leads to small-scale disturbances and radio signal scintillation that
affects HF communications and satellite-based navigation. Successful development
of LCS in this study can enable future studies of LCS analyzing the motion of
vertical flow in equatorial regions. LCS analysis can be used to understand the
chaotic mixing in IT fluid that may cause scintillation, leading to better
operational forecasting.