* 1352973
* Second SIAM-NSF Workshop: Modeling Across the Curriculum
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2015
* Peter Turner, Society For Industrial and Applied Math (SIAM)
* Standard Grant
* John Haddock
* 09/30/2015
* USD 49,917.00

This project supports a two and a half day working conference, on STEM
Education, specifically as it relates to the applied and computational
mathematics community and the infusion of mathematical modeling throughout the
K-16 curriculum. The goal of the conference is to develop a coordinated approach
for the community designing this curriculum. This, the second SIAM workshop
pertaining to Modeling across the curriculum, is more narrowly focused than the
first, based on some of the principal recommendations from the first workshop.
In particular, the development of a richer curriculum for modeling in K-12, a
High School modeling course with a stratified content and a modeling-based
undergraduate curricula.

There is an observed need to approach STEM Education in a more coordinated
fashion, rather than simply developing distinct educational program streams that
pay little or no attention to interactions and interconnections. Applied and
computational mathematics, including statistics, (ACMS) represents a natural
vehicle for this coordination. A goal of this project is consdiering the
development of undergraduate STEM degree programs as alternatives to traditional
discipline majors. The intention is that this would experience growth similar to
that of Computational Science and Engineering programs over the past 5 to 10
years. Coordinating the fundamental mathematics, computation, statistics and
science content to support application in a wide range of STEM fields may have
strong appeal to potential students and their eventual employers. STEM degree
programs would preserve options while not restricting choices for graduate,
professional or career opportunities.

Within the K-12 education, the discretionary 15% of the Common Core State
Standards Initiative recommendations for math and science education will provide
an opportunity to develop material that enhances the whole STEM educational
spectrum in a coordinated fashion. At the upper level, an alternative curriculum
in applied and computational mathematics could be established, and an integrated
STEM educational experience that would reinforce prior experience in a way that
would yield more and better prepared students for STEM college majors and
careers would result.