* 1352949
* Collaborative Research: Assessing Assessments: A Historical and Philosophical Study of Scientific Assessments for Environmental Policy in the Late 20th Century
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2015
* Naomi Oreskes, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 06/30/2015
* USD 145,470.00

Assessing Assessments: A Historical and Philosophical Study of Scientific
&lt;br/&gt;Assessments for Environmental Policy in the late 20th
Century&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project investigates the process by which scientists attempt to assess and
summarize--accurately, fairly, objectively--the scientific knowledge that
society needs to make informed judgments about complex issues. How do scientists
evaluate the reliability of their colleagues? research, understand its limits
and degrees of uncertainty, and come to consensus (or not)? How do scientists
respond to the subtle or overt pressures that arise when they know the world is
watching the outcome of the process? What factors internal to the process may
lead to systematic bias, error, or distortion? &lt;br/&gt;Periodically,
scientists come together to present scientific information at the request of
policy-makers and for the benefit of the general public, particularly in the
area of environmental science relevant to policy. Recent examples include the
National Acid Precipitation Assessment Program, the Ozone Trends Panel, and the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, organized to summarize and assess the
state of the art with respect to acid rain, global ozone depletion, and
anthropogenic climate change, respectively. Such assessments consume large
amounts of time, money, and manpower, and they can play a major role in policy
debates. Therefore, it is important to understand how they work (or fail to
work). Yet, few scholars have studied them. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the internal dynamics of the
assessment process puts us in a better position to judge the quality of any
particular assessment, as well as to suggest potential means of improvement,
and, ultimately, to provide an improved foundation for science-based policy. The
presumption that assessments should influence policy assumes that the quality of
these assessments is high, but that assumption has rarely been closely
examined.&lt;br/&gt;