* 1352201
* CAREER:Metal Organic Frameworks for Increased Nitric Oxide Duration at Medical Interfaces Plus the Development of a Biomaterials Module for Non-STEM Majors
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2019
* Melissa Reynolds, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 05/31/2019
* USD 500,000.00

Non-technical:&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research project is to develop
methodologies for therapeutic materials which can be utilized in medical
devices. At present, infection and clotting caused by long-term medical implants
such as stents, catheters, and grafts, can compromise patient care and
contribute to increased health care costs. Currently, no therapeutics are
available that can be used in the manufacturing of medical devices which will
last the lifetime of the implant. In this work, a completely new approach in
creating materials for long-term medical devices is proposed that uses catalysts
to produce natural therapeutic agents after a device has been implanted in a
patient. The materials chosen can be quickly integrated into current
manufacturing processes and, thereby, reduce retooling costs and expedite the
time to market for next generation medical devices. Most importantly, the
results of this work will reduce the necessity for patients with long-term
medical implants to undergo repeated surgeries due to common failures of current
devices. A direct result of this work will be quality training of undergraduate
and graduate students in interdisciplinary and cutting-edge biomedical research.
In addition, the proposed work also helps college students to become more
informed citizens through the development of a biomaterials teaching module for
undergraduates. This module will promote informed citizens by providing students
with an understanding of the challenges faced by biomedical researchers and
manufacturers when bringing new medical innovations to
market.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award by the
Biomaterials program in the Division of Materials Research to Colorado State
University will focus on developing a new class of biomaterials that can extend
the lifetime of implants used for long periods. This award is cofunded by the
Biotechnology, Biochemical, and Biomass Engineering program in the Division of
Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport Systems. To date, the
lifetime of the implants is limited due to the incompatibility between the
device and surrounding fluids and cells, inflammation and possible infection. To
prevent such incompatibilities and promote integration of the device into the
body without compromising its functional properties, a novel strategy is
proposed that uses metal organic framework (MOF) catalysts, which endogenously
generate nitric oxide (NO). Nitric oxide is a well-established bioregulatory
agent, and is known to prevent clotting and infection while promoting cell
growth. The synthesis and subsequent incorporation of catalytic amounts of
tailored NO releasing materials at the biointerface minimizes the likelihood for
adverse alterations to the physical or mechanical properties of implants. Thus,
this unique strategy allows for translation to a range of applications that
require NO dosages that were not previously possible. In this project, the
researcher will explore how the structure of the catalyst influences its
reactivity with various S-nitrosothiols (RSNOs) to locally produce NO at the
polymer interface. Further, other important factors such as polymer matrix and
processing methods will be evaluated to fine tune the dosages of NO produced at
the surface. The project is expected to produce new methodologies for
therapeutic additives, and develop a better fundamental understanding of how
these materials can function as biologically useful catalysts. In doing so, this
work utilizes MOF catalysts in a manner not used previously. As such, this work
not only advances the field of biomaterials, but also that of metal organic
framework catalysis. The broader impact focus of this project is in the
development and training of students in the field of biomaterials by exposing
them to a broad range of perspectives and approaches that makes them ready to
work in various environments when they graduate from college. This includes
students being able to work either independently or in collaborative research
teams and to understand how their expertise contributes to the overall success
of the project. In addition, biomaterial modules for non-science majors will be
developed and implemented into the undergraduate laboratory curriculum to
improve student awareness of biomaterials. The curriculum module being developed
will explicitly focus on questions related to biomaterials, their discovery, and
how a material could be used for biomedical applications. To understand the
effectiveness of this new module, pre- and post-surveys will be used to evaluate
student demographics, student motivations, student views about the nature of
science, and students' learning abilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;