* 1352499
* CAREER: Controlling Pressure-Induced Transformation in Rare Earth Orthophosphates
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2022
* Corinne Packard, Colorado School of Mines
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Lane
* 07/31/2022
* USD 555,654.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Sudden through to slowly growing cracks in high
temperature ceramic components such as combustors, nozzles, and thermal
insulation in aircraft engines, turbines, and rockets can lead to catastrophic
failure. Some unique ceramics undergo a change in their shape and volume to a
new crystal structure when they are deformed, which can be harnessed to impart
increased toughness in a material by absorbing energy caused by an impact or
propagating crack. This project is determining how to use chemistry to control
the point at which the change to a new crystal structure occurs and its speed of
transformation. The information and new materials discovered in this research
can be useful in designing fiber coatings for ceramic matrix composites with
better performance (superior mechanical properties) for high temperature
aerospace applications. Both undergraduate and graduate students in Materials
Science and Engineering are being trained and mentored. This project is
developing science learning modules for use by local elementary school teachers
from school districts with a high percentage of minority students and the Rocky
Mountain Camp for the Dyslexic. These complementary education and outreach
components broaden the participation of underrepresented groups in science and
engineering in an effort to meet the U.S. need for expanding the science and
technology workforce with more highly qualified people. This project will help
strengthen U.S. innovation and economic competitiveness in the area of turbine
engines and in terms of education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: This
project is establishing the influence of chemistry, grain size, temperature, and
stress state on pressure-induced phase transformation kinetics in rare earth
(RE) orthophosphate ceramics (REPO4 crystal structure). Phase transformations in
these materials are being examined using a range of techniques that include
high-temperature nanoindentation, transmission electron microscopy, and diamond
anvil cell (combined with Raman spectroscopy). One goal is to enable precise
control over the trigger for the plasticity transformation in coatings for
improved ceramic matrix composites. The influence of kinetic effects on the
transformation onset pressure and degree of reversibility are being identified.
Insights gained through this research are aiding in the science-based design of
ceramic composites, components, and devices in which pressure-induced
transformation must be triggered with precise timing for maximal effect. This
work addresses a grand challenge of the field to understand the factors
controlling phase transformation kinetics that can lead directly to new ways to
process metastable materials with enhanced functionality.