* 1352565
* CAREER:   Investigating Earthquake Cycles on Mid-Ocean Ridge Transform Faults
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2014,02/28/2021
* Margaret Boettcher, University of New Hampshire
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah K. Smith
* 02/28/2021
* USD 445,733.00

Seismicity on mid-ocean ridge transform faults (RTFs) is remarkably systematic
and this study will explore the physical reasons for this unusual predictability
in earthquake behavior. Transform fault length and plate tectonic slip rate are
the basis of global scaling relations that robustly estimate the size of the
largest earthquake, the seismic coupling, and the repeat time of the largest
earthquakes on most RTFs. However, the processes that create this regularity in
RTF seismic cycles and that limit the size of their largest earthquakes are
unknown. This integrated research and education project comprises two main
components: A comprehensive analysis of RTF structure from high-resolution
multibeam bathymetry and finite element modeling of RTFs; Derivation of
earthquake source parameters on typical (Gofar) and atypical (Clipperton) RTFs
to compare along strike variation in seismic coupling and fault properties.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ultimate aim of this project is to improve seismic
hazard assessment by determining if time-dependent hazard models, which describe
hazard as being low following a large earthquake and building with time,
actually reflect the underlying mechanics of fault slip on geometrically simple
faults. Part of the study will be completed through undergraduate class
projects, with students trained in the use of geophysical datasets and
resources. Two graduate students will gain research experience. Basic concepts
on earthquake generation and predictability will be conveyed to high school
physics teachers through simple analog experiments that are one component of a
new professional development workshop. High school physics curricula will be
developed as an outcome of the Summer workshops, and university students will
gain educational experience working in the classroom with the teachers
throughout the following school year.