* 1352157
* CAREER: Solute Effects on the Oxidation Behavior of Ni Alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2020
* Emmanuelle Marquis, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Yang
* 05/31/2020
* USD 500,000.00

Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports an integrated
educational and research plan focusing on student outreach, motivation, and
creative thinking with goals of excellence in research and teaching in the field
of physical metallurgy, environmental degradation of materials, and state-of-
the-art microscopy. In the area of structural materials particularly for power
generation applications, critical research is needed not merely on the intrinsic
properties of structural materials, e.g. strength, toughness, or creep, but more
significantly on the extrinsic response to external environments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed philosophy is to unravel and quantify the
mechanisms that controls materials properties at the atomic scale and to
incorporate this information into alloy design "rules". Focusing on the dynamic
segregation theory currently used for explaining the role of rare earth
elements, the possible role of Si in the creation of a continuous oxide
protective layer, and the competitive nature of thermodynamics and kinetics in
defining the "third element effect", the proposed use of high spatial and
chemical resolution characterization techniques in combination with theoretical
modeling will provide quantitative information needed to answer long-standing
open questions on the role of alloying. This new understanding is critically
important for validation of computational models and use in design of oxidation
resistant materials in a more efficient manner based on new alloy design
approaches envisioned in the Materials Genome
Initiative.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Environmental degradation is ubiquitous;
therefore methods, concepts, and training are translatable to a much larger
range of materials science or materials engineering issues, from bio-implants to
energy production, energy conversion, and light alloys for transportation.
Through collaborations with the New York Metropolitan Museum and the French
Laboratoire des Monuments Historiques, the proposed teaching and additional
research experiences will broaden the scientific scope, by impacting other
materials areas where oxidation and corrosion issues are significant, while
adding a cultural component to the project. The program will foster the
recruitment of under-represented minorities and women in particular into
research activities. The exciting collaborative research, teaching, and outreach
activities at all levels of the educational spectrum along with the development
of open web-based teaching and research tools will provide students,
professionals, and colleagues with unique opportunities to excel in their own
research endeavors within a diverse setting while inspiring a sustained outreach
mindset.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
CAREER award supports an integrated educational and research plan focusing on
student outreach, motivation, and creative thinking with goals of excellence in
research and teaching in the field of physical metallurgy, environmental
degradation of materials, and state-of-the-art microscopy. In the area of
structural materials particularly for power generation applications, critical
research is needed not merely on the intrinsic properties of structural
materials, e.g. strength, toughness, or creep, but more significantly on the
extrinsic response to external environments. &lt;br/&gt;The effects of specific
alloying elements on the oxidation response of model Ni-Al alloys will be
investigated through direct imaging techniques allowing structures and chemistry
to be visualized with near atomic resolution. In combination with theoretical
modeling, this approach will provide quantitative information needed to answer
long-standing open questions in the field of metal oxidation.
&lt;br/&gt;Environmental degradation is ubiquitous; therefore investigation
methods, concepts, and training are translatable to a much larger range of
materials science or materials engineering issues, from bio-implants to energy
production, energy conversion, and light alloys for transportation. Through
collaborations with the New York Metropolitan Museum and the French Laboratoire
des Monuments Historiques, the proposed teaching and additional research
experiences will broaden the scientific scope of the project, by impacting other
materials areas where oxidation and corrosion issues are significant. The
program will foster the recruitment of under-represented minorities and women in
particular into research activities. The exciting collaborative research,
teaching and outreach activities at all levels of the educational spectrum and
the development of open web-based teaching and research tools will provide
students, professionals, and colleagues with unique opportunities to excel in
their own research endeavors within a diverse setting while inspiring a
sustained outreach mindset.