* 1352317
* CAREER:Self-Assembled Biodegradable Conjugated Polymers for RNA Interference
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2014,02/28/2022
* Joong Ho Moon, Florida International University
* Continuing Grant
* Nitsa Rosenzweig
* 02/28/2022
* USD 515,568.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific goal of this CAREER
Award supported by the Biomaterials program in the Division of Materials
Research is to improve the delivery efficiency of synthetic carriers through
systematic investigations of the structure-function relationships. Safe and
efficient delivery of nucleic acid (i.e., DNA and RNA) molecules to target
tissues and cells has high therapeutic potentials against many diseases, because
the molecules can specifically block the functions of genes associated with
diseases. By optimizing chemical and physical properties and understanding
cellular entry/localization of conjugated polymer/RNA complexes, the PI expects
to control gene functions efficiently, exceeding current performance levels of
the existing carriers. The knowledge obtained from this project will have
broader impact on designing and fabricating various synthetic gene and drug
delivery systems. Early research experiences and engagements in scientific
communities and retaining existing minority undergraduate students in degree
programs are recognized as efficient ways to improve the number of minorities in
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM). The education goal of
this project is to increase the number of minorities in science and engineering
through focused outreach programs. By integrating research results into classes
to motivate students to pursue higher degree, offering research/career
development seminars designed for students at undergraduate institutes (UIs) to
encourage students to go to graduate school, and offering research opportunities
to local high school students to provide early research experiences and
engagement in scientific communities, the PI will cultivate the excitement of
research through teaching and dissemination. The relationships built through the
proposed project will help support science and engineering training and
education in Southeast Florida.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this CAREER project are 1) to
establish an interdisciplinary biomaterials research program that advances our
understanding on the structure-function relationships of polymeric gene/drug
delivery materials and 2) to develop innovative educational methods to increase
the number of minority students in science and engineering through outreach
programs. Despite the excitement regarding RNA interference (RNAi) technology,
poor delivery efficiency and toxicity of carriers hinders further breakthroughs
in RNAi-based therapeutics. This project allows the PI to systematically
investigate the carrier structure-biological function relationships at the
cellular level by using fluorescent semiconducting conjugated polymers (CPs).
Modulating and controlling the chemical structures of the carriers will lead to
in-depth understanding of how the surface properties of the carriers influence
the cellular entry pathways and localizations. Finally, biodegradability of CPs
allows efficient release of RNA through intracellular unpacking. Visualization
of the delivery event and labeling of target cells with CPs having excellent
photophysical properties are also beneficial for developing multifunctional
biomaterials. The project will allow the PI to share the excitement of the
research experience with a significant number of local high school,
undergraduate, and graduate students by launching outreach programs including
the University Experience Program. The PI and Chemistry Club members will host
4-6 high schools (40 students per school) per year to offer a college-level
research experience to underrepresented students.