* 1352726
* EAGER: A Social and Context Aware Spectrum Management Framework for Heterogeneous Cognitive Radio Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2015
* Liran Ma, Texas Christian University
* Standard Grant
* Wenjing Lou
* 09/30/2015
* USD 128,426.00

Cognitive radio is a promising technology that can significantly alleviate
spectrum scarcity and improve the spectral efficiency. This project conducts a
comprehensive study on developing a social and context aware spectrum management
framework that targets maximizing the spectral efficiency for cognitive radio
networks with heterogeneous devices and applications. This research is motivated
by the idea that the efficient management of spectrum requires the consideration
of the entire network ecosystem where the users and their applications interact
with each other. In the proposed framework, a novel fairness criterion is
developed for the network scenarios under consideration. With the developed
fairness criterion as a constraint, a social and context aware spectrum
allocation scheme is developed, which contributes to the maximization of the
spectral efficiency. In addition, a fair opportunistic spectrum sharing
mechanism is proposed to further improve the spectral efficiency. Lastly,
various aspects of social bonding in a group of users are exploited to reduce
the delay occurred in the spectrum sharing process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
expected results of this project include novel algorithms, designs, and
technologies to enable the future deployment of commercial cognitive radio
networks and new emerging applications. The findings of this project will be
disseminated through journal and conference publications. The developed hardware
and software tools will be made available to the research community at large as
well. The project integrates research and education with the intent of training
undergraduate students. It also outreaches to high school students in the local
area.