* 1352753
* EAGER: Quantitative Environmental Risk Assessment of Energy Extraction from Deep Shale Formations
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2016
* George Pinder, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 09/30/2016
* USD 307,030.00

1352753 (Pinder). A credible quantitative assessment of the risk of
hydrofracking fluids used for gas production impacting the environment does not
exist. Rather, there are a few ?worst case scenario? evaluations obtained using
mathematical models. However, this approach provides no estimate of the
probability of a potable aquifer being impacted by hydrofracking fluids. To fill
this knowledge gap the PI proposes to create and apply, through a proof of
concept example, a new risk-assessment methodology that allows for the specific
calculation of the probability that potable water supplies above a selected area
of the Marcellus shale will be impacted by hydrofracking fluids. He will use a
fault tree, and to a lesser degree an event tree, in his analysis because the
system failure criterion is known and therefore of interest are the events that
could contribute to its occurrence. Through a formal risk assessment he will
provide a quantitative statement, for the proof of concept geological site
addressed, of the probability of an unacceptable impact of hydrofracking on
potable water supplies. The result will inform the debate regarding this
environmental risk and bring it to a more intellectually informed level.
Moreover, by examining those factors that impact the risk, such as geological
formation integrity, strategies can be formulated to minimize that risk. This
project will provide an objective, quantitative assessment of this environmental
risk that can form a basis for discussion. There will be disagreements about
whether one probability value or another is appropriate for some steps in the
fault tree analysis, but if the research community agree on the methodology,
significant progress will have been made. The PI can subsequently look at the
sensitivity of the selected probabilities on the risk, and this will provide one
possible basis to propose appropriate investments for gathering more complete
information as needed. Relative to broader impacts, the PI initiated a new
program at the University of Vermont (UVM) for minority recruitment in
engineering which has been very successful. This program is designed to attract
outstanding undergraduates from historically black high schools to UVM to
increase the ethnic diversity in engineering. Students selected for this program
spend one week on the UVM campus where lectures are provided on various aspects
of engineering. One broader impact goal of this project is to create and deliver
a stand-alone unit for the on-campus program on the role of engineering in the
debate on hydrofracking; one lecture will be dedicated to the science and
engineering of hydrofracking and the other to the analysis of the environmental
risk of this process. The students will be asked to provide an assessment of the
project. A form will be provided to each student to evaluate how beneficial the
lecture was. Additionally, the general public seeks to know the risk to potable
water supplies of hydrofracking. The calculations that will be made using this
approach will, for the first time, allow for an actual quantification of the
risk of hydrofracking fluids reaching potable aquifers. A non-technical lecture
will be designed to bring hydrofracking in general, and the risk concepts
developed by this project in particular, to college students that are non-
engineers.