* 1352431
* CAREER: Electron Acceptor Materials Based on Cyclopenta-fused Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2014,08/31/2020
* Kyle Plunkett, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 08/31/2020
* USD 650,000.00

In this CAREER Award funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and
Nanochemistry program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Kyle N. Plunkett of
Southern Illinois University is developing new electron accepting materials
based on cyclopenta-fused polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (CP-PAHs). The
research involves the development of general strategies to synthesize small-
molecules and/or polymers that incorporate CP-PAH subunits and the
characterization of their properties. The resulting polymers are being tested as
potential n-type materials in organic field effect transistors and organic
photovoltaics. A new educational program is addressing fears and anxiety in the
organic chemistry classroom through non-traditional interactions with students,
and an outreach program is allowing a teacher and his students from Herrin High
School to participate in this research project. The broader impacts of this work
include the potential societal benefits of new clean energy technologies and
economic impact through possible commercial applications. Furthermore, public
awareness demonstrations at a local farmers market are communicating the utility
of this research to the Southern Illinois community.

Electrically conducting carbon-based (organic) molecules hold enormous promise
for realizing highly efficient, affordable, and broadly available electronic and
optical devices. This project focuses on the development of new organic
molecules and materials that can efficiently stabilize a negative charge.
Realizing the targeted structures is not only a significant accomplishment in
the rational design of electronically conducting organic materials but also
contributes to solving important problems in energy conversion technology. The
project also provides opportunities to high school, undergraduate and graduate
students to perform chemical research and present their findings to colleagues
and the general public.