* 1352894
* Phylogenetic Principles of Brain Structure and Function: A Workshop at Janelia Farm, October 23-25, 2013
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2014
* Georg Striedter, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Asson-Batres
* 08/31/2014
* USD 49,999.00

Understanding how brains function to specify behavior, thoughts and memories of
an organism is a major challenge of the twenty first century. Brain initiatives
in the US and other countries tend to focus on the human brain, but
understanding how neural circuitry and activity control behavior in non-human
species may also yield important insights into brain function. Of course,
exploring the neural circuitry, activity patterns responsible for behavior in
many different animal species requires large amounts of work. Therefore, careful
planning for these efforts is required to maximize their impact on the field. To
facilitate this planning process, this workshop will convene a group of 40
experts in comparative neurobiology, brain research and allied disciplines to
debate critical questions, such as whether one should functionally map entire
brains or subsystems, whether to focus on closely related animal species or
distant relatives, how to integrate developmental with adult data, how to
identify equivalent brain components in seemingly very different brains across
species, and how to integrate information about brain structure with data on
brain function and behavior. Workshop participants will discuss these questions
in small groups and then report their answers to the entire group, which will
synthesize those answers into a coherent research agenda with short- and long-
term goals. An important outcome of this workshop will be a written report or
published journal article that will offer guidance to both researchers and
funding agencies. To maximize the workshop's impact, video recordings of key
sessions will be disseminated through a publicly accessible web site, which will
also host the report and some related documents. One quarter of all workshop
participants will be postdoctoral researchers. They are expected to make
important contributions and, simultaneously, gain valuable experience. A strong
effort will be made to include women and members of underrepresented groups to
broaden participation in this important area of neuroscience.