* 1352707
* Mechanisms of celestial navigation in Drosophila
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2014,09/30/2015
* Michael Dickinson, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Sridhar Raghavachari
* 09/30/2015
* USD 500,000.00

Like ancient mariners, many flying animals have the ability to navigate long
distances across the globe using cues from the earth and sky. One particularly
reliable feature of the sky that animals can use as a compass is the pattern by
which light from the sun is polarized as it scatters in the atmosphere. This
project will study how animals navigate using polarized skylight, by exploiting
state-of-the art genetic and physiological approaches that are available in the
common fruit fly, Drosophila melanogaster. The results will provide insight into
the general question of how circuits in the brain can make accurate calculations
that guide locomotion and other motor actions. Simplified, inexpensive versions
of the experimental devices used in the proposed studies will be developed for
use in education and outreach. The findings will also benefit ongoing efforts to
engineer small, energy-efficient autonomous air vehicles that can perform useful
missions for civilian and military applications without the need of GPS.

Using this experimentally powerful genetic model organism, it will be possible
to determine how specialized cells and circuits in the brain detect and process
polarized light and use it as a compass reference for navigation. The project
will make use of custom-built flight simulators, in which animals navigate under
an artificial sky that may be experimentally manipulated. The research will also
employ recently developed techniques of two-photon calcium imaging in freely
flying subjects for measuring the activity of cells within relevant neural
circuits of the brain as navigation tasks are being performed, a level of
analysis not previously achieved. Results from these studies will be
disseminated through publications in peer-reviewed journals, and through
presentations at scientific conferences.