* 1352130
* IOS: RUI: Suction feeding in small organisms - outpacing the size limit
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Ulrike Muller, California State University-Fresno Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 07/31/2019
* USD 298,848.00

Bladderwort, an aquatic carnivorous plant, is among the fastest known predators,
able to capture and ingest its prey in less than 1 millisecond. Bladderwort is
also among the smallest suction feeders, sucking planktonic prey into
millimeter-sized underwater traps. Bladderwort are interesting not just for
their speed and small size, but because their feeding mode is also the most
common found in fish, from larva to adult. Yet current understanding suggests
that suction feeding is less suitable for small organisms such as fish larvae -
small suction feeders experience water as viscous, which seriously limits
suction speed and increases the energetic costs of suction. Fish larvae are
known to have a low success rate at capturing prey and hence suffer high
mortality from starvation, which in turn is a main factor limiting recruitment
and adult fish population size.This study aims to identify the lower size limit
of suction feeding. This study will lead not just to a better understanding of
suction feeding in small organisms, but might also help to address the high
mortality of larval fish. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To study suction feeding in
small organisms, students will conduct experiments on bladderwort to discover
how suction feeders as small or even smaller than larval fish capture their
prey. Students will build mathematical and robotic models to explore what limits
capture success. The goal is to identify the morphological features and flow
mechanisms that allow small organisms to suction feed. By combining data sets on
bladderwort from Fresno State, students with data sets on larval fish and
tadpoles from collaborating universities, this study will then compare the
morphological and flow features of all three organisms to explore how far plants
and animals have developed converging solutions. The research within this study
will be conducted at a minority-serving institution. It will be integrated not
only into undergraduate and Master's thesis research projects, but also into
several undergraduate courses to enable roughly 2000 students per year to
conduct authentic research as part of their course work.