* 1352487
* CAREER:  Phase-separating Membrane Materials for Efficient and Specific Molecular Delivery to Cells
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2020
* Jeanne Stachowiak, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Steve Smith
* 05/31/2020
* USD 520,733.00

Non-technical:&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award by the Biomaterials program in the
Division of Materials Research to University of Texas at Austin is to develop
biomaterials for drug delivery system. From eliminating cancerous tumors to
repairing damaged tissues, medicine frequently relies on our ability to direct
multiple types of therapeutics to diseased cells, while sparing healthy cells
from exposure. This project designs biomaterials that are capable of precisely
recognizing diseased cells and efficiently delivering therapeutics to them. In
particular, the materials developed in this work undergo a dramatic
transformation from a non-interactive state to a highly interactive state when
they recognize specific markers on the surfaces of diseased cells. This strategy
will enable highly specific therapeutic delivery to diseased cells, increasing
the capability and efficiency of pharmaceutical therapy while decreasing side
effects. Furthermore, this work will create new opportunities to build a broad
range of simple, man-made materials and systems that mimic the ability of living
cells to sense and respond to changes in their environment. As part of the
broader impact activities, this project plans to increase minority student
participation in STEM, by inviting a diverse group of freshman students to
contribute original ideas for the design of minimal 'cell-like' systems. Several
students with promising ideas will be invited to try them out in the laboratory,
providing them with a unique opportunity to solve real-world problems by
combining creativity with critical thinking. By presenting the results of these
design projects to local high school science classes, students will build
confidence in their ability to succeed in STEM, while simultaneously inspiring
the next generation of students to consider STEM
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award by the
Biomaterials program in the Division of Materials Research to University of
Texas at Austin is to develop biomaterials for drug delivery system to transport
large macromolecular cargos such as genes and proteins efficiently and
specifically across the cell's plasma membrane. In this project, the
investigator will be mimicking a strategy used by cells to recognize one another
-coupling of ligand-receptor binding to membrane biomaterials that phase
separate when they recognize threshold levels of receptors on the surfaces of
target cells. This award is cofunded by the Biotechnology, Biochemical, and
Biomass Engineering program in the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering,
Environmental, and Transport Systems. This project will be addressing some of
the challenges facing the drug delivery system of large macromolecular cargos
efficiently and specifically to inside of the cell. This project will design and
synthesize membrane-based biomaterials using synthetic and phase separating
liposomes. Synthetic polysomes will be designed with careful tuning the density
of ternary lipid mixture ligands and fusion proteins on its surface. During
cell-cell recognition and fusion, ligand-receptor interactions alter the local
membrane composition, causing cellular membranes to undergo a highly localized
phase separation that dramatically concentrates ligands and receptors,
strengthening cell-cell contacts. Following these contacts, these membrane
biomaterials phase separate when they recognize threshold levels of receptors on
the surfaces of target cells, driving membrane fusion and delivery of molecular
cargos to the cellular cytoplasm. Furthermore, these materials provide new tools
for designing 'cell-like' systems that sense and respond to environmental
changes. Drawing on this toolkit, educational efforts will center on a new
course that will challenge freshman in non-STEM majors to come up with ideas for
'simple biological machines'. This unique project will invite a diverse group of
students to share in the excitement of scientific innovation while many are
still choosing their academic major and future career, broadening participation
in science on our campus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;