* 1352915
* EAGER: Identifying Barriers and Opportunities for Building SocioTechnical Capital
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2015
* Tawanna Dillahunt, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2015
* USD 165,942.00

This project advances a scientific understanding of how "socio-technical
capital" - ties that are created, maintained, or exploited through the use of
information and communication technologies - is developed and used across
different socioeconomic groups and populations. It is hypothesized that, like
other valuable resources, the benefits of computer-mediated opportunities for
building socio-technical capital are unequally distributed in society. For
example, it appears as if far more effort has gone into building social
networking tools and online markets for highly paid professionals (such as
LinkedIn) than for handymen or day laborers. And online labor markets that exist
for low-skill, low-commitment jobs (such as Amazon Mechanical Turk) do not
appear to offer a path toward building socio-technical capital that might lead
to more-stable, higher-wage jobs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to
understand the prospects of tailoring the technologies of social networking
tools and online labor markets to meet the needs of specific socio-economic
populations, such as populations in Detroit, Michigan, and other cities in
economic decline. The project will follow a human-centered approach of
contextual inquiry, conducting interviews and focus groups employing a range of
"design probes". These probes will examine technologies that currently support
the employment process (such as LinkedIn, CareerBuilder, ODesk, TaskRabbit, and
Angie's List) as a springboard to identify fundamental barriers to usage, and
also to generate ideas for features that might be especially useful. In later
sessions, design probes will include low-fidelity prototypes embodying features
generated in earlier sessions. The end result will be an articulation of the
special needs, barriers, and opportunities for using technology to help people
in economically vulnerable communities to build, maintain, and use social
capital to start moving up the economic ladder. The project will investigate how
information and communication technology can help to create and maintain of
social and economic bridges between individuals within specific economic
communities and people who can provide access to employment opportunities
outside of those communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The project
will have broad social impact by informing approaches to cultivating pathways to
upward mobility in communities hit hardest by economic decline. If the research
finds promising opportunities and surmountable barriers to the use of social
networking tools and online labor markets, it will inform the design of future
technologies and computer-mediated approaches to help these populations better
prosper. If the research finds limited opportunities or insurmountable barriers,
practitioners will know to look elsewhere to help vulnerable populations find
essential socio-technical capital.