* 1352963
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Origins of a Historical  Understanding of the Universe
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2014,02/28/2015
* Jennifer Pegg, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 02/28/2015
* USD 18,000.00

Project Overview&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports doctoral dissertation
research that explores the emergence of modern cosmology in the history of
nineteenth century astronomy. The goal of the co-PI (the doctoral dissertation
researcher) is to provide an account of how the universe was understood in
western intellectual networks and popular culture during that period. In
pursuing that goal, the co-PI will examine the ways in which the development of
cosmology was an interdisciplinary process that strongly influenced nineteenth-
century science and society. The development and social impact of this
transformation will be explored through research in manuscript archives in the
US, UK, and France.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The emergence of modern cosmology remains unexplored
and significantly under-researched. While addressing this gap, the co-PI will
illuminate the relationship between Romantic philosophy, public culture, and the
development of a historical understanding of the universe. He will also reveal
significant methodological interplay between nineteenth-century astronomy,
geology, and life sciences; for example, that they share similar problems and
develop similar epistemological solutions. The co-PI is well positioned to
engage in this research project. The PI (the co-PI's mentor) brings expertise in
the history of nineteenth-century life sciences. The co-PI's credentials include
a bachelor's degree in astronomy and astrophysics, and the doctoral dissertation
committee includes an astrophysicist and historians of
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition
to presenting the results of this research in journal articles and at
professional meetings, the co-PI hopes to develop the material into an
undergraduate course and to publish the research as a book, written in an
accessible style, for the general public and academics alike.