* 1352084
* CAREER: Quantum Field Theory in Diverse Dimensions, Supersymmetry, and Quantum Gravity
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2019
* Daniel Jafferis, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 04/30/2019
* USD 450,000.00

This research program is about quantum field theory, string theory and quantum
gravity, greatly strengthening the thoretical understanding of our physical
universe. One focus is on finding new general properties of strongly interacting
quantum field theories, new exact results in supersymmetric (relating bosonic
and fermionic elementary particles)quantum field theories, and new insights into
the maximally superconformal (2,0) theory in six dimensions. (Conformal
invariance is a generalization of scale invariance that only requires that the
angles between corresponding curves do not change.) Another is on discovering
new concrete examples and implications for non-perturbative particle
interactions of the gauge/gravity correspondence, and researching the emergence
of bulk locality in Anti-de Sitter/Conformal Field Theory (AdS/CFT) space.
Lastly, it will attempt to formulate the exact theory of quantum gravity in
other backgrounds, such as an expanding de Sitter universe. Major progress has
been made in discovering quantities that can be calculated exactly in
supersymmetric theories, and much remains to be explored. The keys are finding
new kinds of backgrounds in which supersymmetry is preserved, and then applying
the technique of localization to obtain an exact reduction of the path integral
to a finite dimensional integral. Such methods have given a window into the
structure of the (2,0) theory, which puts its further elucidation within
possible reach. The research involves the quantum entanglement entropies that
give a monotonic function of scale in quantum field theories and probe the
geometric structure of the emergent bulk in AdS/CFT. Nonlocal quantities such as
the sphere partition function and entanglement entropy control renormalization
group flows in odd dimensions implying that topological and propagating degrees
of freedom are combined in a novel way. One direction of this project is to find
examples of such behavior as well as new general constraints on renormalization
group flows.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit : One of the most
important open questions in theoretical quantum field theory is the
determination of their dynamics at strong coupling. The new exact results for
supersymmetric theories that are expected will lead to new insight into such
systems. It also gives new checks of AdS/CFT and other dualities. Further
explorations of quantities like the number of degrees of freedom that constrain
renormalization group flows in three dimensions will lead to interesting new
predictions for long distance behavior that may arise in condensed matter
systems. Entanglement entropies have been playing an intriguing role in this
context, and further exploring their general properties will lead to new
advances. The discovery of a calculable description of the maximally
superconformal theory in six dimensions will lead to new advances in
understanding of supersymmetric theories in lower dimensions. Finding the
general characterization, observables in arbitrary quantum states, of conformal
field theory (CFT) operators that correspond to bulk will have significant
implications for quantum gravity. It will be a step in understanding quantum
gravity in general backgrounds, and would shed light on the black hole
information paradox. New examples of AdS/CFT, and further understanding how the
dualities involving the simplest conformal field theories fit into string theory
will provide a window into the basic structure of the gauge/gravity
correspondence. Advances in the problem of understanding the theory of quantum
gravity in de Sitter space will shed light on this deep question relevant to our
own expanding universe.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts : This research
allows participation in the Boston area Theorynet program, delivering biannual
talks to high school classrooms. This is a good way to impart the enthusiasm for
discovering new fundamental laws of physics and the importance of scientific
curiosity in general. The theoretical research in strongly interacting quantum
field theories also has interdisciplinary connections to condensed matter
physics, as well as quantum gravity and high energy theory. The subject of
entanglement entropy makes a great special topics graduate course. It is
relevant to information theory, condensed matter physics, quantum field theory
and quantum gravity. Lastly, through this research, finding new exact results in
supersymmetric quantum field theories makes excellent manageable yet novel
research projects for graduate students and postdocs.