* 1352168
* CAREER: Sodium Spinor Condensates and Their Applications in Quantum Information Science
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2019
* Yingmei Liu, Oklahoma State University
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 06/30/2019
* USD 571,822.00

This CAREER award supports the study and application of massive entanglement and
spin-squeezing in quantum information science, in part by implementing the first
precise magnetometer with micron spatial resolution and femto-tesla field
sensitivity, as well as the development of an efficient scheme to detect and
characterize the entanglement. This work is targeted towards applying a sodium
spinor Bose-Einstein condensate (BEC) to generate massive entanglement in the
vicinity of Dicke states through adiabatic evolution across a quantum phase
transition, and to create spin-squeezing via collectively coupling atoms to a
light field with a quantum non-demolition measurement. The goals of this
research are both of fundamental interest for advancing our understanding of
quantum physics, and of technological significance. Its interdisciplinary
character envelops a broad spectrum of fields in physics and quantum information
theory. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Magnetometers, devices constructed to measure the
strength and spatial distribution of magnetic fields, are among the most
essential and versatile measurement tools available. They are used in a wide
variety of applications in all areas of science and industry, such as searching
for mineral resources, biomedical imaging for early detection and diagnostics,
and the exploration of environmental hazards. As with all measurement
techniques, the goals of a magnetometry measurement are to reach a sensitivity
that will allow the detection of smaller and smaller quantities and a resolution
that will allow pinpointing location to smaller and smaller sizes. The research
supported under this CAREER award will incorporate ultracold BECs into proven
optical measurement methods for atom magnetometry, which relies on atomic
signals for detection, that were previously based on techniques using hot atomic
vapors. The new cold atom approach will make it possible to develop
magnetometers with enhanced magnetic field sensitivity and spatial resolution.
Beyond the important research goals, this CAREER award will provide excellent
opportunities to introduce students to modern developments in quantum physics,
to involve them in research projects, and to prepare them for a career in
science and technology. Two new laboratory courses in physics will be developed
to better prepare the students for advanced research. Active efforts will be
undertaken to broaden the participation of under-represented groups in this
project by involving Native American students, women in physics, and potential
?first-generation? college students in research and educational activities. This
CAREER award will enhance the infrastructure for science education in the region
and encourage more talented students to pursue a career in science.