* 1352996
* Facility Support: The Arizona State University SIMS Laboratories
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2015,03/31/2019
* Peter Williams, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 03/31/2019
* USD 1,161,577.00

This award will renew support for the Arizona State University Secondary Ion
Mass Spectrometer (SIMS) Facility. Arizona State University has long been a
leader in SIMS research and development and is known for cross-disciplinary
collaborations; renewing this national facility allows this group to continue to
share their expertise with the broader Earth Science community. As part of the
annual public outreach efforts of the facility, a SIMS workshop is offered that
attracts ~15 visitors (dominantly students with women representing ~50% of
attendees) for an intense, 3-day immersion in the instrumentation with lectures
and hands-on practical experience in sample preparation and analysis. Of the
five senior personnel in this proposal, three are women, and two are early-
career scientists. The facility will synthesize and characterize relevant
chemical and isotopic standard materials, which will be disseminated to other
SIMS laboratories to enhance scientific understanding and
collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The facility will be used primarily for
light element geochemistry: analysis of H in nominally anhydrous minerals, Li
and B concentration and isotope measurements in a range of silicate minerals and
glass, hydrogen, deuterium, and carbon in silicate glasses, and F contents of
minerals and volcanic glass. However, many users have successfully obtained
analyses for heavier elements in trace abundance, such as Rb to Nb, REE, Hf, Th,
and U. Point analyses and depth-profiling studies will continue to be
emphasized. In adding the NanoSIMS to the facility, it will become the first
open facility offering access to NanoSIMS for the analyses of terrestrial
materials. Renewed funding will allow novel applications of NanoSIMS to
previously under-explored applications in the Earth Sciences, such as
characterizing zoning in trace elements and isotopic concentrations at the sub-
micron scale to elucidate the timing of geologic events. New techniques will be
developed based on their interaction with visitors as the facility scientists
strive to provide the chemical data needed to advance their science.