* 1352924
* EAGER: Enhancing Mobile Device Users' Levels of Situational Awareness through Tactile Feedback
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2015
* Ravi Kuber, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2015
* USD 96,001.00

In this project the PI will explore a novel approach to allowing individuals to
monitor their wider environment for potential obstacles and threats while
engaged in a task where the eyes are occupied. Specifically, he will focus on
mobile device users, who often perform visually-demanding tasks such as
composing and reading text messages while ambulatory, so that they may fail to
notice the presence of pedestrians, approaching vehicular traffic or other
objects which they are at risk of encountering. The PI's approach is to present
tactile feedback via a head-mounted interface in order to communicate the
presence of obstacles. While situational awareness technologies have been
designed to assist ambulatory users, alerts are often presented using visual or
auditory feedback. But if the user is engaged with a mobile task precious time
may be taken to identify the presence of graphical indicators, whereas auditory
alerts may be masked by environmental sounds to that the user misses vital cues.
The PI argues that tactile feedback offers considerable advantages when the
user's other senses are blocked or restricted, and there is the additional
benefit that tactile alerts can be presented discreetly without drawing
attention by others. To test these hypotheses, the PI will conduct a sequence of
studies to determine whether it is possible to design tactile cues that are
effective in supporting informed decisions by the user. Project outcomes will
include design of a head-mounted interface prototype using object-recognition
and sensor-based technologies to track obstacles in the user's vicinity, along
with innovative tactile interface design guidelines.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This research will advance our
understanding of issues relating to situational awareness among mobile device
users, and it will also contribute to the body of knowledge on presenting
tactile feedback to locations on the head (a field still in its infancy). The
development of a library of tactile icons to convey concepts such as the number
of obstacles, their location, and their proximity to the user, will have
application across diverse domains.