* 1352991
* SCIENCE OF LEARNING:  HOW CAN IT MAKE A DIFFERENCE?  Connecting Research to Policy and Practice in Education
* SBE,SMA
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Patricia Kuhl, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Kurt Thoroughman
* 09/30/2017
* USD 69,152.00

This proposal supports the participation of US researchers in an international
gathering of scientists, educational practitioners and policy makers. This award
supports a series of 3 international meetings of scientists that are jointly
sponsored by the U.S. National Science Foundation (NSF), the OECD Centre for
Educational Research and Innovation (CERI), and UNESCO (United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization). The set of planned
conferences include: (a) a Science of Learning Symposium hosted by Shanghai
Institute of Neuroscience that will highlight research from the US Science of
Learning Centers to explore areas of common or complementary interests with
other participants from Asia and Europe, (b) a day for informal interactive
activities among researchers and UNESCO representatives to discuss specific case
studies and their links to relevant research; (c) the OECD/UNESCO/NSF meeting
which is centered around discussion of advances in research about learning and
their implications for educational practice and policy; and (d) a Learning
Symposium hosted by East China Normal University (ECNU), Shanghai Normal
University, and the University of Hong Kong which will provide an even broader
presentation of work by Chinese researchers.

Learning is an important research topic with broad societal impacts. The
proposed activities promote advances in research and researchers' ability to
address educational challenges by: 1) bringing together an international group
of researchers to integrate their understanding of learning across disciplinary
boundaries; (2) to discuss and to disseminate scientific knowledge about
learning in ways that are accessible and meaningful to educational practitioners
and policy makers; and (3) promote collaborations among these disparate
communities that would lead to more effective integration of scientific findings
to future innovations in education and policy. The opportunity for sharing
ideas, successes and failures across countries will facilitate new thinking and
new partnerships to better address the challenges faced in education. Broader
impacts of the proposed activities include: (1) the development, adoption and
adaptation of effective models of learning and/or teaching that have proven
successful in various countries, (2) establishment of new international research
collaborations on learning that integrate knowledge across disciplinary
perspectives to advance methods and theory, (3) create a better understanding of
the value of learning research among policymakers, practitioners, and broader
audiences across countries, and (4) promote more stable partnerships to
facilitate reciprocal exchanges between research and practice.