* 1352144
* CAREER:   Thunderstorm Electrical Energy Structure, Dissipation, and Visualization
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2021
* Eric Bruning, Texas Tech University
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 04/30/2021
* USD 738,575.00

During this project, a two-year field campaign will measure the turbulent
character of thunderstorm flow with two high-resolution weather radars.
Comparison of the turbulence data to lightning flash rate and extent will test
the hypothesis that turbulent convective motions are the source of electrical
energy in storms. The rich textural character of thunderstorm data will be
conveyed to the public in an innovative art exhibit. Data and software will be
shared openly alongside traditional forms of
publication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit :&lt;br/&gt;After
thunderstorms become electrified, it is of basic interest to understand how
often lightning will occur and how extensive those lightning flashes will be.
Electrical potential energy stored in a storm's electric field is the result of
charge carried on precipitating and non-precipitating hydrometeors which are
themselves embedded in the storm's flow. In updraft regions of the storm, where
conditions are most favorable for electrification, the storm's flow is highly
turbulent, while downstream in anvils or in organized stratiform precipitation
regions, flow is smoother. Recent work with a Lightning Mapping Array (LMA) has
revealed that a lightning energy spectrum calculated from flash extent and flash
rate looks much like the energy spectrum that would be predicted by Kolmogorov's
classical turbulence theory for thunderstorm convective plumes. This project
will assess turbulent characteristics of thunderstorms using high-resolution
radars to quantitatively measure thunderstorm kinematics with weather radars.
The combination of radar and LMA data will provide a quantitative test of the
hypothesis that turbulence controls the distribution of sizes of charge regions,
which in turn controls flash rate and extent. By establishing quantitative links
between convective and electrical energy at the range of scales native to both
lightning and the convective character of the plume, this project is expected to
establish a fundamental new relationship between lightning and deep convection,
including a reliable statistical statement about the distribution of flash sizes
expected in thunderstorms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts
:&lt;br/&gt;Attending lightning are recreational, commercial and environmental
impacts, which makes lightning an area of interest to individuals and formal
decision support services provided by and between businesses and government
agencies. This project will help clarify the distribution of electrical
potential in storms, which controls to a large extent whether a flash strikes
ground. The field campaign and its results will be shared at local high schools
to stimulate interest in science and mathematics. During the project, artists
will produce an immersive gallery exhibit derived from field data. This exhibit
will include a survey component to test its effectiveness in presenting
lightning data with the rich texture as it actually exists in storms, countering
notions of lightning as singleton storm-wide discharges between simple
vertically stacked charge layers. Data collection, analysis, and publication of
results in a team setting will provide students with scholarly and
methodological training through a project that is rich in cross-disciplinary
theory and in practical skills tied to observational work. In an era of
increasing computational resources and emphasis on data management and digital
knowledge dissemination, this project will train students to adopt best
practices in reproducible scientific research using open, pan-disciplinary tools
enabled by dispersed, diverse internet-based communities.