* 1352212
* CAREER:   CLUMPMAP - Glacial Climate from Clumped Isotope Thermometry
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2020
* Aradhna Tripati, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Dena Smith
* 03/31/2020
* USD 848,081.00

As a scientist and educator, the PI's lifelong career goals are to (i) develop,
calibrate, and apply geochemical tools for use in paleoclimate, and better
understand the diagenetic processes that can overprint proxies, (ii) improve
public awareness of climate change, and the basic and social relevance of the
geosciences, (iii) enhance diversity in the geosciences, and (iv) establish and
maintain a leading paleoclimate program. This project seeks to further all of
these objectives with an innovative program that capitalizes on her experience
with one of the most exciting new tools in geology: "clumped" isotopes.
Specifically the project will (i) reconstruct terrestrial climates during the
Last Glacial Maximum (LGM; ~23,000-19,000 years ago), and (ii) work to educate,
recruit, and retain a diverse population to the
geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The project builds on the
PI's recent work and describes a program termed CLUMPMAP that uses sedimentary
archives to study LGM environmental change and promotes diversity in the
geosciences. Changes in temperature from the LGM to recent have been studied to
constrain how climate can respond to relative well-constrained forcings and as a
result geologic data from LGM deposits provides valuable benchmarks for climate
models. Over the next five years, the team will apply clumped isotope
thermometry to carbonates and study LGM paleoclimate. This powerful new
geothermometer uses the latest technology in gas-source mass spectrometry and is
based on measuring the temperature-dependent 'clumping of 13C and 18O bonds in
carbonate minerals. Temperature estimates also allow us to unravel the
longstanding Gordian knot of carbonate 18O/16O (d18O) signatures and isolate
fluid d18O. Reconstructions will be compared to climate model simulations in a
manner analogous to what the PI has previously done in published studies. Thus
results will provide insights into past climate variations and the processes
driving them, and will be used to test the accuracy of physical representations
of climate in models. Hypotheses from her recent work will be tested, focusing
on role of tropospheric structure and planetary-scale atmospheric dynamics in
determining the sensitivity of tropical and monsoonal climates to LGM forcings.
An important aspect of this work will be assessing the reliability of model
predictions of climate states that are substantially different than
present.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts include: 1. Supporting the PI in
expanding an integrated program of research and education, developing CLUMPMAP
into a community effort and resource; 2. furthering the training and
educational/career development of student and early career scientists from
under-represented groups, strengthening their qualifications to continue on in
higher education; 3. providing these groups with resources to conduct research
with a cutting-edge technique; 4. engaging and training early career scientists
and students in outreach; 5. enhancing the recruitment and retention of bright
people from diverse backgrounds through the provision of role models and
mentorship; 6. advancing knowledge and appreciation of geosciences amongst young
people, their parents, and their teachers; 7. establishing more role models that
can and should improve the present culture for under-represented groups in many
institutions; 8. furthering scientific understanding of deep-time (pre-Holocene)
Earth systems in areas that are relevant to improving climate models; 9.
developing new collaborations with international experts and promoting the
engagement and training of U.S. students and junior researchers in research,
through fieldwork and collaborative visits; 10. support of a NSF- and state-
funded analytical facility the PI has built; and 11. facilitating the
dissemination of this technique in the fields of sedimentary geology and
paleoclimate.