* 1352259
* CAREER: Theory and Methods for Simultaneous Variable Selection and Rank Reduction
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2019
* Yiyuan She, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 05/31/2019
* USD 400,000.00

The data explosion in all fields of science creates an urgent need for
methodologies for analyzing high dimensional multivariate data. The project
deepens and broadens existing sparsity and low rank statistical theories and
methods by making the following major scientific achievements: (a) an innovative
selectable reduced rank methodology through simultaneous variable selection and
projection, with guaranteed lower error rate than existing variable selection
and rank reduction rates in theory, which paves the way to new frontiers in high
dimensional statistics and information theory; (b) fast but simple-to-implement
algorithms that can deal with all popular penalty functions (possibly nonconvex)
in computation with guaranteed global convergence and local optimality, to
ensure the practicality of the proposed approaches in big data applications; (c)
a generic extension to non-Gaussian models capable of taking into account the
correlation between multivariate responses, with a universal algorithm design
based on manifold optimization; (d) a unified robustification scheme that can
both identify and accommodate gross outliers occurring frequently in real data,
to overcome the non-robustness of many conventional multivariate tools; (e)
general-purpose model selection methods serving variable selection and/or rank
reduction and achieving the finite-sample optimal prediction error rate with
theoretical guarantee. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The need to recover low-
dimensional signals from high dimensional multivariate noisy data permeates all
fields of science and engineering. Hence a project of this nature, designed to
develop transformative theory and methods for simultaneous variable selection
and rank reduction, finds applications in a wide range of disciplines and areas
such as machine learning, signal processing, and biostatistics, among others. By
cross-fertilizing ideas from statistics, mathematics, engineering, and computer
science, the integrated research and education help students develop critical
thinking through cross-disciplinary training, and assist students in becoming
life-long learners. The investigator uses the rich topics in this project to
inspire the learning and discovery interest of the public and students of all
ages. The educational plan consists of course development, student mentoring,
outreach, and recruiting underrepresented students.