* 1352391
* GRC-Physics Research &amp; Education: The complex intersection of Biology and Physics
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Mel Sabella, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 12/31/2014
* USD 48,400.00

This award supports participants to attend a "Gordon Conference" on the complex
intersection of Physics and Biology with respect to both research and education.
The fields of biological physics and the physics education of biology and other
biological-science students have experienced tremendous growth in recent years.
New findings, applications, and technologies in biological physics are having
far reaching consequences that affect and influence the science community, the
education of future scientists and biotechnology workers, and the general
population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Gordon Conferences have a long and rich
history of serving as the key meeting places for many important researchers in
science over the years. This conference brings together biologists,
biophysicists, physicists, physics teachers, physics education researchers,
textbook authors, biology education researchers and biology teachers, as well as
graduate and undergraduate student researchers in these fields, to discuss
connections between, and how students learn, these disciplines. The focus topic
is timely as textbooks are being written and new courses and laboratories are
being developed and implemented, not to mention the publication of Bio2010 and
its calls for a strong interdisciplinary curriculum that includes physical
science. Because of the large number of biology students taking introductory
physics, and the fact that most of these courses do not support the needs of
these students, there is a great potential for this conference to have deep
impact.