* 1352631
* CAREER:   Citizens, Conservation, and Climate: Research and Education for Climate Literacy in Managed Landscapes
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2014,08/31/2020
* Alejandro Flores, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 08/31/2020
* USD 494,187.00

Public lands provide important ecosystem services such provisioning and
regulation of water resources, climate regulation, and cultural and spiritual
inspiration. Climate change impacts the sustainability of these ecosystem
services and with the extensive public lands across the western U.S., a
management response to these impacts is necessary. Land management activities
(e.g., fire, grazing, selective tree thinning) influence ecosystem services by
directly impacting the structure and composition of terrestrial vegetation and
indirectly modifying water, energy, and nutrient cycling. Changes to surface
moisture and energy balance induce corresponding changes in the regional
hydroclimate. Quantitative understanding of these feedbacks and how they
propagate to ecosystem services like the provisioning of water is lacking. This
project will improve fundamental understanding of how land management practices
influence regional hydroclimate while facilitating improved modeling of coupled
hydroclimate-human systems. Specifically, existing models will be used to
develop an experimental framework that explicitly simulates: (1) the autonomous
behavior of land management agencies in response to perceptions of climate
change, and (2) how regional climate and hydrology respond to landscape
disturbance associated with these management activities. Information exchange
between models will occur in the form of changes to the organization and
structure of landscape vegetation as a result of management activities. This
modeling framework will be used to understand how management activities and
climate change jointly replumb the hydrologic system as the global climate
changes. The project focuses on quantifying changes in key variables like
precipitation, snow storage, soil moisture, and streamflow in a large water
supply basin in southwest Idaho, USA. This project will also improve climate
literacy in Idaho k-12 education. The research team will develop a pilot program
to train and equip educators to engage their students in the fabrication, use,
and exploration of miniaturized automated weather stations. Linking the program
to Common Core standards, participating k-12 teachers will be conferred
professional development credits by taking part in the training program and
engaged as ambassadors for the program. Travel expenses for several teachers of
underserved populations will be supported by the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate how land management
decisions (e.g., forest thinning, prescribed fire) will modify the ecological
and hydrological health of public lands in a changing climate. In particular, we
will determine how changes in vegetation associated with these and other
management activities impact regional precipitation and water supply. We will
accomplish this by linking simulation tools that incorporate human activities
and decision-making with physical processes to create scenarios of the future.
These scenarios will help land managers adapt their practices to a changing
climate to better protect water resources. This project will also develop a
program to help k-12 teachers educate students about climate. This program will
provide the training and materials to enable students to create meteorological
stations to monitor climate and bring those observations into the classroom.
Overall, this project will influence conservation of public lands, which
comprise approximately 50% of western states and provide critically important
natural resources, and promote improved climate literacy, increasing our
capacity to adapt to a changing climate.