* 1352270
* EAGER:  Research to Practice Cooperative Strategic Development Project
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2015
* Carrie Billy, American Indian Higher Education Consortium
* Standard Grant
* Jody Chase
* 07/31/2015
* USD 299,948.00

The American Indian Higher Education Consortium, in collaboration with the
Hispanic Association of Colleges and Universities, the National Association for
Equal Opportunity in Higher Education, and other stakeholders, will develop a
model for closing the gap between broadening participation research and
practice. The project design team will employ a strategic methodology, to
develop the framework for a broadening participation network of stakeholder
relationships, which should significantly increase the responsiveness of STEM
education programs and initiatives focusing on underrepresented populations to
relevant research findings, program evaluations, and recommendations derived
from them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;The project will
apply cooperative theories to the problem of the management of the connection
between national broadening participation (and possibly more broadly learning
sciences) research resources and broadening participation practice. The
successes of the project have established that simulations of real-world
resource allocation problems access the distributed problem-solving ability of
closely interacting groups sharing a common set of intentions, and that
involving a diverse set of actors encompassing a broad distribution of knowledge
and motivational systems is effective in solving resource allocation problems
within a complex resource ecosystem. The strategic planning project will test
the hypothesis that the Broadening Participation Research to Practice problem is
solvable within this framework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;The project will establish the applicability of strategic
methodology to a major national resource management issue, thereby providing
confirmation of a model for addressing a broad range of national issues,
including education reform, and other problems within the broader sphere of
social dynamics. The proposed work will provide a rich data set that will be
used to customize future strategic iterations within complex stakeholder
ecosystems involving a wide range of industries, communities, governments, and
organizations.