* 1352043
* CAREER:  Stability and Dynamics of Tissue Cell Assemblies in Yield Stress Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2019
* Thomas Angelini, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Randy Duran
* 05/31/2019
* USD 483,833.00

Non-technical Summary:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award by the
Biomaterials program in the Division of Materials Research to University of
Florida is to investigate biological systems from a perspective of condensed
matter physics by employing the modern materials and tools of engineering and
materials science. This award is cofunded by Biomechanics and Mechanobiology
program in the Division of Civil, Mechanical, and Manufacturing
Innovation(ENG/CMMI). To recruit and retain a diverse student population, the
educational objectives of this proposal are to diminish stereotypical views of
Mechanical Engineering discipline by systematically integrating soft matter
topics into undergraduate curriculum and extra-curricular activities. Persistent
exposure to interdisciplinary topics will be provided to all Mechanical
Engineering majors throughout their undergraduate careers in the form of
lectures, labs, career advising, and an extramural field courses in
collaboration with a marine research laboratory. The proposed education and
research activities are integrated; the materials in the proposed research will
be used in teaching, and the education strategy is expected to grow the pool of
potential students for research activities. The proposed education plan is to
shift the demographic makeup of a large, traditionally homogeneous field.
Education activities target underrepresented groups in STEM fields and proposes
to increase their participation in STEM related research in academia and
industry. The proposed research creates a new platform for 3D cell culture with
potential social benefits; the development of a new effective cellular
biomaterial may advance biomaterials research, biomedical research, biomedical
technology, and medicine. The most likely potential impacts would occur in wound
healing and tissue engineering technologies. In the treatment of acute wounds,
for example, biocompatible yield stress materials could be ideal wound healing
scaffolds. Analogous to 'bone putty', these materials can be extruded as a fluid
to completely fill a topographically complex wound, and solidifying very
quickly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
CAREER award by the Biomaterials program in the Division of Materials Research
to University of Florida is to investigate biological systems from a perspective
of condensed matter physics by employing the modern materials and tools of
engineering and materials science. This award is cofunded by Biomechanics and
Mechanobiology program in the Division of Civil, Mechanical, and Manufacturing
Innovation(ENG/CMMI). The proposed research objective is to leverage the basic
physics of instability, topology and symmetry to study tissue cell dynamics.
Cell assemblies will be 3D printed by the direct extrusion of structures into
volumes of yield stress material. Yield stress materials are solids when applied
stress is low; and they are fluids when stress is high. The combination of cells
and yield-stress materials provides unprecedented control of variables like
size, shape, symmetry, and topology in multicellular structures. The main focus
of this proposal is to study: (1) mechanical instabilities in simple structures
to classify and measure collective cell forces; and 2) the role of symmetry and
topology of complex multicellular structures in collective cell dynamics. The
proposed investigation of the yield-stress cellular biomaterial is significant
because it: (1) creates a superior platform for carrying out fundamental
investigations of 3D cell dynamics; (2) creates a new class of biomaterial never
before investigated; and (3) explores fundamental aspects of collective cell
dynamics that previously could not be done due to limitations of available
support materials. The proposed activities are founded on a new concept that
breaks away from the established paradigm in cellular biomaterials, potentially
advancing knowledge in the areas of basic tissue mechanics and physiology,
tissue culture methodology, and cellular biomaterial science and engineering.
The proposed educational efforts incorporate extensive data collection of the
students' perspective of Mechanical Engineering, demographic attrition rates,
and job placement. This data would provide new knowledge about the causes and
remedies of the historical lack of diversity in student population enrolled in
mechanical engineering courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;