* 1352542
* CAREER: Exploring the Recluse Spider's  Strong Nanometer-Thin Silk Ribbons
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2014,05/31/2020
* Hannes Schniepp, College of William and Mary
* Continuing Grant
* Randy Duran
* 05/31/2020
* USD 450,000.00

Non-technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award by the Biomaterials program
in the Division of Materials Research to College of William and Mary is to
investigate ribbon-like silk fiber of the brown recluse spider with respect to
its hierarchical structure, and mechanical and adhesive properties, as well as
its ability to form even stronger hybrid graphene-nanocomposite materials.
Spider silks have outstanding strength and toughness; at the same time, they are
naturally produced in a fully sustainable way, not using petroleum, large
amounts of energy, or any toxic materials. As natural materials, they are also
interesting for medical applications, such as implants. This combination of
properties makes silks highly interesting as high performance materials. In this
project, the investigator will study the silk of the brown recluse spider, which
has a unique shape. In contrast to the other silk fibers, the filaments of the
recluse are not cylindrical, but extremely flat and thin ribbons, resembling
miniaturized pieces of sticky tape - ten times narrower and one thousand times
thinner than a human hair. Previous studies by this researcher have shown that
these ribbons share the outstanding mechanical properties with the best spider
silks; at the same time, their unique shape gives rise to interesting new
behavior, such as enhanced adhesion, and it allows the application of powerful
analytical tools. Therefore, this project is expected to further our
understanding of silks and their microstructure in general, and will reveal some
of the unique properties of recluse silk in detail, such as their stickiness,
and strength. This knowledge is a direct precursor to exploiting this exciting
material for future engineering and biomedical applications. This project plans
to provide participation and learning experiences for students from high school
to graduate levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award by the Biomaterials program in
the Division of Materials Research to College of William and Mary is to
investigate ribbon-like silk fiber of the brown recluse spider with respect to
its hierarchical structure, and mechanical and adhesive properties, as well as
its ability to form even stronger hybrid graphene-nanocomposite materials.
Unlike many other synthetic or natural polymers, these silk fibers are
freestanding, 50 nm-thin and 5 Ã¬m-wide protein ribbons. Previous studies by this
researcher showed that the tensile performance rivals the strongest silks; at
the same time, their unique morphology gives rise to novel properties and allows
high-resolution structural characterization using atomic force microscopy. The
structure of the recluse ribbons is simpler than other silks; a thin silk film
with such outstanding strength is a novelty. Due to their thinness, these silk
ribbons bend easily, which allows them to maximize the contact area with
surfaces or objects they are in contact, enabling stronger van der Waals
adhesion. The stickiness may further be enhanced by the nano-papillae, globular
nanoscale surface features, and these features have not been observed in any
other silks. The recluse ribbons would thus serve as a model system to improve
our understanding of silks in general, and as a benchmark for biomedical silk
films. The educational plan of this project is to provide research experiences
to undergraduates from several disciplines; and special activities are planned
to reach out to high school students. The research will be featured in new
undergraduate and graduate classes making use of inverted learning techniques
and digital technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;