* 1353635
* SBIR Phase II:  Development of an Affordable and Versatile Spectral Induced Polarization (SIP) Borehole Tool
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2014,04/30/2018
* Frank Curatola, Ontash & Ermac Inc
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 04/30/2018
* USD 1,167,999.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will develop a
commercially viable and affordable frequency domain spectral induced
polarization (SIP) borehole logging instrument that collects data in fluid-
filled boreholes over a wide frequency range with high accuracy/resolution. The
SIP technique is a geophysical technology that offers unique information on the
physical, chemical and biogeochemical characteristics of Earth materials not
provided by existing geophysical logging tools. The opportunity exists to market
the tool to the oil, mining and environmental industries, as technical
constraints and economical limitations that previously prevented the technology
from being commercialized can now be overcome. The primary research objectives
are: [1] develop high-performance analog and digital signal processing hardware,
software, signal processing algorithms, drive, sense and focusing electrodes;
[2] engineer a watertight enclosure and integrate the components into a sonde
deployable in a borehole; [3] test instrument performance in laboratory
simulations and boreholes at field sites that represent a range of geological
conditions. Anticipated technical results include exhaustive evaluation of
instrumentation accuracy and spatial resolution by means of numerical and
physical modeling and assessment of the behavior of the sonde under a variety of
environments and configurations.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project lies with private
industries, government agencies and academia involved in resource exploration
(petroleum, mineral and water) and environmental assessment. Borehole deployment
of an SIP instrument will permit new information on the variation in the
physical, chemical and biogeochemical properties of the Earth to be obtained
from logging measurements. Enhanced scientific understanding in hydrogeology,
environmental, oil, gas and mineral exploration, carbon dioxide sequestration
and geotechnical fields will result from the rich information on variations in
Earth properties retrieved with the instrument. Potential societal impacts
relate to the contribution of the technology to: [1] improved resource
(petroleum, mineral and water) location and characterization; [2] enhanced long
term monitoring of environmental systems in a minimally invasive manner,
advancing the state of long term environmental stewardship; [3] improved
characterization of Earth formations required by civil engineering disciplines.
The availability of this instrument will have immediate and long-lasting
commercial impacts in the environmental characterization and remediation sector,
as well as in the petroleum, mineral and water exploration sector.