* 1353826
* Development of a Strategic Vision and Implementation Plan for the U.S. Antarctic Program
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2013,06/30/2016
* Laurie Geller, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Nature A. McGinn
* 06/30/2016
* USD 836,619.00

Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;The proposed activity will build on a National
Research Council (NRC) study completed in 2011 (Future Science Opportunities in
Antarctica and the Southern Ocean) as well as the Blue Ribbon report More and
Better Science in Antarctica through Increased Logistical Effectiveness (OSTP,
2012). The 2011 NRC study developed a strategic vision for NSF-supported
Antarctic research. This activity will build on this vision and use community-
based workshops to identify a prioritized suite of science questions that the
U.S. Antarctic Program (USAP) can use as a roadmap to guide the science support
infrastructure needed to support to advance high priority science in the
Antarctic. The proposed study will provide NSF with guidance on research
priorities, fundamental observations, and essential infrastructure for the
coming decade, aligned with reasonable expectations for the level of resources
likely to be available. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: &lt;br/&gt;NSF?s
investments in the USAP have the ability to advance high priority research
questions in fields spanning astrophysics and geospace sciences, biology,
ecology, geology and geophysics, glaciology, ocean and lower atmosphere,
integrated systems, and climate science. The proposed study will help ensure
that these investments are made as strategically and effectively as possible.
Ultimately, this research will benefit decision makers and society by providing
a sound foundation of scientific knowledge to help the importance of the
Antarctic as a driving force in earth systems.