* 1353454
* SBIR Phase II:  A Novel Method to Manufacture Ultra-Precise Diffraction Gratings for X-Ray Analysis and Imaging
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2014,09/30/2017
* Jonathan Manton, Inprentus, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 09/30/2017
* USD 1,380,292.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project will revolutionize the
manufacture of ultrahigh precision, x-ray diffraction gratings. Mechanically
ruled, x-ray gratings are used at synchrotron radiation and free-electron laser
facilities, where they define the wavelength of x-rays used for chemical
analysis and imaging studies in the fields of photovoltaics, electronic
materials, catalysis, structural biology, environmental science, and others,
serving a wide variety of industries and academic disciplines. This effort will
advance a new approach to fabricating such gratings that uses a pair of atomic
force microscopes (AFMs) operating in tandem - one for scribing and the other
for in situ imaging. This combination provides unprecedented control over
feature shape and positioning, and will allow scribing of features with nm-scale
precision over areas exceeding 400 square centimeters. If successful, the result
will be a new approach to fabricating holographic optics for use not only at
synchrotron and free-electron laser facilities, but for a variety of other
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of
this project stems from the fact that, between 2009 and 2011, a crisis occurred
in the x&amp;#8208;ray grating market. The only two world suppliers of
mechanically ruled gratings ceased to take orders, either because their
technology was obsolete or because of severe infrastructure problems. This
vanishing of world capacity has taken place when demand for x&amp;#8208;ray
gratings is at an all-time high and growing. Extensive market research via
direct communication with x-ray facilities has revealed a current need for 430
gratings worldwide, which at a sale price of $60,000 implies a global market
opportunity of approximately $26 million. If successful, it should be possible
to capture this market and bring this area of manufacturing back to the U.S.
Gratings aside, this project presents a new approach to creating holographic
optics that could enable new technologies based on the engineering of
customized, optical wave fronts. This approach can scribe curved lines, forming
arcs or ellipses, providing lateral focusing, or exhibiting topological defects
that create electromagnetic vortices having high angular momentum. These
features may find use in microscopy, extreme ultraviolet (EUV) lithography, or
the creation of masters for the mass market for optical grating replicas.