* 1353137
* Learning and Plasticity in Retro-Hippocampal Circuits
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2020
* David Bucci, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 07/31/2020
* USD 725,000.00

The mammalian hippocampus is essential for binding together individual objects
or events with the place and time in which they occur ('episodic memory'). An
essential part of this process is the binding together of stimuli that compose
the environment, or context. For example, a person recognizes his/her home in
part because various individual sensory stimuli have been linked together as a
"unit" that is identified collectively. These units of associated stimuli remain
labile and can be updated as circumstances change. Thus, contextual
learning/memory provides an organism with several adaptive advantages, including
the ability to recognize and predict where a biologically significant stimulus
may be located. Information regarding the physical and temporal context in which
the object/event occurs is provided to the hippocampus by a network of specific
cortical regions; yet, it is unknown how the components of this network
contribute to processing contextual information. This project will illuminate
the how the different regions that compose the where/when pathway contribute to
contextual learning/memory. Addressing these issues will lead to the development
of a new model of cortico-hippocampal function and provide essential information
regarding the basic organizing principles of the mammalian hippocampal memory
system.

Sophisticated behavioral methods will be combined with innovative
neurobiological techniques (recordings and designer receptor-based manipulations
of cell populations in awake, behaving animals) to determine how the
restrosplenial cortex (RSC) and the postrhinal cortex (POR) contribute to
contextual learning and memory. Other studies will determine how the RSC and the
POR interact at the synaptic level during learning. Carrying out the proposed
studies will also provide valuable research training and opportunities for
undergraduates at Dartmouth College, and use new initiatives to promote science
education and research training, particularly in groups that are typically
underrepresented in the sciences. At a community level, research findings will
also be used to expose the local community to basic research in learning and
memory through an outreach program developed in collaboration with a local
science museum.