* 1353724
* Regulation of Neural Circuitry by Cypin
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2017
* David Meaney, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Evan Balaban
* 06/30/2017
* USD 390,000.00

For proper neuron function, the neuron must have the correct number of input
dendrites, which look like branches on a tree. Very little is currently known
about how the pattern of these branches is determined or how these branches
change when a person learns. To make new dendrite branches, a cytoskeleton must
be produced, much like the skeleton in fingers. Dr. Firestein discovered a
protein called cypin that plays a critical role in making this cytoskeleton, and
hence dendrites. It is hypothesized that without cypin, neurons will not form
properly, and the brain will not function correctly. Using nerve cells in a
dish, undergraduate and graduate students will perform experiments to understand
the mechanism by which cypin acts to yield functioning neurons. By investigating
how cypin gives nerve cells their shape and how these nerve cells integrate into
simple circuits, this research will aid in our understanding of principles by
which circuits may be modified during events, such as learning. Dr. Firestein
and colleagues will include a diverse group of undergraduate and graduate
students and will establish an exchange program with University of Puerto Rico.
This proposal also encompasses activities to excite a younger generation of
students (K-12) about neuroscience by producing a video series "Teach Me
Neuroscience" and training K-12 teachers at the bench. It is Dr. Firestein's
hope to establish a program to bring neuroscience to the community in Puerto
Rico via seminars, workshops, and exchange programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The
specific goal of the current work is to evaluate how cypin and its binding
partner PSD-95 affect neural circuit dynamics. Experiments aim to determine the
mechanism by which cypin decreases synaptic PSD-95 using viral-mediated gene
expression in cell culture to alter cypin levels. The role of the proteasome in
cypin-mediated changes in PSD-95 will be assessed. It will also be determined
whether cypin and PSD-95 levels affect function and activity of neural circuits
in vitro. Dr. Firestein has a comprehensive set of tools available to manipulate
cypin functionality at the molecular level and will assess effects of altered
cypin levels on dendrite number, spine number, and size. Experiments will make
use of electrophysiology techniques to determine whether cypin affects neuronal
signaling. The proposed work uses interdisciplinary approaches -
molecular/cellular, biochemical, and electrophysiological - to understand how
morphological changes to neurons result in changes in synaptic function, making
a large advance from previous cell culture work and defining a mechanism by
which cypin acts to regulate dendritogenesis and determine effects on neural
circuitry.