* 1353340
* STTR Phase II:  SpiderRadio: Enabling Cognitive Dynamic Spectrum Access Wireless Communications
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2014,09/30/2016
* Vijay Kumar, Dynamic Spectrum Limited Liability Company
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 09/30/2016
* USD 749,290.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase II project targets a
practical dynamic spectrum management (DSM) architecture and a corresponding
suite of innovative multi-layer algorithms, development of a DSM enabled multi-
radio router and pilot trials for public safety communications. Dynamic spectrum
management and access are two important areas of interest to wireless
communications researchers, spectrum regulators, and international
standardization bodies. DSM plays several important roles, including: (a)
improving spectrum efficiency to alleviate the wireless spectrum crunch; (b)
providing prioritized, inter-operable communications for first responders during
emergencies; and (c) reducing cost for wireless access, and (d) improving the
reliability and security of wireless communications. In this project,
statistical estimation and decision algorithms are proposed for measurement
driven real-time spectrum management at the physical/medium access control
(PHY/MAC), network and application layers. Using agile software stack
implementation and hardware integration a completely working DSM system will be
demonstrated based on these ideas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project will be a better understanding of
DSM related applications, regulatory policies and technical challenges in real-
life mobile wireless networks. Impact on state-of-the-art technologies for
resilient and interoperable public safety communications, especially during
emergencies, is also expected. Findings from the pilot trials will contribute to
the body of knowledge in interference mitigation, spectrum sharing, mobile data
offloading and supporting reliable mobile multimedia applications. Taken
together, these markets constitute a multi-billion dollar opportunity for DSM
technologies.