* 1353156
* EAGER: Simultaneously Controlling Multi-Scale Material Structures Based on Fluid Layering With Self-Assembly and Eutectic Growth
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,02/29/2016
* Mark Stremler, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 02/29/2016
* USD 149,988.00

This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project is to develop
high performance bulk thermoelectric materials by manipulating their structures
at the meso-, micro-, and nano-scale. Achieving a broad range of length scales
in the structure of thermoelectric materials is expected to maximize phonon
scattering, which will in turn maximize the performance of thermoelectric
materials due to the depletion of phononic (or lattice) thermal conduction.
Here, the novel idea is to utilize continuum-level fluid mechanics (layering
technique) for designing meso/micro-scale structures while creating micro/nano-
scale structures with self-assembly and eutectic growth. Through meso-/micro-
scale layering and structuring with liquid phase precursors, the size and
distribution of nanoparticle inoculants will be manipulated to control the
heterogeneous nucleation and solid phase formation at micro-/nano-scales. This
new out-of-the-box but high-risk approach integrating fluid mechanics into
materials science/engineering will provide new insight and research
direction.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Thermoelectric energy conversion systems offer
an excellent strategy for improving sustainability of our electric power base by
scavenging waste heat from various power consuming systems including automobiles
and power plants or for providing effective compact cooling for computers and
electronic devices with robustness and silence. The research will provide
rational and novel methodologies of improving their efficiency by modifying
material structures. In addition, research outcomes include crucial knowledge
for fully utilizing nanoparticles by solving one of the major hurdles,
nanoparticle aggregation. This new approach combining continuum level fluid
mechanics and controlling structures down to nanoscale related to material
science/engineering may bring subsequent research related to rational design of
multi-scale structured materials. The research also include training of Ph.D
students with experience in interdisciplinary collaborative research; broadening
participation of undergraduate students belonging to underrepresented groups
through the NSF-funded Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation at Texas
A&amp;M University and the Center for Enhancement of Engineering Diversity at
Virgina Tech; and integrating nanoscale thermal transport phenomena into
undergraduate/graduate courses.