* 1353070
* ARTS: Collaborative Research: Understanding the relationships and radiation of Old World Croton (Euphorbiaceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Paul Berry, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 08/31/2019
* USD 276,022.00

This study will provide a better understanding of the species diversity and
evolutionary relationships within one of the world's largest flowering plant
genera, Croton (Euphorbiaceae). Many Croton species are important ecologically,
used medicinally, or considered endangered, but the large number of species and
worldwide distribution has hampered previous efforts to fully understand the
systematics of the genus. This study by researchers at the University of Puerto
Rico Mayaguez and the University of Michigan builds on a previous project
investigating Croton species in North, Central and South America and now focuses
on producing a comprehensive phylogeny and classification system for the
estimated 450 Croton species native to Asia, Africa and Madagascar.
Undergraduate researchers and graduate students, including members of under-
represented groups, will be involved in all aspects of the study including plant
biology workshops for high school teachers within Puerto Rico to highlight the
importance of plants to a large and broad audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
study will investigate the systematics of the estimated 450 Croton species in
Africa, Asia and Madagascar using a combination of field, herbarium and
molecular techniques. Phylogenetic relationships will be reconstructed using a
combination of at least 10 nuclear, chloroplast and mitochondrial markers to
provide necessary the evolutionary framework to investigate the tempo and mode
of biogeographical evolution within Croton, with an emphasis on the colonization
and dispersal throughout the Old World. Descriptions, images and additional
information for different Croton species, including a comprehensive monograph of
the genus, will be disseminated freely online through the Encyclopedia of Life
and Catalogue of the Vascular Plants of Madagascar webpages. This study will
also produce a DNA barcode database for the Malagasy species to help identify
these species.