* 1353336
* SBIR Phase II:  Innovations in Nanowire Manufacturing: Large Scale Synthesis of Inorganic Semiconducting Nanowires and Application to Printed Photosensors
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2014,07/31/2016
* Louise Sinks, US Nano LLC
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 07/31/2016
* USD 747,743.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project aims to further develop
large-scale manufacturing methods for inorganic semiconductor nanowires. These
nanowires will be used to make printed photosensors, a superior alternative to
conventional light sensing devices. Traditional synthetic methods for nanowires
are extremely expensive, and only produce extremely small quantities of
nanowires. The proposed technology seeks to produce a cost-effective method to
make nanowires at large scale. Without a reduction in cost, and an increase in
production volumes, commercial products based on nanowires are still not viable.
By developing effective printing techniques, this program will significantly
drive down the cost to produce printed photosensors. A specific demonstration
objective is to use these nanowires to make a printed photosensing device with
performance characteristics similar to conventional devices.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will be to provide
innovative and superior technologies for printed and flexible electronics
compared to what is available today. Flexible electronics technology is expected
to be increasingly applied in a variety of applications including energy
(photovoltaics, batteries, and lighting), consumer devices (displays, sensors,
actuators), healthcare (sensors), communication: radio frequency identification
(RFID), and defense (sensors, photovoltaics, displays). The area of flexible
electronics is a rapidly growing global market. Appropriate novel technologies
must be developed to replicate current solid state devices; these include
printable semiconductors, insulators, and conductors. The manufacturing
technology being developed in this project will facilitate the use of inorganic
semiconducting nanowires for printed photo sensors with both flexible and
transparent characteristics. The optical sensors market is a significant end use
application for the technology being developed in this program.