* 1353109
* SBIR Phase II:  Advanced Development of Novel Maize and Sorghum Bioenergy Plants Using Lignolink Technology
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2017
* Colleen McMichael, Lignolink
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 03/31/2017
* USD 941,999.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will further
demonstrate the potential of LignoLink's technology for improving cellulosic
biomass crops as feedstocks for the bioenergy and animal feed industries.
Lignocellulosic biomass is a major renewable feedstock. A critical step in the
conversion of lignocellulosic biomass to energy is enzymatic digestion of the
biomass to sugars. Lignin provides plant strength and is the primary and most
challenging barrier to accessing and extracting cellulose for conversion to
sugars. The novel Lignolink approach helps overcome this significant challenge
by inserting proteins into the lignin structure of biomass to greatly enhance
the digestibility of lignocellulose. The Lignolink modification of the lignin
structure provides the desired benefits without hurting the strength or the
health of the plant during normal growth. This is a key breakthrough. Small
scale trials in the NSF Phase I SBIR resulted in increases of over 50% in yields
of fermentable sugars from poplar wood and corn-stover biomass, without
affecting plant fitness. In Phase II research the scope of the trials will be
expanded in maize and poplar, both in the number and type of cell wall proteins
being tested and in the scale of the trials with the best performing lines. This
will demonstrate the general applicability of the technology in both annual
cereal crops and in perennial woody biomass sources, which represent the full
spectrum of cellulosic biomass feedstocks.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project extends from bioenergy
to agriculture and biomaterials industries. Biobased products are an attractive
green and sustainable long-term alternative to petroleum based products.
Lignolink's technology, has the potential to make cellulosic biofuels more
commercially viable and more environmentally friendly by permitting the use of
milder pretreatment conditions leading to greater product yields and efficiency.
Pretreatment is the largest single cost in biofuels production, and can be a
significant limiting factor in economic viability. Increases in yields of sugar
from biomass of 50% or more through facilitating biomass treatability itself
holds great potential to improve commercial viability of the use of cellulosic
biomass for energy, specialty chemicals and biomaterials and thus should
facilitate development of economically viable commercial production technology.
Lignolink's technology could similarly improve biomass for use as feed for
livestock, by improving breakdown during digestion in animals. This could
increase efficiency of nutrient extraction, thereby reducing the necessary land
base and environmental impact of animal agriculture.