* 1353890
* IDBR: Type A: Development of a Polymer-Probe-Based Scanning Probe Microscope for Noninvasive, High-Speed, Broadband Investigation of Live Mammalian Cell
* BIO,DBI
* 05/15/2014,04/30/2019
* Qingze Zou, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 04/30/2019
* USD 648,557.00

This award to Rutgers University is being jointly made by two Programs- (1)
Instrument Development for Biological Research, in the Division of Biological
Infrastructure (Biological Sciences Directorate), and (2) Biophotonics, in the
Division of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental and Transport Systems
(Engineering Directorate).&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Scanning probe microscopy (SPM)
is a technique that creates images of surfaces using a physical probe that scans
the specimen. It provides researchers with unique capabilities of imaging,
measuring, and manipulating single live cells and sub-cellular biological
specimen on the same platform, with nanoscale spatial and force resolutions. The
proposed research aims to develop a scanning probe microscope that overcomes
limitations of commercially available devices that have "stiff" probes which are
detrimental to creating 3D images of live biological specimens. The research
outcomes of this IDBR award will be disseminated to the scientific community
through (1) patent disclosure and licenses, (2) close collaboration with leading
SPM companies, and (3) presentations in major cell biology, experimental
biology, and biophysics conferences. The educational activities of the project
include (1) Fostering multidisciplinary training by developing research based
content for the curriculum in biology and engineering courses, (2) Recruitment
and retention of under-represented students at the graduate and undergarduate
level in the fields of biology and engineering, and (3) Outreach activities for
middle- and high- school girls through open lab tours by leveraging the well-
established programs at Rutgers (Rutgers Society for Women
Engineers).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Silicon-based cantilever probes universally
used on all commercially available are too stiff and harsh to avoid
deforming/damaging live biological surfaces (e.g., cell membrane), particularly
for mammalian cells of large volume and soft and corrugated membrane. Moreover,
both the contact-mode imaging protocol, currently the most effective mode for
imaging single live cells in liquid, and the nanomechanical measurement protocol
of open-loop nature, are not only prone to liquid-related disturbances and
damage to the cell membrane, but also rather slow and narrow banded in imaging
and measuring the nanomechanical properties of live cells. The project aims to
overcome these limits through the development and integration of soft polymer-
based cantilever probes, an adaptive imaging protocol of minimal deformation,
and a control-based nanomechanical measurement protocol. The polymer-based
cantilever will be designed and fabricated with contact stiffness and other
mechanical properties tailored to SPM imaging and force interaction on mammalian
cells. The imaging protocol of minimal-deformation will be developed based on an
accurate quantification of the scanning-induced membrane deformation in real-
time, to adaptively adjust both the scanning speed and the normal force to
minimize membrane deformation and maximize the overall imaging efficacy. Then
the control-based nanomechanical protocol is developed to completely remove the
cantilever acceleration effect and substantially reduce the hydrodynamic force
effect on the indentation measurement of live cells. The developed instrument
will be evaluated and for its ability to quantify the viscoelasticity
oscillation of cytoskeleton in real-time, and to quantify and correlate the
morphological and mechanical evolutions of live cells during the cell division
process.