* 1353110
* LTREB RENEWAL: Fitness consequences of pleiotropic androgen effects in free-living mammals
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2020
* Kay Holekamp, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 03/31/2020
* USD 450,000.00

Current understanding of the long-term effects of prenatal hormone exposure on
offspring fitness in natural populations is extremely limited, particularly in
viviparous species. The proposed research investigates the fitness consequences
of prenatal androgen exposure in a long-lived mammalian carnivore, the spotted
hyena. Wild hyenas are studied in Kenya to document correlates and consequences
of naturally-occurring variation in early androgen exposure. Cubs born to
mothers with known concentrations of androgens during pregnancy are followed
into adulthood to test a hypothesis suggesting that androgen-induced variation
in cub behavior and morphology is associated with variation in fitness. Two
other competing hypotheses are also evaluated, each suggesting different extents
to which opposing hormone effects might constrain adaptive evolution. This work
will permit uniquely integrated study in long-lived mammals of the development
of hormonally-induced traits, from their induction in the womb to their
consequences in natural populations. It will be important for understanding more
broadly the role of prenatal androgen exposure in the generation of variation in
behavior and morphology, and the role played by androgens in the evolution of
mammalian life histories. This research crosses disciplinary boundaries and
offers unique and highly valuable international training opportunities for
American students. The work also trains Kenyan students, and supports Masai
students in local elementary schools near the study site. In addition, project
personnel work closely with the public media in the USA and abroad, maintain an
educational website, and give many lectures each year to lay audiences. Finally,
via a web portal this research makes available to other researchers and the
general public core data tables in a database that documents hyena behavior,
demography, and physiology at the study site since 1988. This project is jointly
supported by the Animal Behavior Program and International Science and
Engineering.