* 1353252
* ARTS: Revising Ceraphronoidea (Hymenoptera), a possible link between sawflies and apocritan wasps
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Istvan Miko, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 07/31/2019
* USD 700,000.00

Ceraphronoidea are small, under-studied parasitoid wasps whose larvae feed on
and eventually kill other insects. Many species of Ceraphronoidea are important
in biological pest control programs in agricultural systems. Ceraphronoidea also
appear to be the missing link that is critical for our understanding of the
evolution of Hymenoptera, a lineage of insects represented by more than a
million species (10% of all organisms). This project will result in broadly
accessible resources that lift barriers to future research on these insects,
including: a phylogeny based on molecular and anatomical data, a revised higher-
level classification, images of specimens, data for tens of thousands of
specimens, species-level monographs for agriculturally-relevant groups, and
robust tools that use molecular and anatomical data for identification of
species. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will also test a novel approach for
describing species. This new method increases the openness and accessibility of
biodiversity data and allows one to do analyses of color, texture, shape, and
other phenotypes in order to look for ecological patterns and to assist in
diagnosing species. The approach is broadly applicable and stands to connect
data from taxonomic treatments of any organism, a first for taxonomy. A workshop
in contemporary morphology methods will facilitate training and dissemination of
this new approach. Two graduate students will be trained as integrative
systematists and experts of Ceraphronoidea, the first in over a decade.