* 1353155
* EAGER: Image and Video Forensics: Detecting Image Manipulation by Content Analysis
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2015
* James O'Brien, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 09/30/2015
* USD 192,706.00

The advent of sophisticated photo editing software has made it increasingly
easier to manipulate digital images. Often visual inspection cannot definitively
distinguish the resulting forgeries from authentic photographs. In response,
forensic techniques have emerged to detect geometric or statistical
inconsistencies that result from specific forms of photo manipulation. The PI
aspires to develop new forensic methods based on geometric content analysis,
which focus on finding inconsistencies in the geometric relationships among
objects depicted in a photograph. The geometric relationships in a 2D image
correspond to the projection of the relations that exist in the 3D scene; if a
scene is known to contain a given relationship but the projected relation does
not hold in the photograph, then one may conclude that the photograph is not a
true projective image of the scene. With this in mind, the PI's goal in this
exploratory project is to build a set of testable constraints that must be
satisfied in real images, so that an unsatisfied constraint constitutes
definitive, objective evidence of image manipulation. Fundamental challenges of
this work include: developing tools for analysis from incomplete lighting
information, building testable models of skin reflectance, accounting for
structured uncertainty in feature comparison, and establishing method guidelines
for forensic image analysis.

Broader Impacts: This project will create tools for objectively detecting image
manipulation, which will help reporters, law enforcement, scientists, and others
differentiate between legitimate photographs and forged images. The products of
this research will be communicated via academic publications and online source
code. Collaborations with industrial partners will allow the research to have
practical impact as well.