* 1353120
* EAGER: 3D Event Reconstruction from Social Cameras
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2015
* Yaser Sheikh, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 08/31/2015
* USD 216,000.00

This EAGER project explores the use of social cameras to reconstruct and
understand social activities in the wild. Social cameras are an emerging
phenomenon, producing video captures of social activity from the point of view
of members of the social group itself. They are proliferating at an
unprecedented rate, as smartphones, camcorders, and recently wearable cameras,
become broadly adopted around the world. Users naturally direct social cameras
at areas of activity they consider significant, by turning their heads towards
them (with wearable cameras) or by pointing their smartphone cameras at them.
The core scientific contribution of this work is the joint analysis of both the
3D motion of social cameras (that encodes group attention) and the 3D motion in
the scene (that encodes social activity) towards understanding the social
interactions in a scene. A number of internal models (such as maximizing
rigidity or minimizing effort) for event reconstruction are being investigated
to address the ill-posed inverse problems involved.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research is establishing a new area of visual analysis by providing the
requisite framework for social activity understanding in 3D rather than in 2D.
The ability to analyze social videos in 3D space and time provides useful tools
for almost any activity that involves social groups working together, such as
citizen journalism, search-and-rescue team coordination, or collaborative
assembly teams. The project is integrated with education through teaching and
student training, and outreaches industry through collaborations.