* 1353630
* SBIR Phase II:  Low-complexity, High-throughput Wireless Networking
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2014,10/31/2016
* Hongyi Fu, Ratrix Technologies, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 10/31/2016
* USD 760,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project uses enhanced
MIMO (multiple-input, multiple-output) technology to boost capacity, coverage,
and enhance link robustness in wireless communications without using additional
spectrum. This is accomplished by transmitting independent data streams all at
the same frequency but on different antennas. MIMO technologies have been widely
adopted and have been incorporated into the 802.11n and 802.11ac WiFi, WiMax,
and the LTE-A cellular standards. However, for MIMO systems, the computational
complexity required to detect data symbols increases dramatically as the system
size (number of antennas) and data constellation size increases. Thus, MIMO
symbol detection has become a critical step for wireless communication systems.
Lattice-reduction (LR)-aided MIMO equalization has shown great potential to
reduce complexity and improve the performance. This research develops and
transitions advanced LR-aided equalization technology to real-time, hardware
implementations that meet the stringent requirements of next generation wireless
communication systems. These advanced LR-aided equalization techniques can reach
near-optimal performance (an additional 5-20 dB of signal-to-noise-ratio gain
relative to common equalizers currently used in industry). This project will
result in the creation of a commercial-grade hardware implementation capable of
realizing these gains in existing systems at only a slight increase in cost.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this project
extends to nearly all high-speed wireless data communications including WiFi,
cellular, and backhaul/infrastructure. The advanced LR technology can be
implemented in MIMO receivers to improve range, power, and spectral efficiency
without requiring changes to existing standards or infrastructure. Furthermore,
the advanced LR technology also enables the development of future systems with
higher-order MIMO for higher data rates and better reliability. This project
will develop and commercialize integrated circuit designs that directly address
the problem of spectrum crunch being experienced by wireless network providers
seeking to supply ever increasing data rates to meet customers? demands. This
project will also establish a conduit for commercialization of further advances
in communications and enhance the research partnership between the investigators
and the researchers in the wireless communication industry facilitating
application of scientific discoveries to the application domains.