* 1353553
* IDBR: TYPE A: Large-scale CMOS electrochemical imagers for the study of metabolites in multcellular films
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2020
* Kenneth Shepard, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 05/31/2020
* USD 800,000.00

An award is made to Columbia University to develop an electrochemical imager
chip (EIC) whose purpose it is to study redox-active molecules in microbial
biofilms. The EIC platform will have broad significance in understanding biofilm
formation and may be used to interfere with biofilm development. In natural,
industrial, and clinical settings, the redox transformations caused by microbes
in biofilms often determine the overall functionality of an ecosystem and its
environmental impact. Examples include sulfur compound transformations catalyzed
by bacteria in salt marshes, microbially induced corrosion of oil pipelines, and
the fermentative metabolisms of communities in the digestive tract. Furthermore,
biofilm formation is a critical step in the establishment of many different
types of infections and one that enhances antibiotic resistance, exacerbating
the challenge of treating such infections. This research will also support
education and outreach efforts by incorporating this instrument into a new
course on bacterial physiology and biofilm formation, sponsorship of summer
research by undergraduates, and a K-12 outreach program.

The most complex engineered systems to-date are integrated circuits (IC)
exploiting silicon complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor (CMOS) technology,
which has spawned a global technology revolution in computing and communications
applications. In this project, we will use CMOS IC technology to create a new
type of instrument capable of high spatial- and temporal-resolution
electrochemical imaging of planar multicellular structures that are placed in
contact with the chip. In particular, we will study (1) phenazines, a class of
redox-active antibiotics produced by Pseudomonas aeruginosa biofilms, which vary
in structure and chemical properties and have individualized, drastic effects on
community morphogenesis; and (2) nitric oxide (NO), an intermediate in P.
aeruginosa denitrification, a metabolic process that also affects colony
morphogenesis when nitrate is made available in the environment. NO has been
implicated in multicellular behavior and development in diverse organisms.

This award is being made jointly by two Programs- (1) Instrument Development for
Biological Research, in the Division of Biological Infrastructure (Biological
Sciences Directorate), and (2) the Biotechnology, Biochemical, and Biomass
Engineering Program, Division of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental and
Transport Systems (Engineeing Directorate).