* 1353296
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Testing a conceptually-driven framework to predict variability in the ecosystem consequences of plant invasion across heterogeneous landscapes
* BIO,DEB
* 04/15/2014,03/31/2018
* Richard Phillips, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 03/31/2018
* USD 340,002.00

Invasive species have highly variable impacts on natural services, such as
carbon storage and nutrient retention, that make them very difficult problems
for land managers to address. This project examines the impacts of one of the
most widespread invasive plant species in the eastern United States, Japanese
stiltgrass, on how forests use carbon and nitrogen, and will develop a more
general framework with which to explain how and why impacts of invasives differ
so much among different forests. The research will be conducted at three
locations in Indiana, North Carolina and Georgia so that soil and climate
effects can be separated, and a combination of observational measurements,
controlled experiments in labs and greenhouses, and experiments in the field
will be used. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research addresses important questions
about how individual plants, especially invasive species, affect how forests use
and cycle carbon and nitrogen. The investigators will also develop a general
framework for predicting the impacts of invasives more broadly that will enable
predictions of when and where biological invasions will have the greatest
effects. As part of this project, the scientists will work with high schools to
conduct training programs for teachers in Indiana and Florida that will include
the development of new curricula and activities. The project will also train
several undergraduate students each summer of the project, will provide an
opportunity for a new PhD and Masters students, and will train a post-doctoral
associate as well. The results of the project will be made available to land
managers, other scientists, and to the general public through a web site, public
presentations, and publications. Stiltgrass is one of the most common invasive
plants in the forests of eastern North America, so that helping land managers to
more efficiently target its removal and restoration efforts will have lasting
benefits for conservation and forest restoration projects in the future.