* 1353921
* Collaborative Research: Constraining the Formation and Evolution of the Proterozoic Orogenic Belt of the SW USA Based on Geochronology of Garnet and Accessory Minerals
* GEO,EAR
* 08/19/2013,01/31/2015
* Christopher Andronicos, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 01/31/2015
* USD 74,716.00

Understanding the formation of the continental crust is key to unraveling earth
history and determining the distribution of mineral and material resources
within the earth. The continental crust of the southern Rocky Mountain region of
the southwestern United States was formed between 1.8 billion and 1.6 billion
years ago. The formation of this crust resulted in one of the largest additions
of rock material to the North American continent, and produced a large mountain
belt similar in scale to the modern Himalaya. Existing age determinations of
rocks using radiogenic isotopes have not uniquely determined the time of
mountain building and crustal formation. These researchers will use recently
developed techniques to determine the age of the mineral garnet, which is an
important rock-forming mineral that is diagnostic of metamorphic conditions
during mountain building. Determining the ages of garnet therefore provides the
opportunity to better understand the timing of mountain building, and therefore
processes of crustal formation in the southern Rocky Mountains.

These scientists will attempt to determine the timing of amphibolite facies
metamorphism in southern Colorado and northern New Mexico by directly dating
garnets by the Lu/Hf and Sm/Nd methods. The ages should provide robust
constraints on the timing of garnet growth and therefore the timing of
metamorphism because much of the orogenic belt experienced peak metamorphic
conditions between 500 and 650 degrees Celcius; this is well below the closure
temperature for the Lu/Hf system in garnet. In regions where temperatures
exceeded 600 degrees Celcius, the difference between the Lu/Hf and Sm/Nd ages
may indicate the duration of the high temperature metamorphic event. For key
samples, we will also date accessory phases using the U/Pb isotopic system,
including monazite, xenotime, and zircon. The dating will be tied to detailed
studies of porphyroblast matrix relationships in order to directly link
deformation to metamorphism. A variety of geothermobarometers will be combined
with isochemical phase diagrams, petrogenetic grids, and metamorphic textures to
determine the burial and exhumation histories of the dated samples. These data
are essential to fully understand the tectonic and geodynamic evolution that led
to the formation of the southwestern portion of the North American continent.