* 1353870
* IDBR: TYPE B: High temperature MEMS flow controller for MEMS enabled chopper-modulated gas chromatography - electroantennography (MEMS- GC-EAG) and other GC applications
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Thomas Baker, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 07/31/2017
* USD 443,257.00

An award is made to the Pennsylvania State University to develop a
microfabricated high-temperature flow control device for gas chromatography (GC)
applications that will benefit agriculture and forestry to better target
invasive species and pests.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The device will enable a technique named chopper-modulated
electroantennograph (EAG), which uses GC to separate volatile odorants, and
insect antennae as detectors to identify specific compounds that are of
importance to, and able to be sensed by the insect. As a result of millions of
years of evolution, insect antennae are capable of detecting certain chemicals
more sensitively and specifically than artificial chemical sensors. The chopper-
modulated GC-EAG method will use the proposed flow control device to regulate
gas flow in GC and improve the signal-to-noise ratio of the EAG, with a
resulting several orders of magnitude improvement in detection sensitivity for
behaviorally important volatile chemicals. The use of the proposed device in
other GC applications can potentially contribute to the general chemical sensing
community and benefit the society with more sensitive analysis for environmental
monitoring, food safety, disease diagnostics and etc. The education plan
includes student training and curriculum development. The instrument will also
be integrated into various outreach activities including the annual PSU "Great
Insect Fair", at which attendance routinely surpasses 8,000 people
annually.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of
the research is to develop a high temperature microelectromechanical system
(MEMS) flow controller (HT-MEMS flow controller) whose purpose is to operate
inside a conventional gas chromatography (GC) oven to enable chopper-modulated
electroantennograph (EAG) &amp;#8722; MEMS- GC-EAG as well as other GC
applications. This project aims to develop and lead to commercialization of the
HT-MEMS flow controller to (1) implement chopper stabilization for GC-EAG, which
holds the promise of improving the sensitivity of the current GC-EAG system by
orders of magnitude; (2) explore applications of the instrument in broader
chemical sensing areas, including other GC detectors beyond EAG and two
dimensional GC (2D-GC). Apart from resulting publications and presentations at
workshops and meetings, the technology will be disseminated through a
partnership with GC equipment manufacturers and distributors.