* 1353853
* IDBR: TYPE A Nano-Constriction Devices for Isolation and Cultivation of Environmental Microbes
* BIO,DBI
* 05/15/2014,04/30/2018
* Slava Epstein, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 04/30/2018
* USD 770,516.00

An award is made to Northeastern University to develop a device whose purpose is
to automatically isolate and cultivate new microbial species from the
environment using recent advances in micro/nano-fabrication. Most bioactive
compounds discovered to date have come from microbial sources. Yet over 99% of
microbial biodiversity remains uncultivated using conventional laboratory
approaches, and this pool is an enormous untapped source for bio-prospecting.
The proposed work attempts to cultivate microbes in their own habitat, and
employs an automated, high-throughput method. Applied at an appropriate scale,
this method may be transformative for generating novel microbial biodiversity
for industrial, ecological, and biomedical applications. This research will
foster collaborations between engineers and biologists and prepare undergraduate
and graduate students for dynamic multidisciplinary work environments. Hands on
training in the laboratory will be provided for high school science teachers
from Boston inner city schools to expose them to this and other emerging
technologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this project is to
create a novel platform technology to cultivate microbial species that have
remained elusive in traditional isolation and cultivation methods. The technique
being developed is a radical departure from traditional methodologies,
cultivating microorganisms will be cultivated in situ, which will automatically
provide cells with the required growth factors. The key feature of the
technology is a growth chamber with a single sub-micrometer opening to the
outside environment. The effectiveness of this novel device will be demonstrated
by isolating novel strains and species from marine and soil habitats using a set
of prototype devices. The developed devices will be disseminated to the
community by organizing and hosting a new conference on cultivating
microorganisms at Northeastern University. The conference attendees will be
trained to use the new devices and provided with prototype devices to test. The
technology will be presented at microbiology meetings that potential users
attend. A website will be created that will list the new species that are
cultivated using this technology and will allow the scientific community to
acquire the species for further investigations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
is being made jointly by two Programs- (1) Instrument Development for Biological
Research, in the Division of Biological Infrastructure (Biological Sciences
Directorate), and (2) Biotechnology, Biochemical and Biomass Engineering, in the
Division of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental and Transport Systems
(Engineering Directorate).