* 1353637
* SBIR Phase II:  Highly Sensitive Nanofiber Sensors for Trace Detection of Explosives
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2014,04/30/2018
* Benjamin Rollins, Vaporsens Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 04/30/2018
* USD 1,049,418.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will develop a
working prototype of a handheld detector for trace explosives that is smaller,
more sensitive, and has faster response times than any commercially available
portable device today. Under NSF Phase I SBIR funding of this project,
Vaporsens, Inc. successfully developed new organic nanofiber sensory materials
required to achieve these goals. In Phase II, the company will design and
optimize the sensor systems, electronic hardware, firmware and algorithm
software required to build a handheld detector. The novel nanofiber sensory
materials developed by Vaporsens will enable the proposed detector to
simultaneously detect all three important categories of explosives with greater
sensitivity, due to detection limits in the parts per trillion range. Prototypes
will be subjected to third party testing to validate the rapid, sensitive, and
selective detection of common explosives. The Phase II project will also permit
the design and fabrication of new sensor materials, with the aim of further
improving the sensing sensitivity and selectivity of subsequent devices through
interface chemistry optimization.

The broader impact/commercial potential of the project will reduce the impact of
improvised explosive devices (IEDs) which are a leading cause of casualties in
contemporary warfare. IED use outside of warfare is growing, with over 170
incidents reported in the US alone during the first six months of 2013. As a
result, the worldwide annual sales for trace explosives detection equipment has
grown to approximately $400 million. However, these technologies are limited in
their effectiveness. Swabbing machines require contact; bomb-sniffing dogs are
expensive, need to work with the same handler, and have limited endurance; and
imaging technologies are only practical in checkpoint settings due to size and
expense. In contrast, the small size and high sensitivity of the proposed
detector will be used for exacting detection of trace amounts of explosives in
nearly any location, without swabbing, and at a cost that meets or exceeds the
lowest price of detectors on the market. The commercialized device will be the
first of its kind to allow local law enforcement and other public safety
officials, border security and the military to "sniff" suspicious bags,
vehicles, lockers, and people for dangerous explosive threats with immediate
results regardless of their location.