* 1353628
* SBIR Phase II:  Quantifying Consumer Rationale Expressed in Free Text Online Discussions
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2014,06/30/2017
* Paul Nemirovsky, dMetrics Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 06/30/2017
* USD 899,999.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project aims at creating novel
methods for analyzing consumer behavior and product acceptance. This project
will develop efficient, automated natural language processing (NLP) methods that
perform at Web scale to analyze a broad spectrum of consumer experiences with
products, as reported in conversations on social media, in consumer reviews,
etc. Currently available representations of consumer commentary are relatively
shallow. In this project more detailed representations will be built, advancing
NLP technology and delivering state-of-the-art analysis of conversations that
detail consumer decisions, motivations, and questions about products. In
addition, the representations of consumer commentary will be integrated with
third-party data, resulting in the development of predictive models of consumer
behavior that exceed the accuracy of current models. This will allow product
vendors to quantify the influencing factors behind product adoption and
attrition, which is crucial to proving marketing hypotheses, predicting business
outcomes, and improving customer awareness of product
issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project lies in the ability to improve the analysis and use of consumers'
perception and experience of products. Deeper analysis of millions of consumer
experiences reported online will help the public, manufacturers, marketers, and
regulators alike make better decisions about products. Currently, gaining
representative insights about a product requires manual processing of an
overwhelming range of information sources. Automatic, in-depth analysis of these
disparate sources at Web scale will deliver an unbiased, authoritative stream of
quantified product information and consumer opinion, improving consumer
experience, product performance, and industry transparency. The richness of the
resulting representation will enable an understanding of finer-grained aspects
of product performance and consumer behavior, which cannot be extracted or
analyzed using existing techniques such as sentiment analysis or topic-modeling.
The technology developed in this project will translate to fundamental
improvements in the conduct of market research, commercial campaigns and
regulatory investigations, as well as enhancing the public's ability to make
informed decisions about products.