* 1353318
* SBIR Phase II:  Chemically Impregnated Nanoparticles for Use in Copper Chemical Mechanical Planarization Slurry
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2014,12/31/2016
* Robin Ihnfeldt, General Engineering & Research, L.L.C.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 12/31/2016
* USD 988,689.00

This Small Business Innovative Research Phase II project is focused on the
development of a copper chemical mechanical planarization (CMP) slurry. An
important step in semiconductor manufacturing is CMP, which uses an aqueous
slurry containing abrasives and chemical components in conjunction with a
polishing pad to remove material and to planarize the wafer. As device sizes
decrease, next generation CMP slurries must achieve planarization on
increasingly higher aspect ratio structures. Current copper CMP slurries have a
limited planarization efficiency (PE) (ratio of step height removed to thickness
removed). Without an improvement in PE, CMP is going to become an increasingly
expensive and limiting step in the semiconductor manufacturing process. The
proposed effort aims to develop a copper CMP slurry containing nano-sized
contact release capsules (nano-CRC). Nano-CRC based slurries consist of a core-
shell nanoparticle where the mechanical and chemical components are combined
into a single entity. Use of the nano-CRC slurry yields simultaneously high PE
and high material removal rate, which will improve planarity and decrease
processing costs for semiconductor manufacturers. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact/commercial potential of this project includes advancing the
state-of-the-art in CMP slurry formulation and enabling the continued scale down
of next generation microelectronic devices. The copper CMP slurry market is
currently $340M, and expected to grow to greater than $500M by 2016 due to the
increase in the number of Cu CMP steps as devices continue to shrink.
Additionally, a copper CMP slurry that can achieve both high through-put and
high planarity would yield a product with a very high return on investment for
semiconductor manufacturers. The nano-CRC technology can be used to impregnate
nanoparticles with different chemical payloads, and different base nanoparticles
can also be used (i.e. alumina). The technology has potential to be used as a
platform to provide solutions for a variety of industries, both within the realm
of CMP where it may be possible to use on other CMP polishing steps, and also
for other non-CMP polishing processes, including optical materials, glass
polishing, cleaning, etc.