* 1353321
* SBIR Phase II:  Learning Design Synthesis with a Mechatronics Kit
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,06/30/2017
* Eric Schweikardt, Modular Robotics Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 06/30/2017
* USD 1,024,708.00

This SBIR Phase II project addresses a critical national need for more expansive
and hands-on STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics) education
by developing a mechatronic and robotics construction kit for teaching and
learning engineering design synthesis. The research objective is to develop a
teaching tool to interest young learners in engineering design, encourage and
engage them in engineering practices specifically, creating appealing technology
through exploring STEM topics that meets or exceeds national standards. The goal
is to engage young people regardless of prior technical experience or STEM
exposure in designing mechatronics and robotics systems, and through this to
gain interest, experience, and confidence in engineering design synthesis. The
work comprises developing construction kit hardware, a software environment for
children to program their mechatronic constructions, and materials for using the
kit to teach and learn STEM topics and engineering design. As the hardware
advances, the project will develop software and learning resources that scaffold
the construction kit with educational materials. It aims to support teachers and
other educators incorporating the mechatronics kit into classroom and out-of-
school learning, addressing national STEM standards while advancing research on
how children learn complex design concepts and how educators can best support
this progression.

The broader/commercial impact of this SBIR Phase II project is in engendering in
young learners innovation, design, and creative problem solving among the most
important skills for tomorrow's workforce. These skills are addressed within
STEM disciplines, however, too often the use of technology in education is
limited to skill based computer operations, and engineering is neglected
altogether. The teaching and learning tool and its ensemble of software and
learning resources truly integrates every letter in the STEM acronym, while
inviting students who have no background in robotics, engineering, design,
technology, or computer programming to begin creating immediately. This
leverages their creativity as motivation to continue learning in these fields.
Precisely because kit removes the need for advanced fabrication skills or
programming knowledge, this kit and its accompanying activities will promote
broader inclusion of students who may have traditionally felt intimidated from
more complex STEM engagement. As more students succeed with the kit and its
ensemble of learning activities, this enhances a future workforce, an informed
citizenry, as well as supporting teachers and educators to explore what all
students can achieve when given motivating and confidence building STEM
activities.