* 1353743
* Collaborative Research: Developmental and functional mechanisms of complex trait re-evolution: Limb loss and gain in skink lizards
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Duncan Irschick, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 07/31/2019
* USD 48,920.00

Understanding how complex characters evolve is central to developing fundamental
theories of trait evolution. One such theory, Dollo?s Law, which states that
once lost, complex characters cannot be re-evolved, has challenged biologists
for more than a century. Despite recent evidence suggesting that complex
characters can and do re-evolve, there is a lack of understanding of how and why
these evolutionary reversals take place. The proposed study will address these
questions by elucidating the functional underpinnings and the developmental
mechanisms of complex trait re-evolution. This project will result in an
unprecedented integration of functional morphology and developmental genetics in
an evolutionary framework, facilitating communication between these
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research project will use an integrative
approach that synthesizes developmental genetics and functional morphology in a
phylogenetic framework to study limb and digit loss and subsequent re-evolution
in the Southeast Asian burrowing lizard genus Brachymeles. Objectives of the
proposed research are to determine whether a phenotypic trait that has been lost
re-evolves with the same or different functional capacities, and whether re-
evolved digits develop via the same or different developmental mechanisms as
ancestral digits. Surface locomotor velocity, acceleration, and burrowing speed
and force will be quantified using high-speed video and a force transducer for
ancestrally and re-evolved pentadactyl, intermediate, and limbless species. The
developmental basis of limb and digit reduction and re-evolution in Brachymeles
will be characterized to identify hypothesized developmental constraints on limb
and digit re-evolution. Mesenchymal condensations of digits in embryos will be
identified using histochemistry and in situ hybridization of nine genes
associated with limb and digit patterning. The project will be also involve and
train undergraduate and graduate students in research methods and will promote
international collaborations. Minority and female students will be actively
recruited and encouraged to participate in the research training opportunities
provided by the project. Biologically themed outreach programs resulting from
this project will target disadvantaged communities and local K-12 schools.
Findings from the proposed project will be publicly disseminated online as part
of an established biodiversity information website
(http://philbreo.lifedesks.org/), at scientific conferences, in peer-reviewed
journals, and through other existing databases (http://datadryad.org/).