* 1353618
* SBIR Phase II:  Improved Solution Processible Small Organic Molecule Architectures for Lightweight-Flexible Photovoltaics.
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2014,02/28/2017
* Corey Hoven, Next Energy Technologies
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 02/28/2017
* USD 1,555,999.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will develop new
soluble small molecules (SSM) and device architectures for organic (plastic)
photovoltaic (OPV) technology. SSMs are low-cost plastic semiconductors that can
be printed as an ink or spray painted onto conventional plastic sheets to
fabricate extremely inexpensive, lightweight, and flexible solar cells.
Development of organic solar cells has primarily been based on small molecules
deposited from vapor (an expensive and constraining process) or solution-
processed polymers; semiconducting polymers by nature are inherently impure and
are limited to small batch sizes with inconsistencies between batches. SSM-OPV
technology removes these critical development and manufacturing barriers. In
this project we will further increase the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of
our SSM-OPV cells by developing SSM-OPV tandem cells, which will increase the
theoretical PCE limit as well as directly improve the actual PCE. Unlike
conventional solar where the fabrication of multi-junction solar cells is
complex and cost is prohibitively high, SSM-OPV is well suited for low cost
tandem cell fabrication. Therefore this project will be addressing one of the
most critical barriers to the commercialization of OPV technology.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is the promise of very
low-cost solar cells that are extremely lightweight and flexible, and which are
domestically manufactured via low-cost roll-to-roll processing. These plastic
solar cells promise to be substantially lighter and more flexible than existing
technologies, with competitive efficiencies and lifetimes for the niche portable
solar market and PV integrated roofing. The market for niche solar applications
made from lightweight flexible photovoltaics includes stand-alone portable
chargers for military and retail users as well as integrated systems including
integration with tents, awnings, recreational vehicles, and membrane roofing.
This market is relatively new and is quickly growing despite the fact the market
needs are poorly met by currently available technologies. Currently available
photovoltaics in the portable solar market have limited flexibility thereby
increasing their collapsed volume and weight. While still new, the niche
flexible/portable solar market is predicted to surpass 420MW and reach $600
million by 2020. The market for flexible building-integrated PV (BIPV) roofing
products is projected to reach $3 billion by 2018. There is also potential that
SSM-OPV technology could make inroads into the much larger utility scale market
in the future.