* 1353720
* IDBR: TYPE A: An Integrated Microfluidic Platform for Parallel Analysis of Cell Secretome and Cell Responses in Real Time
* BIO,DBI
* 05/15/2014,04/30/2018
* Jiang Zhe, University of Akron
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 04/30/2018
* USD 546,636.00

An award is made to the University of Akron to develop a novel microfluidic
instrument for parallel analysis of proteins secreted from cells (secretomes)
and cell responses to stimuli in real time, with high sensitivity and high
throughput. Understanding the composition of proteins secreted from cells has
broad impacts on cell biology and the understanding of cellular responses to
stimuli, including cellular signaling pathways, intercellular communications,
and matrix remodeling. The study of secretomes will also impact drug discovery
and therapy development, which will lead to improved public health. The
multidisciplinary nature of this project is expected to stimulate students'
interest in state-of-the-art lab-on-a-chip devices and advanced biotechnology,
and offer training opportunities for students to cross their discipline
boundaries by learning new principles and methods. Through various student
programs at University of Akron, undergraduate students will be recruited, with
an emphasis on underrepresented minorities and women, to conduct research in
this project. The developed methods and the instrument will be actively promoted
to the biological research community via the collaborations with the Center for
Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine at Cleveland Clinic Foundation and the
Northeast Ohio Center for Regenerative and Translational Medicine. Through
working with NSF I-Corps site at the University of Akron Research Foundation,
this instrument will be further developed and commercialization opportunity will
be explored.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Thus far, conventional methods for cell
secretome and cell response analysis require tedious procedures, long assay
times, and bulky, complicated detection instruments. In addition, there is no
existing instrument that can perform parallel assays of multiple cell secretions
and responses in real time. In this project a microfluidic instrument consisting
of a thermo-responsive culture chamber for rapid cell detachment without sample
contamination, an innovative immuno-disaggregation assay for highly sensitive
analysis of cell secretomes, and a label-free magnetic bead assay for analyzing
various cell responses to stimuli will be developed to address the issues.. A
multiplexed micro detection array will be used to enable high throughput,
simultaneous measurements of cell secretomes and cell responses.