* 1353857
* Collaborative Research: Immune tradeoffs during tissue regeneration in mammals
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2014,12/31/2020
* Vanessa Ezenwa, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Klein
* 12/31/2020
* USD 290,000.00

Why can salamanders re-grow amputated limbs but humans cannot? Understanding the
mechanisms that favor tissue regeneration in lieu of tissue repair remains one
of the great unanswered questions in biology. A particularly intriguing
hypothesis, though poorly investigated, is that the loss of regenerative
capacity in higher vertebrates coincides with the presence of a strong adaptive
immune response. Now, the recent discovery of complete tissue regeneration in
wild African spiny mice (Acomys) compared to the failure to regenerate in a co-
occurring rodent (Myomyscus), allows a comprehensive examination of the links
between immunity and regeneration in wild, pathogen-exposed, and fully
immunocompetent adult mammals. Specifically, this study tests the hypothesis
that tradeoffs in immunity along (1) innate vs. adaptive and (2) pro vs. anti-
inflammatory axes underlie variation in the ability and rate of regeneration
between these wild species. Quantifying immune and inflammatory changes at the
cellular and molecular level in response to injury is expected to reveal a bias
towards innate immunity and anti-inflammatory molecules in regenerators, and a
shift towards adaptive immunity and pro-inflammatory responses in non-
regenerators. Project results will provide fundamental insight into the
mechanisms that constrain regenerative ability in mammals. Because regeneration
biology is a fascinating topic with great potential to excite students about
science, the investigators will engage U.S. and international students of all
ages in the project. Graduate and undergraduate students from the U.S. will
travel to Kenya, where animal work will take place, to actively participate in
the study and collaborate with Kenyan students and scientists. The project team
will also make a series of visits to a local Kenyan girls' secondary school and
a primary school to showcase basic concepts in regeneration biology using
African spiny mice as a tool. The international component of this study is co-
supported by NSF's Office of International and Integrative Activities.