* 1353248
* Workshop: Robust Research in the Social, Behavioral, and Economic Sciences, February, 2014, Arlington, VA
* SBE,SMA
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2014
* John Cacioppo, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Olster
* 09/30/2014
* USD 49,553.00

This award supports a two-day workshop to investigate integrative policies and
procedures that would promote robust and reliable published findings in science.
Questions have been raised in recent years about the replicability of various
findings in the biological, medical, cognitive, and social sciences. Making sure
that scientists understand and are rewarded for using methods that yield the
most robust results and incentivizing replication of results are among the many
possible actions that could help ensure that published results are highly
reliable. This workshop will explore these and other steps that might be taken
to improve the validity of scientific findings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientists
build upon published scientific knowledge in both basic and applied research.
When those published results are not reliable, scientific discoveries can be set
back and time and money spent on non-productive avenues of research.
Additionally, science is often used as a basis for decisions in policy and
industry, which also necessitate reliability. Social and behavioral scientists
have contributed to improvements in experimental and quasi-experimental designs,
methodological procedures (e.g., random assignment &amp; blind procedures), and
statistical (e.g., meta-analytic) techniques. The proposed workshop will convene
social, behavioral, and statistical scientists to consider: (i) the state of the
science, (ii) possible improvements in scientific practice and procedures, (iii)
the implications for science education and training, (iv) the implications for
editorial policies and procedures, (v) the implications for research university
policies and evaluation criteria, and (vi) the implications for federal funding
policies and evaluation criteria. This workshop will bring together experts in
each of these domains to develop a coherent set of recommendations for ensuring
that published empirical findings in the social, behavioral, and economic
sciences are robust and replicable and to identify research needs on this topic.
A written report from this workshop will be produced and presentation materials
shared widely. The effort will be led by members of the Subcommittee on
Replication, a part of the Advisory Committee of the Directorate for Social,
Behavioral, and Economic Sciences at the National Science Foundation.&lt;br/&gt;