* 1353761
* OPUS: Lamiales - a synthesis of phylogeny, biology, biogeography, and classification
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2014,01/31/2019
* Richard Olmstead, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 01/31/2019
* USD 151,071.00

The plant group Lamiales is globally important, representing &gt;8% of all known
flowering plants. The group includes numerous species of economic importance
such as the mints, olives, sesame, jasmine, and many horticulturally important
plants. In this project, Dr. Olmstead will synthesize 25 years of research in
his lab on the evolution and systematics of this large and globally diverse
flowering plant group. He will also integrate the extensive literature on these
plants from research into their morphology, anatomy, cytology, chemistry,
taxonomy, paleontology, and ecology. The project will produce a phylogenetic
tree that will use data from publicly available databases (GenBank) and employ
new computational techniques to accommodate the analysis of evolutionary
relationships in the very large datasets of the ~22,000 Lamiales species. Dr.
Olmstead will also produce a book on the present state of knowledge on this
group. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The rapid pace of discovery over the past two
decades, particularly in the Lamiales, has meant that common botanical reference
works are out of date. This has made it difficult for researchers, educators,
agricultural scientists, and others to find accurate information on a range of
topics for the diversity of plants in this group. The large-scale evolutionary
tree produced by this research will permit a more thorough understanding of the
diversification of a globally important plant group, and compiling the
literature on Lamiales will permit researchers, growers and educators both an
overview of the diversity and biology of this group and entr√©e into the
literature for those who want a deeper understanding.