* 1353694
* EAGER: Diverse M-Best Predictions from Probabilistic Models
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2015
* Dhruv Batra, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 08/31/2015
* USD 184,415.00

Computer Vision systems must deal with significant levels of ambiguity - from
inter- and intra-object occlusion and varying appearance, lighting, and pose.
Probabilistic models provide a principled framework for dealing with uncertainty
and for converting evidence into a posteriori belief about the world. Typically,
a vision system uses this belief to predict the "most likely" or maximum
a-posteriori hypothesis. Unfortunately, our current models are inaccurate and
this single-best hypothesis is often incorrect. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project explores a novel way to allow vision systems to hedge against
uncertainty by producing multiple plausible hypotheses. Specifically, this
project develops techniques for finding a diverse set of high-probability
solutions from probabilistic models. The project focuses on (a) interactive
object cutout (where multiple segmentations are shown to the user to expedite
convergence to an acceptable result); (b) semantic segmentation (where multiple
plausible scene labelings are propagated to subsequent stages of a cascade for
higher-order processing); (c) person/object tracking (where multiple
localization hypotheses on each frame reduce the search space of a sequence
tracker). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is producing new scientific
knowledge in the context of probabilistic reasoning and advancing the state of
art in computer vision. The techniques developed are useful for other AI domains
such as Speech and Natural Language Processing. The PI and his students are
broadly disseminating produced work by organizing workshops, tutorials, and
journal special issues, and publicly sharing code and results. The project is
engaging undergraduate students and women in computer science research.