* 1353180
* STTR Phase II:  Universal Wireless Channel Selection Filter for Enhanced Access to RF Spectrum
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2014,10/31/2018
* Vrinda Haridasan, Physical Devices LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 10/31/2018
* USD 1,246,207.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer Research (STTR) Phase II project will
extend the basic science of linear interference delay effect filters, enabling
ultra-wideband tunable RF filters for all types of RF receivers and
instrumentation. It will also extend the engineering science of implementing
such filters as integrated circuits. And, its distortion filtering aspect will
enable enable signal agnostic,adaptive cancellation of wideband, and in-band,
interference, for anti-jamming applications as well as to enhance signal quality
for the consumer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential
is that it will help achieve the national goal of expanding access to RF
spectrum by maximizing&lt;br/&gt;spectral efficiency with its continuous tuning.
Second, it reduces filter cost and space requirements while increasing
reliability by eliminating increasingly complex filter banks. This will result
in smaller, cheaper and more dependable phones for consumers, which will help
drive industry growth. Third, the results of this project will deliver
Smartphone GPS accuracy rivaling commercial units, as well as enabling
protection of GPS-dependent infrastructure against inadvertent or intentional
disruption. Fourth, it will enable precise, jamming resistant GPS navigation by
aerial drones used by first responders, homeland security and the military,
helping prevent crashes that place people at risk.