* 1353908
* LTREB: Drivers of temperate forest carbon storage from canopy closure through successional time
* BIO,DEB
* 04/15/2014,03/31/2019
* Lucas Nave, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 03/31/2019
* USD 448,585.00

Disturbances to forests, such as logging or wildfires, typically lead to large
losses of carbon and nutrients from both the plants and soils of the ecosystem.
Virtually all forests are in some state of recovery from such disturbances,
whether caused naturally or by humans. Knowledge of the time required for a
forest to recover its original amounts of carbon and nutrients after a
disturbance is not complete, nor is an understanding of how regrowing plants,
recovering soils and the year to year variation in climate interact to control
recovery as a forest ages. This project takes advantage of long existing
research plots in forests at the University of Michigan Biological Station to
figure out how changes in forest structure, carbon and nitrogen contents of the
forests, and variations in climate act together through time to influence how
fast trees grow, nitrogen is retained, and carbon is captured and stored in
forests. Scientists and students will make regular measurements of the types of
trees, their stem sizes and mass, their patterns of leaf arrangement, the
amounts of carbon and nitrogen in soils, and other factors in five forest that
were cut and burned in 1936, 1948, 1954, 1980, and 1998 and so today range from
15 years to 115 years old. Several nearby much older forests will also be
sampled. This will let the project link disturbances, climate and ecology for
forests that are broadly representative of those across the northern United
States, Canada, Europe and Asia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will involve
students and forest managers in portions of the research and in the application
of results to actual forest management. Undergraduate students will help design
and carry out regular field measurements of tree and soil properties. Results
will be used in general ecology and forest ecosystem courses taken by students
at the field station in the summer. Both undergraduate and graduate students
will also be able to use the plots and other data to conduct their own research
projects. The team will also host site visits and conduct workshops for forest
managers in state and federal agencies, as well as those in local conservation
groups.