* 1353458
* 50 Years of Scientific Achievement and Future Directions at Arecibo Observatory - A Science Symposium
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2013,01/31/2014
* Robert Kerr, SRI International
* Standard Grant
* Eric Bloemhof
* 01/31/2014
* USD 49,016.00

The 50th anniversary of the inauguration of the Arecibo Observatory is a
landmark event for&lt;br/&gt;one of the nation?s storied and most significant
federal scientific facilities. To mark the&lt;br/&gt;anniversary, SRI
International (SRI) proposes a science symposium that will both
celebrate&lt;br/&gt;and publicize the Observatory?s past accomplishments,
current investigations, and importance&lt;br/&gt;to future exploration. Keynote
speakers will review the Observatory?s 50 years of
scientific,&lt;br/&gt;engineering, and educational accomplishments in
Ionospheric and Atmospheric Science, Radio&lt;br/&gt;Astronomy, and Planetary
Radar Astronomy. Presentations by active users will survey
current&lt;br/&gt;research activities, and moderated forums will offer the
opportunity to discuss strategies&lt;br/&gt;for the future scientific direction
of the facility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The symposium will facilitate the exchange
of scientific findings, insights, and techniques&lt;br/&gt;across the
interdisciplinary community that uses the unique observational resources of
Arecibo&lt;br/&gt;Observatory. Such conversations are likely to stimulate ideas
for expanded investigations&lt;br/&gt;and spark interest in novel explorations,
resulting in increased and more diverse applications&lt;br/&gt;for the
Observatory?s instruments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of the
symposium flows from the educational and outreach missions of
the&lt;br/&gt;Observatory, and the global economic and ethnic diversity provided
by a U.S. federal facility&lt;br/&gt;located in Latin America. Extensive public
press coverage of this event will communicate our&lt;br/&gt;scientific and
educational activities to an extensive, diverse community. The symposium
will&lt;br/&gt;present rich scientific content, provide a pivotal point in
strategic planning for future&lt;br/&gt;achievement, and recognize and
appreciate the scientists and engineers who developed and use&lt;br/&gt;this
national treasure.