* 1353755
* Scholarships for Developing Excellence in Engineering and Physics (DEEP)
* EHR,DUE
* 04/15/2014,03/31/2021
* Charles Kutal, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Pushpa Ramakrishna
* 03/31/2021
* USD 638,254.00

Through the Developing Excellence in Engineering and Physics (DEEP) Scholars
project a team of faculty and administrators at the University of Georgia (UGA)
is increasing the number of academically talented students with demonstrated
financial need who earn a baccalaureate degree in engineering and/or physics. To
this end the project is providing seventeen scholarships to students pursuing
degrees in agricultural, biochemical, biological, computer systems and
environmental engineering and/or physics. Recognizing the national need to
prepare students who have strong backgrounds in both physics and engineering
along with the emerging trend in industry to merge the two disciplines, the
project team is offering a rigorous, 15-credit hour curriculum for an
Interdisciplinary Certificate in Engineering Physics which scholarship students
are encouraged to complete. By making possible increased access to these majors,
the project is helping to meet regional and national STEM workforce needs. In
addition, to broaden participation, students from groups which are under-
represented in STEM (women, 1st generation, African American, and Hispanic) are
being actively recruited.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical features of the project
are guided by the following objectives: (a) to provide academic and social
support that leads to retention in the major through facilitating learning
communities among student cohorts, (b) to engage students in state-of-the art
STEM research and design projects by establishing collaborations with STEM
faculty, and (c) to create internships and other learning opportunities by
leveraging partnerships between UGA and engineering and hi-tech employers in
both industry and government. Data generated through assessment and evaluation
is expected to support the rationale that high retention of students in STEM
fields is achievable through a comprehensive program of academic and social
support. Formative project evaluation is examining whether or not each project
component contributes to student success, the effectiveness of the management
team, and the impact of recruitment strategies. Summative project evaluation
focuses on the whether or not the project is meeting its goal to increase the
number of well-prepared students majoring and ultimately graduating in the
selected fields. Dissemination of the project results is expected to provide a
model for implementation of evidence-based practices in STEM recruitment and
retention. The project team also plans to present its work at the Institute on
STEM Teaching and Learning (a regional meeting hosted by UGA) and through the
national Center for the Integration of Teaching and Learning. Project
deliverables include results of summative evaluation and the course materials
developed for the Interdisciplinary Certificate in Engineering and Physics.