* 1353858
* EAGER: Engineering Microbial Mats for the On-Site Treatment of Wastewater from Unconventional Gas Production
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Radisav Vidic, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 08/31/2016
* USD 100,000.00

CBET 1353858&lt;br/&gt;Bibby&lt;br/&gt;University of
Pittsburgh&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project proposal seeks to develop a
novel, on-site, and low cost treatment mechanism for wastewaters produced during
unconventional gas operations by engineering microbial mats. Wastewaters
produced by unconventional gas drilling operations, termed produced wastewaters,
contain both additives to assist in gas extraction and extremely high levels of
total dissolved solids (TDS) originally derived from subsurface formations. The
unique characteristics of wastewaters from unconventional gas production methods
make treatment and disposal of this waste stream a significant and currently
unsolved technical challenge. Microbial mats are agglomerated and layered
bacterial consortia with complex internal chemical and energetic gradients and a
high diversity of specialized microbial metabolisms. The characteristics of
microbial mats, namely high salt stress tolerance, fixed nature facilitating
transport and removal, and multiple mechanisms of contaminant removal, i.e.
biologically induced precipitation, mineralization, or biosorption, suggest
their utility in treatment of produced wastewaters. The goal of this technology
is to treat produced wastewater well enough for reuse in fracturing operations,
protecting water resources from over exploitation and minimizing the impacts of
disposal. In order to reuse produced wastewater, drillers are primarily
concerned with constituents that may cause scaling or foul a well, namely
barium, strontium, iron, and biological fouling. Additionally, drillers are
concerned about the accumulation of naturally occurring radioactive material
(NORMs). All available data suggest microbial mats as a successful treatment
scheme for removing constituents of concern from produced wastewaters; however,
the application of microbial mats for the treatment of produced wastewaters is
entirely novel and this work will serve to demonstrate both its feasibility and
potential.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Unconventional gas production, often termed
?fracking? for hydraulic fracturing, uses new technology to access gas trapped
in geological formations that were previously inaccessible. The cost effective,
domestic production of natural gas has significant economic benefits in a wide
range of US industries. However, the management of wastewaters produced during
hydraulic fracturing, termed ?produced wastewaters?, is a currently unsolved
technical challenge. The salt content of produced wastewater is approximately
five times that of ocean water and each well produces 2-4 million gallons of
wastewater. Existing technologies are unable to cost effectively cope with this
salt content and volume. This project will investigate a novel on-site treatment
technology, microbial mats, for the treatment of produced wastewaters prior to
reuse in future hydraulic fracturing operations. Microbial mats represent a
novel treatment technology that would require minimal energy input and
maintenance, and could be deployed onsite to eliminate the impacts associated
with trucking large volumes of water for treatment.