* 1353827
* What Stabilizes Population Dynamics in Nature? A New Framework for Quantifying the in situ Strength and Nonlinearity of Species Interactions
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2018
* Mark Novak, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 05/31/2018
* USD 490,000.00

A fundamental question in ecology is how interactions among species (e.g.
predator-prey) cause some species to exhibit cyclic population fluctuations over
time while for other species they do not. An understanding of these mechanisms
is necessary in order to forecast how species and their ecosystems will respond
to environmental perturbations, including habitat loss and climate change. This
research project will develop new methods and statistical analyses that will be
applied to stream communities of the Pacific Northwest. The investigators will
test hypotheses regarding when species populations will cycle in abundance.
Current theory can explain only the most simplistic case of specialist predator
species that feed on only one or a few prey species. However, most species in
nature are generalists embedded in complex networks of species interactions.
This limitation is widely acknowledged as a significant problem in the
development of resource management and conservation practices. This work
promises to advance general ecological theory and resolve a long standing puzzle
concerning stability of predator-prey interactions in nature. Results of this
project will improve our ability to forecast species responses to environmental
disturbances, which is important in wildlife management and conservation. This
project also will support the mentoring, and research training of undergraduate
and graduate students, and a postdoctoral researcher. Broader involvement with
Oregon's local communities will be achieved through an extensive collaboration
with Oregon State University's elementary school partnership program, which
provides science and math enrichment for elementary school students and
professional development for their teachers in order to increase the number of
underrepresented and educationally underserved students that go on to pursue
careers in science, math, health, engineering, and education.

This research will develop a new class of observational methods for estimating
the strength of predator-prey interactions in species-rich systems.
Observational and experimental implementations of the approach in stream
communities of the Andrews Experimental Forest Long Term Ecological Research
site will be used to quantitatively compare the degree to which prey-dependent,
consumer-dependent and adaptive-foraging processes contribute to empirical
levels of interaction nonlinearity. Empirically-derived insights will be
integrated into abstracted mathematical models to develop general theory
regarding the dynamics of specialist and generalist consumers. This research
promises significant advances in our conceptual and applied understanding of the
mechanisms by which predator-prey interactions regulate the dynamics of species-
rich communities. The novel simplicity and broad applicability of the
observational approach to be developed here promises a transformative new way to
bridge mathematical theory and empirical data.