* 1353674
* Regulation and Function of a Mutualistic Bacterial Host Range Specificity Determinant
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2014,04/30/2019
* Heidi Goodrich-Blair, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 04/30/2019
* USD 725,000.00

All plant and animal hosts associate with microbial symbionts that can
contribute to health or cause disease. Many microbe-host associations (both
beneficial and pathogenic) are specific; only a single species or strain of
microbe exists in close association with a single host or tissue. A fundamental
but unanswered biological question is what allows some microbes but not others
to colonize specific hosts or tissues. This research investigates how bacteria
and animal symbiotic partners recognize each other while excluding unwanted
species. The bacterium being studied colonizes the intestine of a small soil-
dwelling roundworm (nematode) , and expresses traits beneficial for the
nematode. The project focuses on a bacterial membrane protein that is necessary
for colonization and dictates specificity for certain nematode species. This
protein represents a family of proteins present in many symbionts that colonize
animal mucosae. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Genetic, biochemical, physical, and
microscopy approaches will be used to reveal the structure, biochemical
function, and interacting host factors of the protein. In general, the work will
hasten technical advances for investigating an understudied class of membrane
proteins. Also, the research will provide paradigms that yield broad insights
into the molecular basis of microbial colonization of animals and what might
allow microbes to expand beyond their current colonization ranges and enter new
hosts or tissue sites. &lt;br/&gt;The public will be exposed to this research
through community seminars and high school outreach programs. The project
encompasses the NSF-recommended five core concepts for undergraduate education,
and will be used to generate an integrated curriculum emphasizing these areas.
Undergraduate, graduate, and post-doctoral apprentices will be trained in the
areas of structural biology, molecular biology, nematology, and bacteriology
through direct scientific inquiry. Thus, this project will provide fundamental
knowledge of bacterial interactions with animal hosts, and will help train
future scientists with expertise to further apply this knowledge.