* 1353873
* SBIR Phase II:  High-performance Polymer Composites for Mouth Guards
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2014,10/31/2018
* Timothy Huang, Akervall Technologies Inc
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 10/31/2018
* USD 1,256,861.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project anticipates bringing
forth a disruptive mouth guard technology that answers the urgent need for
better dental protection. In the US alone, every year more than 1 million dental
injuries occur, resulting in medical costs of roughly $500 million. The proposed
technology will involve novel manufacturing methods to incorporate energy
absorbing solid/liquid suspensions into novel thermo-polymer mouth guard designs
to achieve enhanced impact energy absorption capacity. The specific technical
objectives are to optimize the energy absorbing capacity of the formulated
solid/liquid suspensions, develop the necessary manufacturing technology for
incorporating such solid/liquid suspensions monolithically into the thermo-
polymer, and finally to characterize the mouth guards by subjection to stress
testing (chemical, physical, and thermal). This energy absorbing mouth guard
will deliver on-demand, tunable energy absorption capacity that can be
specifically tailored to provide superior dental protection to users in several
venues including medical, sports, industrial and military. This R&D effort will
produce the first ever mouth guard made with material that adaptively absorbs
impact energy, a stark technological contrast to the conventional (passive)
mouth guard. This new technology will also contribute basic understanding to the
emerging field of nanorheology.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is significant. In just
the mouth guard arena, realizing this technologically advanced mouth guard will
likely bring a novel product into the dental protection market. Then there is
the untapped market to provide much needed dental protection for patients
undergoing medical procedures. Yearly about 150,000 dental injuries occur just
during endotracheal intubations, required when undergoing general anesthesia.
Further, the new energy absorbing fluid-thermopolymer material technology to
emerge could serve as the technical groundwork for a plethora of energy
dampening products. In addition, the research stands to seed a new body of
knowledge, small- scale (millimeter) leveraged use of energy absorptive fluids.
Realizing the technical objectives of this Phase II R&D effort will help foster
local economic growth when the company?s new manufacturing facility opens for
the fabrication of mouth guards based on this technology. A large number of jobs
will be created requiring very diverse technical skills, and the company is
committed to fill these jobs with a diverse work force.