* 1353085
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Understanding how a Hormone-signaling Pathway Modulates Behavioral Phenotype within a Social Network
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Thomas Ryder, Smithsonian Institution
* Standard Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 07/31/2019
* USD 534,946.00

Social networks are a common characteristic of most animal societies. While we
know that individual differences in behaviors such as cooperation or aggression
influence the role that individuals play within their social network, we know
little about the physiological mechanisms underlying those differences. Wire-
tailed manakins provide a model system to study the links between hormones,
behavior and social networking because males form cooperative partnerships that
are the foundation of complex social networks. Using this model system this
research will integrate evolutionary, behavioral, endocrine and neurogenetic
approaches to understand the physiological and evolutionary basis of individual
variation in cooperation and how those individual-level processes scale up to
influence an individual's role and position within their social network in a
dynamic fashion. Because endocrine function is similar across a wide variety of
animals, the outcomes of this work will be broadly applicable. The project will
train at least 16 undergraduate students and 1 graduate student in integrative
research in the US and at the field site in Ecuador. This research will also be
featured in a planned exhibit which will describe the hormonal basis of social
behavior and highlight the similarities between human and animal social networks
at the National Zoological Park's Amazonia Science Gallery. Research products
will be integrated in to tropical ecology courses at the Tipunti Biodiversity
Station which hosts the work in Ecuador. This project is jointly supported by
the Animal Behavior Program and International Science and
Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will link hormone-
regulatory networks and social networks to transform our understanding of how
the endocrine system regulates behavior and influences social dynamics at the
individual and population levels. The project will test two alternative
hypotheses for how selection has shaped the evolution of hormone-mediated social
behaviors involving testosterone: the phenotypic integration hypothesis and the
phenotypic independence hypothesis in wire-tailed manakins where males cooperate
to perform mating displays on a lek. This highly integrative project will
quantify male behaviors in nature (dominance, cooperation, display rate), use
nanotags and proximity data loggers to capture all the social interactions and
map the social network, measure circulating hormone levels across the year,
describe the maximum capacity for testosterone production in males of different
status using GnRH challenges, measure the effect of social intrusion on hormone
titers, block or increase hormone titers to manipulate phenotype, and measure
expression levels of candidate genes for steroidogenic enzymes, steroid
receptors and steroid influenced peptide signaling systems in the brains of
these males using RT-qPCR. These data from individual birds will then be
combined to examine network structures using binary and weighted models and to
examine the influence of hormones on network structure and dynamics. All data
from the study will be archived at the Smithsonian Migratory Bird Center web
site (http://www.si.edu/smbc). The brain transcriptome assembly for the wire-
tailed manakin will be posted on NCBI GenBank.