* 1353366
* Mechanisms of nutrient transport from plants to biotrophic pathogens
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Richard Helm, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Ann Powell
* 08/31/2018
* USD 761,564.00

Diseases caused by plant pathogens are a perennial threat to global food
security and cost hundreds of billions of dollars annually. The most cost-
effective, sustainable method for disease control is to breed crops with
naturally occurring plant genes for resistance to pathogens, which, in practice,
are often quickly overcome by co-evolving pathogens. This project will lay the
groundwork for a new approach to engineer genetic resistance, based on the fact
that most pathogens depend on the plant host to supply essential nutrients for
their growth. By identifying and engineering the plant genes responsible for
nutrient transfer so that they can no longer be used by the pathogen, it could
be possible to cut the pathogen's supply lines and prevent disease development.
This approach could provide resistance against a wide range of pathogens and
would be very difficult for pathogens to overcome by co-
evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on plant-encoded
transporters of amino acids and sugar that are co-opted by Hyaloperonospora
arabidopsidis (Hpa) to facilitate nutrient acquisition. This project will
provide new insights into the contributions of host genes to pathogen nutrition,
and will investigate mechanisms through which transporters are co-opted to serve
the invader. These aspects of plant-pathogen interactions are critically
important but inadequately understood and under-studied. Reverse genetics will
be used to identify amino acid transporters necessary for colonization of
Arabidopsis by Hpa. Double mutants and RNAi lines will be used to assess genetic
redundancy and physiological compensation. Mutants will be studied to determine
the impact on infection by other pathogens, and whether the associated
phenotypes are due to perturbation of innate immune responses. A subset of
transporters will be examined at the molecular level to evaluate the importance
of their differential expression and subcellular localization for pathogen
nutrient acquisition. Biochemical properties and effects of amino acid
transporters on flux across the plasma membrane will be determined to identify
their role in the plant. Finally, a novel approach combining metabolomics and
labeled nutrients will be used to test the importance of amino acid transporters
for pathogen nutrition. Project participants will engage in outreach through the
Partnership for Research and Education in Plants, in which high school students
will conduct original research on transporter mutants. Participating scientists
benefit by honing their ability to discuss the global impact of plant science
research and the specific significance of their projects.