* 1353242
* Construction Engineering Conference and Workshop 2014: Setting an Industry-Academic Collaborative Research Agenda, Seattle, Washington, March 27-29, 2014
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2014
* Gunnar Lucko, Catholic University of America
* Standard Grant
* elise miller-hooks
* 08/31/2014
* USD 49,999.00

The objective of this workshop is to investigate how the large domain of
construction engineering can be empowered toward setting an agenda for basic
research to successfully and proactively address its future challenges.
Currently construction engineering has limited collaboration between industry
and academia, does not focus on theory-building research, and a lack of
understanding on what constitutes fundamental theory in construction
engineering. The proposed conference and research workshop will be held in
Seattle, Washington in 2014 with the goals of identifying critical research
needs, synthesizing an actionable research agenda, and creating a high-caliber
cohort of collaborators from industry and agency representatives and of
construction and non-construction scholars. To achieve the workshop three goals,
the project is designed to not just advocate but actively practice
collaboration: Papers and keynote speeches are jointly authored by industry and
academia, research components are integrated into the entire event, stipendees
will serve to facilitate discussions, record expertise, and lead groups during
the culminating synthesis workshop.

If successful, this workshop will enable construction engineering to move from
being a tradition-bound late adopter of innovation and problem-solving to become
a driver of change that pursues its own needs-focused research agenda with
rigorous scientific methodologies. By stimulating basic research the
construction industry will gain a deeper understanding of how to improve its
performance by realizing savings of time and cost for all stakeholders, enhance
competitiveness in the global marketplace, improve sustainability and quality of
the delivered built facilities, and lower the number of safety incidents.
Results will be distributed through a detailed report that will contain the
methodology, summaries of the various inputs, and the final research agenda and
through peer-reviewed publications on pertinent issues by the industry-academic
teams.