* 1353629
* SBIR Phase II:  Palatal Device Providing In-situ Sensory Feedback for Patients with Vestibular Imbalance
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2014,09/30/2016
* Hui Tang, Innervo Technology LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 09/30/2016
* USD 760,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project proposes to
develop advanced versions of a hidden and noninvasive balance device that can be
used for balance assistance for people with vestibular dysfunction. Vestibular
patients experience imbalance due to loss of vestibular feedback, which may
result in an increased risk of falling, reduced activity levels, and in some
cases, a significantly impaired life. Phase I of the project has successfully
demonstrated a first-generation device that can be worn entirely inside the oral
cavity and provide in-situ sensory feedback of head movement to patients. The
prototypes to be developed in Phase II will be market-oriented, user friendly,
and robust for extended use in mobile environments. Research in Phase II will
include 1) implementation of a wirelessly controlled intra-oral device; 2)
exploration of designs that provide more sensitive perception of the feedback,
reliable contact at the palatal interface, and a robust user experience for
long-term use; and 3) evaluation of the device performance on human subjects
through collaboration with health professionals on vestibular assessment and
rehabilitation. Market-oriented prototypes will be developed by the end of Phase
II, tested by vestibular patients, and supported by medical professionals from
an expanded list of balance centers/clinics.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this proposed project, if successful,
will be a hidden and noninvasive assistive device to treat vestibular imbalance.
Currently, there is no practical device currently available to provide in-situ
sensory feedback of head movement for patients with vestibular loss. The product
from the proposed Phase II research will capture this great market opportunity
with its unique features while assisting vestibular patients in balance control
wherever they go. The benefits to people with vestibular disorders are enormous
as the device has the potential to help them to gain confidence in social
settings, mitigate secondary problems associated with vestibular loss, and
enable them to live a healthier and more enjoyable life. In addition, the device
offers new opportunities for health professionals in the field of vestibular
rehabilitation to conduct research on motion, imbalance, and treatment. Also, it
provides a new tool for neuroscience researchers to study the role of
multisensory integration on balance and perceptual learning involving use of
alternative sensory feedback. The palatal stimulation technology may have
potential in other applications where hidden, noninvasive, and hands-free
sensory feedback is desirable.