* 1353056
* Evolutionary genetics of vernalization responsiveness in the temperate grass subfamily Pooideae
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Jill Preston, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Klein
* 07/31/2019
* USD 422,033.00

Jill Preston&lt;br/&gt;IOS-1353056&lt;br/&gt;Evolutionary Genetics of
Vernalization Responsiveness in the Temperate Grass Subfamily
Pooideae&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most plant species integrate multiple
environmental cues, such as day length and past winter chilling, to ready them
to flower when local conditions are favorable. Not only does flowering time
affect plant fitness, but also the yield of grains, fruits, and seeds available
for human consumption. But how do plants in different climates know to vary
their flowering times, and what happens as these local climates change over
time? To address these questions, this project focuses on a geographically and
ecologically diverse group of cereal crop and forage grasses with the aim of
determining how flowering time has evolved at both the whole plant and genetic
level under global cooling over the past 50 million years. By shedding light on
the past, results of this study promise to allow better prediction of flowering
time responses to current global change, and to isolate novel genes and genetic
pathways for the potential manipulation of flowering time in crop
grasses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The "pooid" grasses evolved from a tropical
ancestor around 48 million years ago and have subsequently colonized a wide
range of habitats in both the northern and southern temperate zones as global
temperatures decreased. One of the major barriers to living in the temperate
region is freezing temperatures, which are particularly detrimental to
reproductive structures. The crop pooids barley, wheat, and oats are able to
avoid flowering in winter by rapidly becoming competent to flower after an
extended period of cold tempreatures (vernalization). However, it is unknown
whether the evolution of the vernalization response was key to the
diversification of all temperate pooids, or if it evolved more recently in
separate grasses. To determine the evolutionary origin(s) and genetic basis of
the vernalization response, the PI will work with students, a postdoctoral
researcher, and computer scientists in the Vermont Genetics Network to carry out
flowering time experiments on 40 species of pooid grasses collected from
different latitudes across the world. The flowering time response of each
species to cold temperatures will be mapped onto an evolutionary tree and models
will be used to estimate when and how many times flowering in response to cold
evolved. As a complement to this, genomic data will be collected to pinpoint
similarities and differences in vernalization responsive gene expression between
species. By determining different levels of plant responses to chilling, data
from this project will facilitate critical insights into the complex adaptations
of plants to their environments. Furthermore, activities and outcomes of this
study will be used to foster interdisciplinary and active learning activities
for high school to graduate students, paving the way for the next generation of
successful organismal and evolutionary biologists.