* 1353625
* SBIR Phase II:  Full-Page Electronic Braille Display
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2014,01/31/2018
* Wallace Pitts, Polymer Braille Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 01/31/2018
* USD 1,243,801.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project plans to develop
an affordable device that will allow the visually handicapped community to
access digital information in a robust format comparable to a mobile tablet
computer. Current embodiments of this technology use 40 year old technology that
cannot scale beyond two lines of text, consume significant amounts of power, and
are prohibitively expensive when using more than a single line. This Phase II
project will focus on establishing a mechanical Braille cell module using the
polymer-based single dot actuator successfully developed in the Phase I project
as the foundation for a multiline display. The primary technical challenges to
be addressed are achieving the mechanistic and electrical requirements while
maintaining low production costs. Thus, this project has three primary
objectives that build on the single-dot actuator: (a) construction and testing
of 1- and 6-dot prototypes that meet technical requirements, (b) construction of
an 8-dot Braille cell and demonstration electronics and software, and (c)
assembly of a short line of Braille text to demonstrate the cells perform as
expected when arrayed in the anticipated display format. Additionally, PBI has
the access to technical facilities and knowledge to successfully perform the
Phase II.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial
potential of this project is that the visually handicapped community, 1.3-2
Million individuals, does not have access to an affordable device comparable to
a modern a mobile tablet or computer display. This severely limits the ability
of this community to access digital information and dramatically impacts
literacy levels, STEM-related education, and employment. The currently available
piezo-electric technology is prohibitively expensive and cannot display more
than 2 lines at once. This makes it unsuitable for use with mathematical
equations, images, and other larger-scale digital information. The affordable
device developed using this Phase II funding will use a novel polymer technology
to display several lines of Braille text at once. In addition to allowing the
visually handicapped community to participate more fully in this digital age,
the development of this device will change the way complex, multi-line
information is disseminated. Braille literature is significantly larger than
traditional. For example, the King James Bible weighs 64lbs, takes up 60 inches
of shelf space 12 inches x 12 inches and costs $342. This technology is expected
to impact multiple industries such as call centers, libraries, digital content
providers, STEM, business, print media, and anywhere modern users benefit from
digital content.