* 1353200
* SBIR Phase II:  Applying Semantic Paradata to Outcomes-aligned Assessment
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2014,09/30/2016
* Robert Robson, Eduworks Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 09/30/2016
* USD 768,000.00

This SBIR Phase II project will result in a cloud-based web application that
uses natural language processing to automatically generate online assessment
questions for any digital textual material and to align questions with topics
and learning outcomes. These questions will be available for instructors to
review, edit and use in online quizzes that students can take on desktops,
laptops, tablets or smartphones. The application will grade the quizzes and
analyze both individual and aggregate results. Instructors can enhance the
analysis by tying errors to common student misconceptions. The application will
provide instructors with near real-time updates on student learning and provide
students with personalized and immediate feedback. The application will maintain
a bank of questions that can be customized to an academic unit or institution
and that will grow with use. The question bank and data collected by the system
will be mined to improve performance over time. A beta release will be evaluated
at multiple universities during Phase II. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader/commercial impact of this work includes its potential to improve
instruction for over 21 million American college and university students.
Assessments play critical roles in higher education, but it currently takes
considerable instructor time and effort to produce, grade and maintain them.
Using the application developed in this Phase II SBIR, instructors will be able
to generate and deliver quizzes quickly enough for ad-hoc in-class use and
easily enough to integrate frequent practice and diagnostic tests into daily
instruction. This will enable instructors to better evaluate students, keep
students engaged, and tailor their instruction to student needs. Students will
be able to take more practice tests, which evidence shows helps retain and
recall class content, and administrators will obtain more data tied directly to
student outcomes. Expected benefits include increased student success rates and
richer data that universities and accreditation agencies can analyze to evaluate
and improve programs. In addition, this Phase II SBIR will implement, test and
improve techniques for automated question generation and outcomes alignment that
can be used in other applications.