* 1353510
* OPUS: Extinction of the ammonites and differential survival of the nautilids at the Cretaceous/Paleogene boundary
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2017
* Neil Landman, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 04/30/2017
* USD 119,909.00

The Cretaceous-Paleogene boundary, 66 million years ago, marks the last great
extinction event in Earth's history. Among the most notable casualties were the
ammonites, shelled cephalopods related to squids and octopus. Having worked on
this group for more than 30 years, Dr. Landman will synthesize data on
cephalopod diversity and abundance at the end of the Cretaceous just prior to
their extinction. He will compare these data to similar data on nautilids, a
closely related group of externally shelled cephalopods that survived the
extinction event and live in today?s oceans. This research will develop a global
picture of the "health" of the ammonites and nautilids at a critical time in
Earth history and investigate hypotheses on why the ammonites went extinct while
the nautilids did not. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The processes of evolution,
including extinction, have led to the diverse biosphere we see today.
Investigating why some lineages go extinct while others survive will help us
prepare for the threats to modern-day biodiversity. Extinction is a concept that
captures the interest of the public. The American Museum of Natural History,
which receives over five million visitors a year, including 500,000 children on
field trips, is well positioned to educate the public. The principal
investigator will collaborate with educational professionals to feature the
results of this synthesis through the Museum's award-winning Science Bulletin
program. He will introduce high school teachers to the Cretaceous-Paleogene
extinction event and the associated extinctions, and the teachers will, in turn,
include this topic in their Earth History classes.