* 1353819
* IDBR: TYPE A: High-Throughput, Large-Scale Plant Phenotyping Platform
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2014,12/31/2018
* Namrata Vaswani, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 12/31/2018
* USD 697,550.00

An award is made to Iowa State University to develop a high-throughput, large-
scale plant phenotyping instrumentation for knowledge discovery in plant
phenomics area. Characterization of the complete plant phenome has posed a
difficult challenge due to the large number of genes in the genomes, and
changeable environmental conditions that influence plant phenotypes. Analyzing
plant phenotypes on a large and multi-scale level with sufficient throughput and
resolution has thus been difficult and expensive. This project will lead to the
development of microsystem technology based plant phenotyping instrumentation,
and therefore will constitute a transformative leap in throughput and
information content over existing phenotype assays. The core of the
instrumentation is an integrated plant growth system consisting of an array of
miniature greenhouses, microfluidic plant chips, and microfluidic control logic.
The plant growth system can provide maximal environmental flexibility in large-
and multi-scale study of plant-environment interactions. The miniature
greenhouses will flexibly regulate relative humidity, carbon dioxide level, and
light intensity. The microfluidic plant chips will be designed to be sliding
chip-like disposable components for use inside the greenhouses. Each plant chip
will not only allow a number of plants to simultaneously grow for a desired
period of time, but be able to automatically trap individual seeds, change
growth temperature, regulate chemical concentration, and introduce biological
species to the plant growth regions. A programmable imaging system will be
designed to collect images of plant seeds, roots, shoots, and cells. To quantify
morphological traits and determine phenotypic differences in a high throughput
manner, an automated algorithm will be developed to extract and analyze images
acquired during plant growth and development. Arabidopsis thaliana will be used
as a model plant for biological verification of the instrumentation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will contribute to systematic analysis of
plant phenotypes with a wide range of applications in gene identification,
functional genomics, and genotype-to-phenotype correlations. Large and multi-
scale phenotyping of plants, in concert with changeable growth environmental
influences, has broad implications in applied and basic plant biology. The
proposed instrumentation will make breakthrough toward solving grand challenging
large-scale problems in the field of phenomics, will build resources to benefit
plant biology researchers, and will create a paradigm shift in the plant
phenomics area by placing powerful data analysis capability in the hands of
researchers. The education plans include providing an interdisciplinary
opportunity to three doctoral students and four undergraduate students including
two female and minority students, creating a one-credit seminar course for the
Undergraduate Bioengineering Minor Program, and adding a new lab to existing
undergraduate and graduate courses at Iowa State. The dissemination plan
includes providing phenotying services to plant biologists at Iowa State and
beyond through extensive collaborations, organizing Plant Phenomics workshop,
partnering with national laboratories to disseminate phenotying services, and
commercializing the instrumentation through the small business innovation
research or small business technology transfer mechanism.