* 1353944
* N2Women 2014 Student Travel Grants
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Sami Rollins, University of San Francisco
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 05/31/2015
* USD 10,000.00

This grant supports students at U.S. institutions to attend the 4th Networking
Networking Women (N^2Women) Workshop. This workshop will be co-足located with the
2014 annual conference of the ACM Special Interest Group on Data Communication
(SIGCOMM 2014), to be held in Chicago, Illinois, August 2014. The workshop will
be a full-day event held on the Sunday preceding the main conference in order to
foster connections between attendees early in the week. Moreover, we have
selected the Sunday timeslot to avoid conflicts with the technical workshops
associated with the conference, which will be held on the Monday preceding the
conference. Priority will be given to students who will benefit from attending
the workshop, but are unlikely to attend due to the unavailability of travel
funding. Students attending the N^2Women Workshop will be encouraged to stay and
attend SIGCOMM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The intellectual merit
of this proposal resides in the contributions that the student participants will
make to (1) the N^2Women Workshop, (2) the SIGCOMM 2014 event (the premier
conference in the networking communications field) and (3) the future scientific
progress of the students? research. The exposure to the technical content of
both the N^2Women Workshop and SIGCOMM 2014 will inspire students to address the
tough problems in their respective field, with a long-足term benefit of
scientific progress for these types of networks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: The broader impact of this proposal is the development of the
under-足represented graduate students who with this t ravel support are able to
attend the N^2Women. The travel funds will allow these graduate students to
attend high-足caliber technical presentations, be exposed to state-of-the-art
research, and interact with leading researchers and fellow graduate students. We
expect the impact to the students? careers from attending the N^2Women Workshop
to be substantial.