* 1353327
* Collaborative Research: Causes of Variation in Parid Call Complexity
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Todd Freeberg, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 08/31/2019
* USD 365,000.00

Human language is the most complex communication system known. However, many
non-human animal species also have quite complex communication systems,
including non-human primates, whales and dolphins, and even many bird species.
The key factors driving such complexity, though, remain largely unknown for both
human language and for non-human communication systems. Discovering these
factors is crucial to understanding the origin and evolution of such complex
behavior, including the origin of language in our own ancestors. The proposed
research will use observational and experimental methods to test three key
factors proposed to explain vocal communication complexity: social complexity
and group size, predation risk, and habitat-induced constraints on sound
transmission. The investigators will examine these factors in two common North
American bird species that possess complex systems of vocal behavior as well as
complex social structures: Carolina chickadees and tufted titmice. The
researchers will include their results in their teaching and mentor multiple
student researchers in current research methods including Big Data management
strategies, and collaborting with supercomputing staff through the Extreme
Science and Engineering Discovery Environment program associated with the
University of Illinois supercomputing facility. Lucas and Freeberg will continue
to write about this work for general-audience journals like American Scientist,
where they co-authored a 2012 article that has been read by thousands of readers
in the U.S. and abroad.

What factors drive the evolution of complex signals? The Social Complexity
Hypothesis posits that species or populations forming complex social groups
require more complex signaling systems than species or populations that form
simpler groups. Although there is increasing evidence to support the Social
Complexity Hypothesis, a key limitation is that it is rarely tested against
alternative hypotheses. The proposed work tests the Social Complexity Hypothesis
against two major alternative hypotheses to explain communicative complexity,
using chick-a-dee calls of two avian species of the family Paridae (Carolina
chickadees, Poecile carolinensis, and tufted titmice, Baeolophus bicolor): (1)
Social Complexity: Individuals in more complex flocks produce calls with greater
complexity than individuals in simpler flocks. (2) Habitat Constraints:
Individuals in habitats that are more open produce calls with greater complexity
than individuals in more closed habitats. (3) Predation Pressure: Individuals in
habitats with a greater density or diversity of predators produce calls with
greater complexity than individuals facing fewer predators. The hypotheses will
be tested with unprecedented resolution through captive flock experiments at the
University of Tennessee and University of Florida, data collected on un-
manipulated wild flocks, field playback experiments, and observations of flocks
before and after scheduled partial forest cuts at the University of Tennessee
and Purdue University. The work will increase understanding of the function and
mechanisms of complex communicative behavior and provide fundamental information
about how complex behavior at the level of the individual emerges from the
nature of the social and physical environmental setting in which the individual
lives. Parid species are now commonly utilized as a model system for the study
of social information use and its fitness consequences in animal communities.
This work lays a solid foundation for understanding the nature of parid call
complexity and, in turn, the generation of finely tuned information used by many
species in fitness-related decision-making in a rapidly changing world. The
investigators intend to deposit the data in the University of Tennessee
institutional repository, Trace (http://trace.tennessee.edu/), where University
of Tennessee Libraries staff will provide appraisal for long-term preservation
and stewardship. Trace addresses access, security, preservation, and copyright
of deposited research, and ensures that global researchers can find the data,
with the assignment of Digital Object Identifiers (DOIs) encouraging proper
citation and re-use.