* 1353421
* SBIR Phase II:  A Knowledge-Based System to Improve Student Advisement in Two Year Colleges
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2014,12/31/2016
* Fritz Grupe, Townsend Communications, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 12/31/2016
* USD 691,313.00

This SBIR Phase II project is designed to improve academic advising and access
to advising to over 11 million community college students. Community colleges
serve a significant population of non-traditional adult students seeking
associates degrees and vocational training to improve their job and career
prospects. Currently only one in four students enrolled in community colleges
graduate. The project will fund the completion of a knowledge based software
system that utilizes the knowledge of academic advisors, codifies and converts
their collective expertise into an advanced, knowledge based system that mirrors
guidance and recommendations that an expert advisor would provide a student.
Using this program community colleges, under pressure to improve graduation
rates while confronted with severe budget cuts, will be able to economically
expand the availability of advising services to large numbers of students. The
program can be tailored to individual campuses connecting their course offerings
to a student's recommended major and provide a wide variety of career advisement
support materials. The program also builds on national movements to advise
students with career clusters and career pathways in order to improve student
completion rate.

The broader / commercial impact of the project is to benefit over 2,300 two year
colleges serving 11 million students, many of whom are not receiving any or
adequate academic advising. Nationally experts are beginning to realize that
stronger academic advising is a critical component to improving graduation
rates. However, due to the cost of providing one on one advising is high and
schools and faced with reduced budgets, campuses need tools to expand their
advising without adding significantly to their budgets. Nowhere is this more
acute than at the community college level where only one in four students
graduate and students report advisement as a major weakness in their progress
toward degree and college completion. This project will complete the development
of a nationally available instrument that upgrades academic advisement for a
broad, currently under-served population of students who receive little or no
advisement. The knowledge-based system is built around a nationally accepted
career clusters concept. It supports a diminishing number of advisors at high
school and two year colleges, as well as advisors at workforce development and
other non-campus agencies. The program is already supported by three state
community college boards in California, Washington and Nevada.