* 1353640
* SBIR Phase II:  Integrated Voltage Regulators for Small Footprint, Efficient Power Delivery in Mobile Electronics
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2014,09/30/2016
* Wonyoung Kim, Lion Semiconductor
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 09/30/2016
* USD 1,409,999.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project seeks to develop
integrated voltage regulators (IVR) that are 10 times smaller than existing
solutions. Power management ICs (PMICs) are chips in mobile electronic devices
that deliver power from the battery to different chips (e.g., processor,
memory). Existing PMICs use discrete board-level inductors to efficiently
deliver power, but the problem is that inductors occupy a large area on the
board. This is especially problematic in space-constrained mobile electronic
devices. Mobile device manufacturers put tremendous amounts of effort to reduce
square millimeters of board area to make room for additional semiconductor chips
for new features. Using IVRs, mobile devices can have extra space that used to
be dedicated to bulky discrete components for PMICs, and use that space to
either include new chips for new features or increase the battery size for
longer battery life. This project will first work on semiconductor test-chip
prototypes that prove the idea of IVRs. Then, the next step is to demonstrate it
in commercial mobile electronic devices. The goal of the project is to ship IVRs
in high-volume smartphones and tablets by replacing existing
PMICs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project is in saving board area and processor power consumption in mobile
devices, which is crucial for continued innovation in mobile devices. Mobile
device manufacturers always look for new features to add in their next
generation products to differentiate themselves from competitors. New features
often need additional chips, but the problem is that there is simply no area
left in the mobile devices for new chips. One way to solve this is to shrink the
battery and leave more room for chips, but this is unacceptable since it reduces
battery life. The only way to keep introducing new features and chips is to
reduce the existing board area. IVRs solve this burning need of mobile devices.
Using IVRs, phones and tablets will have extra space in their board to include
new features such as micro-projectors and ultra-accurate motion sensing. The
technology developed from this project is essential in allowing mobile devices
to keep improving with new features. This project aims to have a big impact in
the fast-growing smartphone and tablet market with 1 billion and 250 million in
annual shipments, respectively.