* 1353600
* STTR Phase II:  Reconfigurable Wireless Platforms for Spectrally Agile Coexistence
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2014,09/30/2016
* Samuel MacMullan, ORB Analytics
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 09/30/2016
* USD 748,847.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase II project will involve
research on and development of a reconfigurable wireless platform enabling
broadband communications in rural areas via secondary access of television white
spaces (TVWS) spectrum. The recently ratified IEEE standard, 802.22, is the most
promising technique proposed for TVWS operation. Unfortunately, current 802.22
implementations create unacceptable levels of out-of-band (OOB) emissions,
greatly degrading the performance of both primary and secondary TVWS users.
Current designs also fail to sense the presence of other TVWS users as necessary
for coexistence. Such limitations have prevented the rollout of 802.22
solutions. The proposed work overcomes these limitations, leading to a low-cost,
high throughput, and robust implementation for the 802.22 wireless regional area
network (WRAN). Phase II laboratory and field testing will validate the
viability of Phase II developed 802.22 WRAN prototype devices for rural
broadband deployment. The activities described in this proposal will
significantly advance the community?s understanding of methods to make cognitive
radio networks such as 802.22 practical and effective in offering broadband
services in rural areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial
potential of this project centers on offering a low-cost broadband solution to
the 14.5 million Americans who live in rural areas currently beyond the reach of
broadband access, while appealing to those in rural areas that have broadband
access but are unable to afford the high equipment and service costs of current
solutions. Rural communities with broadband access have lower unemployment,
higher per capita earnings, and greater educational opportunity. Broadband
improves rural area healthcare effectiveness while lowering cost. Public safety,
emergency service, and first responder communities also call for high data-rate
communications to better predict and respond to natural disasters.