* 1353904
* IDBR: Type A - Improving 3D resolution and reducing sensitivity to spherical aberration in live, thick sample cellular imaging using novel methods in optical sectioning microscopy
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Chrysanthe Preza, University of Memphis
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2019
* USD 744,512.00

This award is being made to the University of Memphis by the Instrumentation
Development for Biological Research program in the Directorate for Biological
Sciences.

Several areas of biological and biomedical research critically depend on 3D
imaging for accurate analysis of subcellular structures within thick cellular
samples. This research project will create a new imaging system design based on
integrated computational and optical techniques to overcome the depth
limitations of high-resolution 3D microscope imaging. The collaborative nature
of the research is a model for cooperation between basic scientists and
engineers. Outreach activities associated with this project will provide
opportunities for local undergraduate students and community college instructors
to participate in this research, connect with biological researchers and the
international microscopy community, and gain skills in modern microscopy
techniques.

This project will develop a computational optical system for three-dimensional
(3D) microscopy imaging. The research involves integrated structured
illumination optics, phase modulated imaging optics, digital signal processing,
and analysis/synthesis techniques to achieve results not obtainable from
traditional imaging standards. A novel partially coherent illumination
configuration will be designed and tested and an imaging system uniquely capable
of insensitivity to sample-induced aberration will be engineered. Digital
processing algorithms that result in high-resolution, low-noise 3D images at
depths of up to 100 micrometers within a thick sample will be developed. The
broader impacts of this work include enabling of new capabilities developed to
address currently inaccessible biological questions as well as potential
societal benefits from implementation of a model for interdisciplinary education
that encourages young scientists and engineers to engage each other in the drive
toward innovation and discovery. Dissemination plans include a) a 3-day
workshop/training session for potential users and industry partners, and b)
online plans and instructions to build the system and the right to non-profit
institutions to use it for research.