* 1353249
* "Workshop on Key Challenges in the Implementation of Convergence"; September 16-17, 2013; National Academy of Sciences in Washington, DC
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2014
* Katherine Bowman, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 07/31/2014
* USD 25,000.00

The "Workshop on Key Challenges in the Implementation of Convergence" will be
held September 16-17, 2013 at the National Academy of Sciences in Washington,
DC. The grant will support the participation of approximately 15 younger and
diverse faculty members. An important area of development propelling research in
the life sciences has been the integration and collaboration of its research
communities with the physical, mathematical, computational, and engineering
sciences, often referred to as "convergence." The level of engagement to
implement this concept goes beyond one field simply borrowing tools or
techniques from another to emphasize the ability to forge new kinds of working
partnerships and take on new types of challenges. Convergence of the life
sciences with fields including physical, chemical, mathematical, computational,
and engineering sciences has become a key strategy to tackle complex challenges
and achieve new and innovative solutions. Numerous reports have explored
advances that are enabled when multiple disciplines come together in integrated
partnerships, and as a result institutions have increasingly moved to implement
programs that foster such convergent research. The workshop will gather
practitioners who embody or seek to embody convergent and transdisciplinary
research in their laboratories and organizations, leaders from academia and
industry, and representatives of foundations and agencies to discuss strategies
that programs have implemented to achieve this vision, what pitfalls were
encountered, and what practical lessons have been learned. An ad hoc committee
appointed through the National Academy of Sciences will distill the discussions
and the key messages, conclusions, and recommendations into a report that seeks
to provide useful guidance for the community. NSF support will enable a broader
group of faculty members to participate in the workshop and its discussions,
particularly younger faculty members and/or faculty members from diverse
institutions or from underrepresented groups. Engaging diverse perspectives in a
discussion of the strategies and challenges encountered while implementing
convergent science will be important if the promise of this convergence is to be
realized. Such younger and diverse faculty members will bring a wealth of ideas,
perspectives, and enthusiasm to the discussions. The workshop will help to
articulate the excitement of convergent science and explore examples of how it
can be implemented.