* 1353798
* Integrated analysis of pollen recognition and double fertilization mechanisms
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Mark Johnson, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 08/31/2018
* USD 669,708.00

Fertilization and seed production in flowering plants relies on the delivery of
two sperm to female gametes by a pollen tube. The success of the long and rapid
journey of the pollen tube relies on constant signaling between the pollen tube
cell and the cells of the pistil. Pollen tubes must find specific cellular
targets, they must burst when they arrive at the target, and their sperm must
fuse with female gametes. These events are all essential for seed production,
which is central to agricultural production and food security. Our goal is to
understand the molecules that mediate exchanges between pollen and pistil.
Cellular interactions between pollen and pistil are mediated by extracellular
signaling exchanges occurring in a complex environment where multiple pollen
tubes are competing for a limited number of ovules. Ovules are the structures
where female gametes develop and that mature into seeds (e.g. rice grains and
corn kernels) only after successful fertilization by a pollen tube. The United
States will be better able to contribute to scientific progress when our
scientists represent the full diversity of our nation. This project will provide
cutting edge training in biological imaging, genetics and genomics for early-
stage students from groups that have not traditionally been represented in US
science. These students will join a team of graduate students and a post-
doctoral researcher who will also receive training through this project.

This project will use unique molecular tools to define: 1) Pollen components of
the signaling system that results in cessation of tube growth and sperm release
in the ovule, 2) Novel components of the mechanisms required for gamete fusion,
and 3) How gamete fusion triggers a mechanism that prevents multiple pollen
tubes from entering a single ovule.This project will take an integrated approach
to the study of fertilization in flowering plants. The molecules that must be
displayed by the pollen tube for recognition by the female will be discovered.
The project will also define novel components of the gamete fusion mechanism and
test hypotheses aimed at understanding how gamete fusion blocks attraction of
subsequent pollen tubes. The project takes advantage of unique expertise in
imaging, genetics, and genomics to understand how pollen-pistil interactions are
integrated to maximize seed production. Defining the molecular exchanges between
pollen and pistil that maximize reproductive success will transform our ability
to generate new crop varieties with resilient pollination systems.