* 1353643
* SBIR Phase II:  Wirelessly Operated Implantable Micropump for On-demand Drug Administration in Laboratory Animals
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2014,08/31/2021
* Tuan Hoang, Fluid Synchrony, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 08/31/2021
* USD 1,497,949.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project couples the
precision of microtechnology with low-power microfluidics to realize a fully-
implantable micropump specifically tailored for drug delivery applications in
rodents. Currently, drug administration is predominantly conducted by manual
handling and needle injection which is labor-intensive, induces stress and other
?white-coat? effects and is limited to simple drug release profiles. There is a
need for advanced drug administration capability in animals that enables new
complex dosing profiles, provides automation for chronic studies, and improves
scientific validity. Technical challenges include the development of a low-power
inductively-powered pump actuator, ten-fold pump miniaturization and wireless
control of a large number of implanted pumps. The research objectives are (1) to
optimize pump performance and usability (2) to extend cage size compatibility
and connectivity (3) to optimize software usability (4) to optimize system
design and establish quality assurance processes for scale-up and (5) to conduct
an in-vivo validation study. Successful demonstration of the remotely-controlled
implantable infusion pump system will enable new dosing schemes, provide precise
temporally controlled dosing for more reproducible results from acute and
chronic studies, and enable new approaches to drug therapy that would not
otherwise be possible. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project lies in uniquely improving
scientific outcomes and facilitating the drug development/discovery process.
Currently, only one in 10,000 drug candidates successfully attain FDA approval
with a significant number of candidates failing or discarded due to inadequate
drug administration. Rapid and accurate evaluation of efficacy, safety and
toxicity early in the drug development process is improved through the fully
automated, wirelessly-controlled drug dosing technology supported by this Phase
II project. This project targets the international laboratory animal market
estimated at $3.4B in 2012. Animal models are employed throughout the drug
development pipeline and in particular, rodents are critical to drug candidate
target validation, screening, and optimization. Included in this effort are
several significant first-to-market capabilities such as chronic dosing
capability in freely-moving, tether-free mice and high-throughput evaluation of
multiple new drugs through automation. The controlled delivery of agents,
including emerging biologics, siRNA, peptides, and small molecules, is an
important capability in a multitude of clinical and preclinical research
applications including neuroscience, pharmacology, toxicology, and physiology.
More importantly, this project will enable drug studies that to be performed in
a manner that will facilitate and enhance the translation of candidate therapies
from animal to human.