* 1353447
* SBIR Phase II:  Low Temperature Ion Source for High-Brightness Focused Ion Beams
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2014,02/28/2018
* Brenton Knuffman, zeroK NanoTech Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 02/28/2018
* USD 1,260,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will develop
low-temperature ion source (LoTIS) technology which uses laser-cooling to create
a beam of Cs+ ions with high brightness and low energy spread. This technology
will extend the utility of focused ion beam (FIB) instrumentation that is widely
used for nanometer-scale precision machining tasks; it accomplishes this by
addressing shortcomings in precision and speed afforded by commercially
available ion sources. One primary research aim of this project is the
measurement of a key ion source performance metric, namely brightness, in order
to compare its value to that of incumbent ion source technologies. LoTIS may
have a brightness that is tenfold to one hundred-fold larger than the industry
standard liquid metal ion source. An ion source with such an improved brightness
would enable superior machining precision at higher speeds over a broader range
of ion beam operating energies.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is to develop improved
FIB instrumentation to empower users in a variety of research fields and
industrial applications, including nanotechnology, biotechnology, semiconductor
manufacturing, and energy exploration. In particular, nanomachining
applications, including integrated circuit edit and rapid prototyping of
nanoscale device structures, are increasingly limited by the precision afforded
by current ion source technology, and the users in these areas are in need of
higher-precision FIBs. FIBs employed for transmission electron microscope
lamellae preparation require less precision but could benefit from reduced
subsurface ion damage provided by this method, through the use of Cs+ ions at
low energy. A bright source of Cs+ ions could also dramatically improve the
resolution and throughput for spatially-resolved elemental mapping in secondary
ion mass spectrometry (SIMS) applications. This technique represents an order-
of-magnitude ion source performance improvement that will address FIB user needs
across a wide spectrum of scientific and commercial applications.