* 1353159
* OPUS: The function of dead wood in forest ecosystems: A synthesis for the next decade
* BIO,DEB
* 04/15/2014,03/31/2017
* Mark Harmon, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 03/31/2017
* USD 146,900.00

Dead trees are part of every forested landscape and ecosystem, yet much remains
to be learned about their role in these systems. Although the study of dead
trees is in its infancy, a significant body of literature and associated data
have become available in the last 25 years that can be used to describe the many
functions of dead wood in forested ecosystems of the world. Over a two-year
period this project will synthesize results from journal articles, past reviews,
and data analyses related to the role of dead trees in forests leading to an
updated synthesis in book form. Specific activities include: an updated
literature review and analysis of the function of dead trees in forests of the
world; reanalysis of long-term experimental data on wood decomposition;
compilation of articles, images, and photographs related to dead trees; updating
and expansion of previously published reviews and book chapters; and synthesis
of all these materials into a book.

Dead trees are one of the most common objects in forests, yet their function is
often ascribed as "waste". In reality dead trees serve many important ecological
functions such as a habitat and a food source for a wide host of organisms, part
of the physical structure in forest streams, a source of energy, water, carbon,
and nutrients for forest organisms, as well as fuel for either human use or for
wildfires. It is of critical importance in a world in which the number and
volume of dead trees is likely to be increasing, that their role and dynamics be
better understood not only by specialists but also by all those managing and/or
using forests. This scientific synthesis therefore represents a major
improvement in understanding a major component of all forests. To enhance public
understanding and appreciation of this important natural resource a parallel
project will create visual and written presentations of dead trees that will be
distributed in multiple formats such as public displays and a popular book.