* 1353623
* SBIR Phase II:  Development of a Media-Rich, Game-Based Social Learning Platform for Improving Math Process Skills
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2014,07/31/2016
* Sheela Sethuraman, CueThink
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 07/31/2016
* USD 908,645.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase 2 project proposal refines
and scales the project's initial platform for improving mathematics problem
solving. Math classrooms today spend most of their time practicing procedures
and rarely spend time engaged in deep study of mathematical concepts. In
addition, by the time students reach middle school, a number of them have either
developed math anxiety or are not adequately challenged. This mobile
collaborative platform supports process-driven, student led solutions. Students
can create, curate and evaluate multimedia vignettes of their own thinking
process. In Phase 2, the team will continue to refine the product, targeting
students in Grade 5-12. It will also build a multi-faceted dashboard to help
educators customize content, create learning pathways and determine student
strengths and weaknesses. In addition, the company intends to extend the product
to support English Language Learners and students with learning
difficulties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of
this project offers tremendous promise for changing math education and
engagement both in and out of the classroom. This platform will help students
develop confidence and skills in solving complex problems, refine their math
communication and improve their meta-cognition through the review of other
students' work and equip teachers with tangible data about growth measures. This
enables the company to address multiple markets starting with the $1.6 billion
5-12 market segment and subsequently addressing several adjacent market segments
that are growing rapidly. The team brings a strong and diverse mix of
educational, technical and business skills that will be critical to successful
commercialization of the proposed math education innovation.