* 1353404
* Collaborative Research: Understanding the potential for a climate change-driven critical transition from forest to chaparral
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Howard Epstein, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 07/31/2018
* USD 98,503.00

The frequency and severity of wildfires is changing throughout much of the West,
impacting humans and forest ecosystem services and the rate of forest recovery
after wildfires. These altered wildfire rates and forest recovery patterns may
force the dominant vegetation permanently to shift from forests to shrubs. The
25-million acre (10 million hectare) Klamath region of Oregon and California is
an area of particular concern. A shift from forest to shrub would impair the
ecosystem services of the forest that benefit humans, impair unparalleled
botanical diversity of the Klamath region (for example, there are 29 species of
conifer trees that support associated assemblages of other plants and animals)
and release massive amounts of greenhouse gasses as these high-carbon
sequestering forests transition to low-carbon content shrub-chaparral. The
scientists working on this project will evaluate the potential for a forest to
shrub transition in the Klamath and collaborate directly with the U.S. Forest
Service to identify robust strategies for ecosystem management in the face of
climate change. Including the participation of Forest Service decision-makers,
who manage 80% of the Klamath region, will ensure the transparency and
credibility of the science, thereby increasing its impact on environmental
outcomes.

This project will test the general hypothesis that climate may drive a critical
transition in the Klamath from a high-biomass conifer forest dominated region to
a self- low-biomass shrub-chaparral-hardwood dominated region because of
increased fire activity and decreased forest recovery rate. The project will
quantify the potential for, and mechanisms underlying, a climate induced
transition using a three-pronged research approach: (1) development of general
mathematical models to gain a broad understanding of dynamics underlying
critical thresholds in fire-prone ecotones and to identify the functional
relationships that control transitions between shrub-chaparral-hardwood and
mature conifer forest, at local and landscape levels; (2) field research to
characterize the climate- dependence of post-fire recovery and to test and
parameterize models; (3) process-based simulations of local, landscape, and
regional dynamics to characterize the interactive roles of climate, fire, and
management in shaping the region's ecological communities. Improving
understanding of critical transitions has been recognized as a fundamental
challenge in ecology with global relevance and urgency in the face of climate
change. Increased understanding of the potential for a critical transition in
the Klamath region will inform the management of fire-prone forests worldwide.