* 1353919
* EAGER:The 'Keystone Community Concept' as a probe to understand metacommunity ecology.
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2015
* Mathew Leibold, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 08/31/2015
* USD 252,216.00

The classical approach to understanding ecological communities is based on the
niche, and relates local environmental conditions to the species found in a
community. Recent challenges to this approach emphasize the importance of
processes that act over broader spatial scales, such as dispersal and
extinction. While it is likely that natural communities are influenced by both
local and regional factors, the interaction between these has been extremely
difficult to study. This EAGER project will develop new theory, statistical
tools, and experimental protocols to quantify the roles of dispersal limitation,
extinction, and niche-based community assembly in natural, unmanipulated
communities. Because few of the proposed approaches are thoroughly developed,
the research is risky. It promises to transform the field of community ecology
from its current dichotomous and therefore simplistic view of community
regulation to one that integrates diverse processes across broad spatial scales.
As a result, scientific understanding of natural communities and the maintenance
of biodiversity will be significantly improved.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By
extending existing theory and developing a new, statistical toolbox to test this
theory in natural communities, the work will contribute significantly to the
general field of ecology. Results will be directly applicable to critical
questions in conservation of biodiversity. The project will involve a workshop
to consolidate links between theoretical metacommunity ecology and conservation
biology. Through this workshop, research that is primarily theoretical will gain
practical application. Undergraduate students, graduate students and a
postdoctoral researcher will participate in the project, gaining experience in
linking theory with experimentation. The project will also engage secondary
school teachers in association with the University of Texas U Teach program.