* 1353946
* Leveraging Workshop: Catalyzing University-Industry Engagement to Promote the Nation's Competitiveness
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2014
* Anthony Boccanfuso, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Donald Senich
* 09/30/2014
* USD 30,000.00

The organizing theme for this Workshop is: "Strengthening the Nation's
Competitiveness through Stronger University-Industry-Government Engagement".
This grant provides funding to host a workshop on the planning for, execution
of, and reporting on an outcomes-oriented workshop designed to evaluate the
current government-university-industry research, development, and
commercialization engagement model and identify new approaches worthy of
consideration and testing.

Leaders in the public and private sectors have long recognized that strategic
Industry/University (I/U) research collaborations are critical to advancing a
nation's commercialization portfolio, and its overall economic competitiveness
and well-being. While few challenge this hypothesis that the idea-to-innovation
process is bolstered by healthy university-industry relations, the type of
strategic and high value collaborations are often difficult to implement.

To achieve its objectives, the Workshop will be structured around: a pre-event
survey that captures issues to be addressed; presentation on the topics and
findings/materials from the October 2012 GUIRR/UIDP Workshop; examinations of
what role federal agencies and NSF specifically play; regional efforts meant to
spur collaboration; identification of on-going and proposed
pilots/demonstrations; and building new models.

The Workshop will bring together a strategic set of thought leaders who have the
ability to affect change in their organizations and undertake pilots,
demonstrations and experiments that can impact the way that companies and
universities (in conjunction with government) act. Many of the invitees will
have experience implementing bold approaches and providing a neutral environment
for conversations will bolster efforts to dispassionately consider these pilots
and propose new ones. The National Academies has been a critical player in
examining issues affecting university-industry collaborations. Through its
Government-University-Industry Research Roundtable, The National Academies
regularly has convened thought leaders from academia, corporate, government and
the non-profit sectors to examine these issues and created the University-
Industry Demonstration Partnership to provide an incubator for addressing
matters affecting high value, high return collaborations between the sectors.
Using the National Academies GUIRR and UIDP programs provides a high visibility
platform for launching national experiments to advance co-creation among the
three sectors.