* 1353592
* SBIR Phase II:  Bio-Based Latex by Emulsion Polymerization of Alkyl Itaconates
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2014,12/31/2016
* Yvon Durant, Itaconix Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 12/31/2016
* USD 765,989.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project will optimize large-
scale production of latex polymers from alkyl itaconates. These latexes
represent a new class of polymers that offer desirable properties in wood,
textile, paper and adhesive coatings, including low odor, no VOC contribution,
and bio-based production. Itaconix has previously developed cost-effective
emulsion polymerization processes to produce this new class of polymers. The
research objective for this project is to scale and optimize these processes for
use in large production reactors. The expected result is commercial quantities
of itaconate latexes. The project is highly innovative and will enable a major
new class of latex polymers that are novel, offer desired coating properties,
are made from renewable resources, and will accelerate the development of
integrated bio-refineries.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is a significant
expansion in the potential use of competitive bio-based products. Many of the
current bio-based products under development, such as bio-acrylic acid, are
drop-in replacements for petroleum-based versions of the same product. Future
use of such drop-ins often depends on complexities of commodity prices, short-
term economic objectives and long- term environmental goals. The benefits from
producing and using of itaconate latexes are straight forward and uncomplicated.
These products offer novel chemistry with unique functionality at competitive
price/performance to petroleum-based products. They are safe for humans and the
environment to manufacture and use. They are made from renewable resources and
will accelerate the development of high-value-added bio-refineries, and from
paints to paper, consumers are seeking to increase the bio-content and use of
renewable resources in the products that they buy. Commercial scale production
and use of itaconate latexes will expand opportunities in the U.S. to meet all
of these objectives.