* 1353862
* Regulation of glutamate receptors at synapses by WD40 repeat proteins and the deubiquitinating enzyme USP-46 in C. elegans
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Peter Juo, Tufts University
* Continuing Grant
* Evan Balaban
* 07/31/2019
* USD 715,000.00

This project will increase our fundamental understanding of how neurons
communicate with each other at the molecular level. Neuronal communication is
essential for normal brain function and for learning and memory. Neurons
communicate with each other at specialized junctions called synapses. Neurons
release chemical signals, such as the neurotransmitter glutamate, which are
received by downstream neurons via specialized protein detectors called
glutamate receptors (GluRs). Changing the number or levels of GluRs at the
synapse allows neurons to alter their communication, which enables the brain to
learn, adapt and store memories. The specific focus of this project is to study
how a new family of proteins control the number of GluRs at the synapse by
preventing their degradation via the ubiquitin system. Ubiquitin is a tag that
can be attached and removed from other proteins in a highly controlled manner.
Proteins marked with ubiquitin are targeted to the cellular trash for
degradation. This proposal studies how three proteins function together to
specifically remove ubiquitin from GluRs, thus rescuing them from degradation
and increasing receptor levels at the synapse. In addition, this project
develops and launches an innovative, discovery-based Molecular Genetics and Cell
Biology Lab Course for undergraduates, trains graduate students and postdoctoral
fellows, and provides research opportunities for high school teachers and
minority undergraduates.

Ubiquitin is an important regulator of synapse development and function. There
are about 100 deubiquitinating enzymes (DUBs) that remove ubiquitin from other
proteins, however very little is known about the DUBs that function at the
synapse. The awardee's lab recently identified USP-46 as the first DUB to
regulate GluRs. This proposal investigates how two proteins, WDR-20 and WDR-48,
interact and regulate the activity of USP-46 to control GluRs levels at the
synapse, and tests how these molecular changes affect behavior. This study uses
genetic, biochemical, quantitative imaging and behavioral methods to study GluRs
in the well-established genetic model organism C. elegans. Advantages of C.
elegans include powerful genetic tools, a simple and defined nervous system, and
simple behavioral assays to correlate neuronal function with whole animal
behavior. The basic mechanisms involved in synapse development and function are
conserved from nematodes to humans. Understanding how molecular changes at the
synapse impact neuronal communication and behavior will provide fundamental
information that could be applied to improve learning and memory, and to begin
to uncover the molecular basis of learning and behavioral disorders.