* 1353800
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Democratizing the Teaching of Parallel Computing Concepts
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2015
* Jennifer Chiu, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Sushil K Prasad
* 09/30/2015
* USD 40,000.00

A study by the U.S. Council of Competitiveness reports that 97% of U.S.
businesses rely on the innovative use of high-performance parallel computing
(HPC) to maintain their competitive advantage in the global economy.
Furthermore, the ubiquity of multi- and many-core processors in modern computing
devices, ranging from the small (embedded devices and cell phones) to the medium
(laptops and desktops) to the large (data centers and supercomputers), requires
that computing educators properly prepare the next generation of computer
scientists to reason about problem solving in a parallel way. Unfortunately,
companies lament the dearth of a trained workforce that is familiar with
parallel computing concepts, thus exacerbating the problem of the technological
change and globalization that is potentially leaving the U.S. behind in the
world economy. To address this shortcoming, this project extends and transforms
the investigators' existing computer science (CS) curriculum to democratize the
teaching of parallel computing concepts by leveraging Scratch, an educational
programming language shown to be highly effective in teaching computing to
children but lacking in explicit parallel programming constructs. Providing a
rich visual environment, Scratch enables students to create sophisticated
programs just by dragging predefined components into a visual editor. This
project enhances Scratch with abstractions for explicit parallel processing with
a prototype for evaluation and deployment to ensure broad applicability,
facilitate adoption, and assure educational effectiveness. Enhancing Scratch
with such parallel programming abstractions enriches the computer science
&lt;br/&gt;curriculum, without imposing the cognitive overhead and overload
typically associated with teaching parallel computing. This project engenders a
unique cross-disciplinary collaboration between the fields of parallel
computing, software engineering, and education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Significance: This project aims at democratizing the teaching of parallel
computing concepts, thus molding the minds of the next generation of computer
scientists to effectively realize solutions that take advantage of explicit
parallel processing. This educational intervention has the potential to bridge
the technological gap that is leaving the U.S. behind in the world economy. The
project directly impacts students from middle school to college and even
professionals seeking re-training. Students involved &lt;br/&gt;in this research
receive training in parallel computing, software engineering, and education.
Outreach to underrepresented groups includes the continuation of the PIs's
efforts in recruiting and retaining female and underrepresented minority
students in research and education under the auspices of this project.