* 1353987
* IDBR: Type A, An Ultraprecise and Ultrastable Atomic Force Microscope for  Multimodal Characterization of Biological Molecules and Materials
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Thomas Perkins, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 06/30/2018
* USD 665,000.00

This award to the University of Colorado at Boulder, by the Instrument
Development for Biological Research program, in the Division of Biological
Infrastructure (Biological Sciences Directorate),is jointly funded by the
Biomaterials Program in the Division of Materials Science (Math and Physical
Sciences Directorate). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Atomic force microscopy (AFM) is a
tool used for imaging, measuring, and manipulating matter at the nanoscale, and
gathers surface information by using a mechanical probe called a cantilever.
Applications of AFM in biology include understanding the folding and unfolding
of individual proteins. Protein function requires proper folding, and misfolding
can lead to diseases such as Alzheimer's. In folding studies, force stability is
critical since the folding and unfolding rates are sensitive to sub-piconewton
(pN) changes in force. This project merges cost-effective micromachining of
cantilevers with a novel optical detection to achieve a 1,600-fold increase in
temporal resolution at 1 pN. The proposed developments will benefit the fields
of biology, as well as materials science. Project activities will provide
excellent interdisciplinary training for undergraduates as well as graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The twin goals of this project are to develop a
next generation AFM for biological measurements that achieves (i) world-leading
short-term force precision coupled with state-of-the-art force stability and
(ii) extend its imaging capability beyond topography to map chemical composition
with enhanced resolution. The first goal will be demonstrated in the context of
protein folding assays. To provide a 10-100-fold improvement in force stability,
a novel differential detection system of cantilever motion will be developed.
This system will use a tiny spot size (~2 ìm) to enable detection of ultra-small
(L = 10 ìm) cantilevers, which have been modified by a focused ion beam for
improved performance. These cantilevers enable world-leading force precision
coupled with sub-pN stability over long periods (100 s). The second project goal
focuses on chemical characterization of materials using a new Raman imaging
modality that offers 3.5-nm resolution. By scattering multiple laser beams off
the AFM tip, the proposed AFM will synergistically merge this exciting imaging
modality with the world-leading tip-sample stability and builds upon a strength
of the PI?s lab: integrating multiple lasers into an AFM. Initial studies will
focus on DNA wrapped carbon nanotubes. Results will be disseminated via papers,
presentations, and patents. Biological research communities that will benefit
from this project include single-molecule biophysics, membrane protein biology,
cellular structure, protein folding, as well as other disciplines (e.g.,
physics, material science, &amp; nanotechnology). Collaborations with AFM
manufacturers (including Asylum Research and Molecular Vista) will facilitate
adoption by a wider user base.