* 1353624
* SBIR Phase II:  An Innovative Robotic Jamming Gripper
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2014,09/30/2016
* John Amend, Empire Robotics, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 09/30/2016
* USD 925,999.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project will continue the
development of an innovative robotic gripping technology that leverages the
unique jamming behavior of granular materials to enable a device that can
passively conform to objects of varying shape and then vacuum harden to grip
them rigidly. These ?jamming grippers? are a unique solution for the agile
gripping and manipulation of arbitrary objects with a single gripper -- a need
that occurs in manufacturing robotics, prosthetics, and increasingly in home and
healthcare robotics. Preliminary results published in top scientific journals
successfully implemented this technique in a laboratory setting. The Phase I and
Phase IB efforts further demonstrated the technical and market feasibility of a
commercial product based on this technology. In Phase II, the research objective
are: 1) to answer the critical remaining research questions that stand between
the prototypes and a commercial product, 2) to demonstrate product feasibility
by transitioning the technology from the prototype stage to a first Alpha
product, and 3) to expand the capabilities of this technology by developing and
testing prototypes for adjacent market applications. Successful completion of
this project will position the team for sustainable sales of a suite of related
products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project will be realized through technological contributions in the area of
robotics. The first target market will be industrial manufacturing, focusing on
tasks where variations in object shape are prevalent (e.g. food handling,
pharmaceuticals, bin picking, and kitting/assembly). Alternative robotic
gripping solutions range (in increasing price) from vacuum suction cups, to
traditional jawed grippers, to customized or specialty grippers, and finally to
general purpose multi-fingered hands. The simplicity of the proposed jamming
gripper can potentially enable two orders of magnitude price reduction over
current grippers that achieve similar performance. This gripper is also uniquely
positioned to open the door to a previously untapped niche market ? simple
movement tasks in manufacturing that must currently be performed by human
laborers due to lower volumes or frequent line changes. The flexibility and low
cost of a jamming gripper makes it a more agile and reusable component, and this
type of solution is the key element that is missing for bringing robotic
automation to many smaller scale manufacturers in the U.S.