* 1353601
* SBIR Phase II:Next Generation Vertical Cavity Surface Emitting Lasers
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2014,08/31/2018
* Majid Riaziat, OEPIC SEMICONDUCTORS, INC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 08/31/2018
* USD 1,040,745.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project proposes to fabricate
and commercialize Vertical Cavity Surface Emitting Lasers (VCSELs) that are free
from any wavelength limitations imposed by the choice of semiconductor
substrate. These revolutionary VCSELs will operate in a single mode with high
output power, narrow linewidth and a stable linear polarization for use in
spectroscopy and communications. Using 2D photonic crystal structures and
substrate-independent reflectors, it is possible to build efficient single mode
VCSELs at any wavelength covering the near-infrared and approaching mid infrared
(800nm to 2,500nm). High efficiency and high output power are achieved by very
low electrical resistance and efficient heat sinking. The first prototype will
have the ambitious goal of offering a preferred alternative to DFB lasers in
long-haul fiber optic communications and near infrared
spectroscopy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of
this project includes many societal, educational, scientific and commercial
benefits. As a social benefit, the commercialization of this technology will
enable faster and simpler air and water contamination measurements, and faster
and lower-cost telecommunications. As an educational and scientific benefit, the
next generation VCSEL development provides a robust and reliable method for
fabricating 2D photonic crystals that are usable for optical signal processing
and novel laser designs. Also, the resulting high-efficiency compact lasers with
high mode quality can be used for pumping high power solid state lasers; and
finally, the high speed versions of these advanced lasers can simplify data
communication in fast computer systems used in scientific simulations. As a
commercial impact, the additional functionalities of the next generation VCSELs
will enable them to break out of their current niche datacom market into broader
applications in communications and instrumentation. Their substrate independence
will eventually make it possible to process them on silicon and other materials
suitable for the final application. This will lead to a significant increase in
demand for VCSELs due to the new markets that they will serve.