* 1353825
* Solar Cycle, Solar Wind, and Ultraviolet (UV) Control of Substorm Frequency and Magnitude
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2018
* Thomas Sotirelis, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* John Meriwether
* 05/31/2018
* USD 305,000.00

Magnetospheric substorms are one of the most widely studied and important topics
in magnetospheric physics. Substorms are frequent and studies of substorms allow
researchers to investigate the basic physics of the dynamics of the solar wind,
magnetosphere and ionosphere system. It is well recognized that magnetic
reconnection occurs at the dayside magnetopause in the overwhelming majority of
substorms and is generally thought to be the main way in which mass, momentum
and energy are transported from the solar wind to the magnetosphere. However,
other processes can also influence substorm dynamics. This is a proposal to
evaluate the importance of the solar wind velocity and ionospheric conductivity
on substorm dynamics. It is possible to separate these effects from the effects
of reconnection because of the large 30 year data base created by the SuperMAG
project. In a substorm the magnetosphere is first preconditioned by the solar
wind. This preconditioning has two time scales. In this proposal it is
hypothesized that those time scales are influenced by the solar wind velocity.
One influence affects the reconnection rate at the dayside magnetopause and the
other provides ?seed energy? to the plasma sheet. The investigators also propose
to investigate the influence of ionospheric conductivity on substorm
preconditioning by studying the effects of solar UV insolation. In particular
they will investigate the semi-annual variation of geomagnetic activity with
peak activity at the equinoxes and the observation that during substorms
stronger auroras occur in the winter hemisphere. They propose to resolve the
question of whether dipole tilt (and hence reconnection) drives the equinoctial
variation or whether UV insolation is also important. This work will support a
young woman scientist just starting her career. The Applied Physics Laboratory
has an ongoing program to support summer interns. The database from this study
will be very valuable to the overall magnetospheric physics effort.