* 1353461
* IDBR: Type A Adaptive Optical Structured Illumination Microscope (AOSIM)
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2014,01/31/2018
* Joel Kubby, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 01/31/2018
* USD 391,543.00

An award is made to the University of California Santa Cruz to develop an
Adaptive Optical Structured Illumination Microscope (AO-SIM) for in-vivo super-
resolution imaging. While super-resolution imaging has revolutionized optical
microscopy by overcoming the diffraction limit in far-field imaging, it has yet
to transform dynamic live in vivo imaging through thick tissue, which is of
broad interest to the biological research community. The development of an AO-
SIM in this project is a novel combination of three different imaging techniques
that will enable this; structured-illumination to double the resolution from 220
nm to 110 nm, tomography to increase the corrected volume, and a woofer-tweeter
adaptive optical system sufficient for an order of magnitude increase in the
depth of correction. This capability will be transformative since live super-
resolution imaging has only been demonstrated at superficial depths (i.e. 1-10
microns), and there is a clear and broad need for it at deeper depths within the
biological research community. Active areas of research using super-resolution
microscopy include cellular architecture, membrane heterogeneity and dynamic
protein assembly. Specific examples of research that will benefit from the
instrument developed in this project include live, deep-tissue in vivo studies
of chromosome structure and function during meiosis in C. elegans and the
regulation of chromatin structure and gene expression in Drosophila. Both of
these research topics can be addressed with the 1 Hz imaging speed targeted for
the instrument. The instrument development team is well qualified to conduct the
project as they have previously developed the first adaptive optical microscope
that used direct wavefront sensing to achieve live, dynamic (0.6 sec AO
correction time) diffraction limited (220 nm) imaging in thick (>90 Ã¬m)
biological tissues. The approach used for fast direct wavefront measurement in
adaptive optical image correction is also applicable to other forms of super-
resolution and structured illumination imaging including Stimulated Emission
Depletion (STED) microscopy, Photo-Activated Localization Microscopy (PALM),
Stochastic Optical Reconstruction Microscopy (STORM), and Selective Plane
Imaging Microscopy (SPIM). The instrument development team has access to the
required resources including the W.M. Keck Center for Adaptive Optical
Microscopy (CfAOM), the UC Center for Adaptive Optics (CfAO), and the UCO/Lick
Laboratory for Adaptive Optics (LAO), all located on the UC Santa Cruz campus.

This project enables live super-resolution images of samples in difficult to
access locations providing new information for a host of biosystems. It also
provides training in cutting edge optical science for students at UC Santa Cruz,
a Hispanic-Serving Institution (HSI). The research team members are active
participants in programs that help sustain our broader impact, providing
research experiences to aspiring scientists, with emphasis on serving
underrepresented minority students. These include the NSF-funded California
State Summer School for Mathematics and Science (COSMOS) program, the Institute
for Scientist & Engineer Educators (ISEE), and the NIH-funded Minority Access to
Research Careers and Initiative for Maximizing Student Development. COSMOS, a
4-week summer residential program for high school scholars, provides an
intensive experience that encourages promising young scholars to continue their
interest in science and mathematics. COSMOS students work side-by- side with
outstanding researchers and university faculty, covering topics that extend
beyond the typical high school curriculum. Our AO microscopy research results
are presented regularly at these summer sessions and COSMOS students have been
visiting the AO microscopy lab for the last 5 summers. ISEE also supports a new
generation of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
professionals. The program is structured around three major themes: inquiry,
diversity and equity, and assessment. ISEE mobilizes current and future STEM
professionals to teach and mentor hundreds undergraduates and postgraduates each
year. The resulting next-generation instrument will be made available for users
at the W.M. Keck Center for Adaptive Optical Microscopy (CfAOM)
(http://cfaom.soe.ucsc.edu/), a research center focused on the application of
adaptive optics in biological imaging. The results of the project will be
presented at conferences and workshops attended by both biologists and
instrument development communities. The research results will be published in
leading journals, patent applications and in an image gallery (iGallery) on the
CfAOM website. Web links will be established to the iGallery from the leading
biological microscopy courses and super-resolution vendor technology web pages
in order to advertise the new imaging capability to the biological research
community. The original vendor of structured illumination microscopes, Applied
Precision, a GE Healthcare Company, has expressed an interest in a
commercialization partnership to broadly disseminate the AO-SIM once it is
successfully developed.

This award is being made jointly by two Programs- (1) Instrument Development for
Biological Research, in the Division of Biological Infrastructure (Biological
Sciences Directorate), and (2) Chemical Measurements and Imaging, in the
Division of Chemistry (Math and Physical Sciences Directorate).