* 1353423
* IDBR: TYPE A: Highly Efficient and Rapid Viral Aerosol Detection System (HERVADS)
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2018
* Hugh Fan, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 04/30/2018
* USD 382,549.00

An award is made to the University of Florida to develop a bioaerosol instrument
whose purpose is to enable highly efficient and rapid detection of airborne
viruses. Existing bioaerosol sampling systems are designed for bacterial aerosol
collection/detection, which are very ineffective for capturing viral aerosols
because viruses are much smaller than bacteria. In addition, conventional
detection methods for viruses are time consuming and therefore do not allow
determination in field investigation. The novel Highly Efficient and Rapid Viral
Aerosol Detection System (HERVADS) utilizes cooling and mixing methods to enable
particle size amplification so that the nanosized viruses can be efficiently
collected from air (&gt;90% of the new device compared to 5-10% of the existing
device). Integrated with a paper-based microfluidic device with selective and
sensitive immunoassay, the instrument allows detection of sampled viruses in
minutes, orders of magnitude faster than the current method (in days), thus
enabling its uses in the field. Incorporation of electrostatic mechanism into
the system further enables detection of viral aerosols even in low
concentration. By working closely with an industrial partner, the research team
will have frequent and in-time feedbacks that allow incorporation of critical
features for successful commercial development in the future. The University of
Florida?s Office of Technology Licensing will also assist the research team in
feasibility assessment, dissemination and outreach.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Successful development and implementation of the novel
HERVADS will have significant societal impacts. The HERVADS will impact
environmental field studies, enabling the sampling of viruses of environmental
and agricultural importance and furthering our basic understanding of the
natural diversity of viruses associated with a variety of environmental niches.
The HERVADS can also be used to help monitor air quality in critical
environments such as emergency rooms, detecting biological pathogen threats, and
would be useful for monitoring respiratory pathogens in mass gatherings. In
addition, the cohesive collaboration among mechanical engineering, environmental
science and virology will train graduate students with multi- and inter-
disciplinary knowledge. Involvement of undergraduate researchers will motivate
and better prepare them for pursuit of advanced education. YouTube videos
created for this project will be a vehicle to reach the public, for course
materials, as well as to promote the interest in utilizing the
HERVADS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is being made jointly by two Programs-
(1) Instrument Development for Biological Research, in the Division of
Biological Infrastructure (Biological Sciences Directorate), and (2) the
Division of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental and Transport Systems
(Engineering Directorate).