* 1353739
* Activity-dependent development of the glial network in Drosophila ventral nerve cord
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Lynne Oland, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Evan Balaban
* 07/31/2017
* USD 435,000.00

Glial cells are non-electrical brain cells that work together with neurons to
make the nervous system function. Glial cells can sense the activity of neurons
and control it, help to guide the wiring of the networks of neurons, are
involved in learning and memory, and provide vital metabolic support for
neurons, so mapping only the connections and activity of neurons in the brain is
not enough to understand how the brain works. Glial cells must be included. This
project will: (1) detail the anatomy of individual glial cells and make a
comprehensive map of the glial cells and the network they form; and (2) examine
the effect of disrupting neuronal activity on the development of glial cells and
their network. The work will be carried out in the nervous system of the fruit
fly Drosophila, a genetically powerful system in which development and function
of neurons have been well studied. Because Drosophila shares many aspects of
cellular development with humans, an understanding of the developmental
relationship between neurons and glial cells in this advantageous model system
will lead toward a fuller understanding of normal development and mature
functioning of the human brain. The project also includes outreach to the public
via K-12 classroom visits and public events, and a multi-station hands-on Brain
booth at a large annual festival. Several undergraduate students each year will
be trained in the laboratory. A new course for undergraduates about glial cells
will be developed that will include creation of a website on glial cells that
will serve as a resource for the academic community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will examine the hypothesis that the glial network is shaped by neuronal
activity during development. The work will be carried out in the ventral nerve
cord of the 3rd-instar Drosophila larva. Previous work has developed this system
to specifically address neuron development, but the developing glial network in
this system has not been characterized. Thus, this is a particularly
advantageous animal model ripe for investigating the effects of neuron activity
on glial development. The project will provide a high-resolution reconstruction
of the glial network in the ventral nerve cord using genetically labeled and
dye-filled glial cells, electron microscopy, and 3D reconstruction of glial
cells in normally developing animals and in animals in which neuronal activity
in the nerve cord has been blocked or reduced using genetic manipulations during
larval development.