* 1353014
* Hunger-Dependent Modulation of Olfactory Receptor Gene Expression
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2019
* Alexander van der Linden, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Sridhar Raghavachari
* 07/31/2019
* USD 435,000.00

Animals change their behavior in an ever-changing environment in order to
survive and reproduce. The researchers are trying to understand how changes in
the environment can alter behavior. Studies have shown that an animal's sensory
perception of attractive and noxious chemical stimuli in its environment can
dramatically alter its behavior according to its feeding state. These behavioral
modifications could allow them to alter and optimize their food-search
strategies. Growing evidence suggests that an animal's feeding state can alter
its sensory perception directly by changing the expression levels of
chemoreceptor genes. Thus, an important question is to understand how these
expression changes may contribute to changes in an animal's behavior. This
research investigates, for the first time, the mechanisms by which chemoreceptor
genes in a single sensory neuron type are regulated by an animal's feeding
state. Since disease-carrying mosquitoes change the expression of chemoreceptor
genes as a function of their feeding state, this research will also provide the
basis for novel strategies to control chemical-driven host-seeking behavior in
these systems.

The researchers investigate the mechanisms of how an animal's feeding state can
alter chemosensory behaviors by modulating the expression of chemoreceptor
genes. With help of a feeding state-dependent reporter assay to monitor changes
in chemoreceptor gene expression combined with genetic, genomic and behavioral
approaches in C. elegans, this project will investigate the mechanisms by which
the expression of this chemoreceptor gene in a single sensory neuron type, ADL,
is modulated by feeding state via insulin and neuropeptide signaling. Genetic
approaches will be used to identify potential transcriptional factors required
for the expression of this chemoreceptor gene. Behavioral assays will be used to
examine whether an altered expression of chemoreceptor genes contributes to
altered ADL-mediated responses as a function of feeding state. Lastly, the
transcriptional profile of the ADL neuron in starved animals will identify
additional genes that provide new targets of regulators of altered behaviors
upon starvation. The results of this project will provide critical information
into the molecular and neural mechanisms of chemoreceptor gene expression, and
the basic mechanisms underlying behavioral plasticity. This research will
support the research training of undergraduate and graduate students from low-
income and disadvantaged backgrounds. This research will also create a 'Sense of
Smell Day' for K-12 students as part of Brain Awareness Week in Nevada to teach
young explorers in the lab the basics of how the sense of smell works.