* 1353582
* SBIR Phase II:  Securing Industrial Control Networks with Network Forecasting
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2014,03/31/2017
* Michael Schultz, Observable Networks, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 03/31/2017
* USD 1,359,888.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project is focused on network
forecasting, a new approach to securing industrial control networks. In essence,
network forecasting involves monitoring all devices on a network, and for each
device using past behavior to predict near-term future behavior. Deviation from
predicted behavior then signals a potential issue. The intellectual merit of the
innovation lies in its departure from traditional network security paradigms.
Traditional approaches, such as signature-based anti-virus and intrusion
prevention systems, detect misbehaviors by recognizing repeats of past
behaviors. These approaches necessarily overlook one-of-a-kind or zero-day
misbehaviors. In contrast, network forecasting incorporates an understanding of
correct and expected network behavior so that aberrant behavior can be
identified even if it has not been seen before. The approach builds on the
company's previous work in understanding the active roles that devices assume on
a network. When predicted network device behavior fails to match reality on the
network, network operators can respond without needing to fully understand the
details of the threat that caused the disturbance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact/commercial potential of this project is substantial because
critical infrastructure - such as a power generation and distribution grid -
represents both a significant investment and a substantive vulnerability in
modern society. While recent cyber-attacks may have heightened public awareness
of the threats to critical infrastructure, such infrastructure has been the
object of sustained concern from government and private-sector groups for many
years. However, while the need for increased security in critical infrastructure
has grown over time, the effectiveness of network security methods has not kept
pace with the sophistication and impact of cyber-attacks. If successful, network
forecasting has the potential to transform the security and monitoring practices
in nearly all domains of critical infrastructure. Continued technological
advances and economic growth presume the existence of secure, networked critical
infrastructure. Substantial advances in the security of such infrastructure,
such as that promised by the technology being developed in this project, can
help protect the future of our society.