* 1353737
* Identifying Genetic Determinants of Speciation from Genomic Maps of Ancestry in Hybrid Mice
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2020
* John Novembre, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 07/31/2020
* USD 899,993.00

Why are there so many species? The process by which two species are generated
from one - speciation - is a major determinant of biodiversity. When species
hybridize in nature, some parts of their genomes are exchanged and others are
not. Those regions of the genome that are not exchanged keep the species
separate. By identifying those incompatible regions in species of mice, this
research will reveal genetic mechanisms responsible for speciation (and
biodiversity). Another novel contribution of this research will be the
development of new approaches that analyze entire genomes, instead of one region
at a time. The project will combine research with teacher training to share
discoveries with the public. In addition to expanding evolutionary knowledge,
this research will benefit applied fields, including human health. For example,
the framework developed in this project can be used to understand the current
reproductive effects of historical mating between humans and Neanderthals.

This research will provide new theoretical and empirical frameworks for
measuring gene flow between species in hybrid zones. The focus will be ancestry
junctions - those points along chromosomes where ancestry switches from one
species to the other. In contrast to existing analyses of hybrid genomes, this
approach will easily scale to entire genomes. Computer simulations will be used
to quantify the effects of selection, migration and genetic drift on ancestry
junctions across the genome. A range of genetic architectures of reproductive
isolation will be investigated to determine the conditions under which selection
against hybrids leaves detectable genomic signatures. This theoretical framework
will be applied to new genomic data collected in hybrids between two subspecies
of house mice that are excellent models for studying speciation in progress.
Incompatible genomic regions responsible for reproductive barriers between new
species will be identified.