* 1353442
* SBIR Phase II:  Collaborative Indoor Mapping Technologies
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2014,10/31/2018
* Carole Teolis, TRX SYSTEMS INC
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 10/31/2018
* USD 1,425,666.00

This SBIR Phase II project will develop software and a system that enables
nearly automatic generation and maintenance of a global database of indoor maps
through crowdsourcing and data fusion. The current state of the art in indoor
mapping relies on a manual labor-intensive process to create and maintain maps
as they change over time, which is difficult to scale. A dynamic map-building
system will address the challenge of generating and updating key indoor map
navigation data. The developed mapping software will use existing embedded
Smartphone sensors to discover building features (such as hallways, elevators,
exits, and stairwells) and their connectivity as a user walks through a building
while carrying a Smartphone running the mapping application. Additional building
signature information is collected as part of the map. The user's location,
which is simultaneously being tracked using the same sensors, is used to
identify the location of the discovered building features. The map accuracy and
completeness will increase as the number of users increase. This indoor map
database will be used for improved indoor location and
routing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader/commercial impact of the mapping
software is that it will enable map coverage to increase beyond high use
environments such as malls, airports, and museums. The dynamic map-building
system enables maps to be easily extended to include all commercial buildings
and to help address the challenge of maintaining and updating indoor map
navigation data as they change over time. The data produced by the system will
complement and integrate with indoor map data being made available by leading
indoor map suppliers. Indoor maps can be used to power a wide array of
applications, and they are clearly essential for making location-based
applications work. These applications include consumer applications as well as
critical safety applications. Locating people (including children) in emergency
situations becomes possible if the software can both calculate their location
and show it on a clear map that includes essential floor plan data that makes it
easy to reach them. Navigating out of a building in an emergency is possible if
the open pathways, stairwells, entrances, and exits are clearly marked on a map.