* 1353970
* The genetic architecture of local adaptation in a dioecious species: implications for chromosome evolution
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2019
* Lynda Delph, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 05/31/2019
* USD 672,144.00

This study will provide a deeper understanding into how natural selection leads
to the divergence of populations, the first step toward speciation, focusing on
traits that differ between males and females. The results of this study will
address fundamental aspects of how selection varies on males and females and how
this affects the structure of genes and chromosomes. Understanding these
processes will broaden our knowledge about a central question of biology: Why
are there so many different kinds of organisms? The work will train several
undergraduate and graduate students, as well as a postdoctoral scholar, in both
scientific research and public outreach, and provide them with opportunities to
establish international collaborations. The researchers will work with
scientists at Bloomington, IN, WonderLab Museum of Science, Health and
Technology and with teachers at the Templeton Elementary School to create public
displays about pollination biology and plant reproduction.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will investigate the genetic architecture of
local adaptation using the short-lived, herbaceous, dioecious, perennial plant
white campion (Silene latifolia). The researchers hypothesize that local
adaptation occurs primarily via selection on males, leading not only to
phenotypic differences between males and females, but also the genetic basis of
local adaptation being associated with pseudoautosomal loci. To test this
hypothesis, they will conduct a multi-year reciprocal-transplant experiment
using two populations from Spain and Croatia that are highly divergent for
sexually dimorphic traits. They will also conduct manipulative experiments in
the greenhouse and the field to determine: (1) which traits are involved in
local adaptation (via phenotypic-selection analyses), and how variation in water
availability and air temperature influences this adaptation (via water and
temperature manipulation), (2) whether males are under greater selection to
diverge, and (3) whether sexual antagonism exists for any of these traits. In
addition to pure-population individuals, F2 progeny planted in both Spain and
Croatia will allow further determination of which traits and quantitative trait
loci (QTL) are targets of differential selection between the two habitats. They
will measure the extent to which QTL for divergent traits are essentially sex
specific in their effect or shared between the sexes, and lastly, whether QTL
responsible for adaptive trait divergence occur in the pseudoautosomal region of
the sex chromosomes. The result will determine which traits of males and females
are under selection, the extent to which antagonistic selection between males
and females is implicated in adaptive population differentiation, and the extent
to which these loci are located on the X and Y chromosomes.