* 1353799
* Dynamics of Wnt receptor activation, signal initiation and signal termination in vivo
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Marcel Wehrli, Oregon Health & Science University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Krieg
* 07/31/2018
* USD 600,000.00

NSF Proposal IOS-1353799&lt;br/&gt;Marcel Wehrli,
Ph.D.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dynamics of Wnt receptor activation, signal
initiation and signal termination in vivo&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cells of
developing embryos and adult tissues must receive and precisely interpret
specific signals for proper growth. Secreted proteins of the Wnt family
represent one such signal. Wnts elicit precise changes in gene expression
mediated by increased levels of the protein ?beta-catenin. Too much or too
little signal leads to tissue defects and disease. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While
it is known that Wnts activate cell surface receptors, it remains unclear where
on the cell membrane or inside the cell the ligand-activated receptor functions,
how it activates the intracellular signaling cascade via the protein Dishevelled
and how the receptor is turned off. This proposal addresses these questions
directly with a novel in vivo approach. In addition, it will identify how
Dishevelled blocks the central regulator in the pathway, a protein complex
assembled around the scaffold protein Axin, and is expected to identify in vivo
how the receptor-initiated signal leads to the inhibition of the Axin complex
and induces beta-catenin signaling, a process that remains controversial.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;Our understanding of the
Wnt/beta-catenin pathway has increased dramatically in recent years. However,
many findings are derived from in vitro experiments and their functional
significance is limited. The signaling events of the Wnt/beta-catenin pathway
are amenable to investigation in their normal cellular context using the
Drosophila model system, underscoring the significance of the studies proposed
here. These investigations are expected to identify dynamically changing
interactions as the signal is transduced, thereby greatly increasing our
understanding of this important signaling mechanism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal will provide an opportunity for one graduate student and three
undergraduates to engage in cutting edge research. In addition, it will allow
the PI to introduce K-12 students to basic development and genetics and to
promote a science-based curriculum in local schools.