* 1353092
* Collaborative Research: A Global Test for Non-linear Responses of Grassland Diversity to Nitrogen Deposition
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2018
* William Harpole, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 05/31/2018
* USD 299,973.00

It has received less attention than climate change, but nitrogen deposition from
air pollution could also have major ecological effects. One well-documented
effect of adding nitrogenous fertilizers to grasslands is loss of species due to
heightened competition. Although deposition from the air is so far mostly adding
smaller amounts of nitrogen, accumulated effects could cause similar losses.
This project will advance our understanding of how nitrogen deposition is likely
to affect biodiversity in grasslands worldwide in the future. In partnership
with an international network of research sites, researchers will measure
incoming nitrogen, accumulation of nitrogen in the soil, and abundances of plant
species over three years to discover which levels of nitrogen deposition are
likely to trigger species loss. Because reducing nitrogen pollution can be
economically costly, it is important to be able to weigh these costs against
benefits to conservation of diversity and other resources such as grazing lands.
Research results will thus be disseminated to managers in the U.S. to help
inform policy with science. The project will also train technicians and
undergraduate students and provide research experiences for two high school
teachers who will pass on their knowledge to classes. The project will test the
hypothesis that the relationship between nitrogen deposition and species loss is
determined by previous nitrogen availability, co-limitation of plant growth by
other nutrients, climate, and species traits. At about 30 of the 75 sites in the
international Nutrient Network, researchers and collaborators will install
nitrogen addition treatments designed to mimic accelerated deposition and deploy
ion-exchange resin collectors to measure nitrogen availability to plants. These
treatments and measurements will be combined with existing nutrient treatments
and measurements of nitrogen input, climate, and plant species composition to
provide a large data set for Bayesian analyses.