* 1353738
* Molecular mechanisms underlying temperature modulation of plant immunity
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Jian Hua, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 08/31/2019
* USD 628,569.00

Broader significance&lt;br/&gt;Plant immune responses are greatly modulated by
environmental signals including temperature, and this modulation is an adaptive
mechanism for a balanced environmental response and plant growth. There is
limited knowledge on how temperature is perceived and how it regulates plant
immune responses. This project will identify targets of temperature on immune
responses and reveal major strategies plants use to tune immunity to
temperature. This project will enhance the prediction power of climate change on
plant growth and defense and will provide guidance in breeding crop plants that
have a balanced growth and defense for the changing environment. The project
will integrate education with research for undergraduate students including
minorities at and outside Cornell through various programs including NSF Plant
Genome REU Site. One of the four aims of the project will be conducted mostly by
undergraduates. This project will also provide a broad training to a
postdoctoral fellow and a graduate student in research and teaching assisted by
the NSF ?Center for the integration of research, teaching, and learning?
program. Discoveries generated from this project will be disseminated through
journal publications, conference presentations and classroom teaching, thus
contributing to the advancement of science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to further elucidate the
molecular mechanisms underlying temperature modulation of immune receptor
R-mediated immune responses. Earlier studies revealed that R proteins could
function as temperature sensors and deficiency of abscisic acid antagonizes the
high temperature effects on R proteins. This project will first further reveal
how temperature and abscisic acid regulate the activity of R proteins to affect
immunity. This will be achieved by dissecting the regulation through genetic
screens using Arabidopsis autoimmune plants. Mutants with altered temperature
sensitivity in immune responses will be isolated and cloned, and the mode of
gene action will be investigated. This project will also reveal the genetic
basis of variation of temperature sensitivity of immunity in natural
populations. This will be achieved by surveying wild Arabidopsis accessions for
their temperature sensitivities in disease resistance. Major loci determining
the temperature sensitivity will be isolated. With identification of mode of
regulation of R proteins by temperature and ABA as well as major strategies in
tuning immunity to temperature signals, this project will reveal new mechanisms
of signal sensing and signal integration and provide strategies to generate
plants with optimal responses to a changing environment.