* 1353524
* SBIR Phase II:  Resonance Force Microscopy for Nanoscale Manufacturing Process Monitoring
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2014,05/31/2018
* Sung Park, Molecular Vista, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 05/31/2018
* USD 1,409,994.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project aims to develop
a production prototype of an automated nanoscale manufacturing process
monitoring tool based on the resonance force microscope (RFM). The tool will
combine image force microscopy (IFM, a version of RFM that measures the linear
part of the susceptibility) and scattering near-field optical microscopy (sSNOM)
with atomic force microscope for use in the hard disk drive (HDD) and
semiconductor industries. sSNOM measures the dipole-dipole interaction force
while IFM measures the dipole-dipole force gradient, both with nanometer spatial
resolution. These techniques allow direct imaging of resonances associated with
electrons, phonons, and plasmons. The capability to image plasmon resonances is
well suited to probe the near-field (NF) profile associated with a plasmonic
structure called near-field transducer (NFT) utilized in heat-assisted magnetic
recording (HAMR). With HAMR universally viewed as the next generation technology
for HDD industry, the need for a monitoring tool for mass production of HAMR
head is acute since there is currently no simple way to probe the NF profile of
NFTs. The objectives of the proposed project are (1) to successfully prototype
an automated NFT characterization tool and (2) to field test it with one or more
HDD manufacturers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential
of this project will be felt not only in the HDD industry but across many
industries. While the monitoring of NFT production is the near-term niche
application for the automated tool, the same tool will have longer-term value
for in-line characterization of physical and chemical properties of nanoscale
materials and structures in the manufacturing environment of diverse industries,
including, for example, the measurement of stress in the channel layer and
chemical characterization of defects in semiconductor industry and monitoring of
protein-based pharmaceuticals. In R&amp;D and academic settings, the RFM
technique provides the capability to image individual biomolecules in situ, such
as for the real-time monitoring of membrane protein dynamics on cells, which
will provide unprecedented utility in biomedical and clinical research. A
reliable label-free imaging tool with the capability to identify chemical bond
information at the molecular level will potentially bring about revolutionary
advances in many fields of basic and applied biological science, including drug
discovery, proteomics, structural biology, and personalized medicine. The RFM
technique will be simpler to implement as compared to other hybrid instruments
involving high resolution microscopy, resulting in an affordable instrument for
academic and research institutions.