* 1353367
* Analysis of the plant cortical cell program that controls arbuscule/periarbuscular membrane development and function in arbuscular mycorrhizal symbiosis
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2014,04/30/2019
* Maria Harrison, Boyce Thompson Institute Plant Research
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 04/30/2019
* USD 555,761.00

Most flowering plants are capable of forming symbiotic associations (called
arbuscular mycorrhizal (AM) symbiosis) with soil fungi. These associations
develop in the plant root, where, in exchange for carbon, the fungus transfers
phosphate from the soil to the root. Currently, relatively little is known about
the mechanisms of symbiotic development. This project aims to determine the
functions of two novel plant proteins that are essential for development of AM
symbiosis. The project also focuses on symbiotic phosphate transport and aims to
determine how plant cells sense phosphate delivery by the fungus. The
investigators will use genetics, molecular and cell biology techniques to assess
the sub-cellular locations and functions of these proteins in plant cells. It is
expected that these studies will reveal new information about how plant root
cells build symbiotic membranes and also how they sense phosphate. This
fundamental knowledge will advance the current understanding of AM symbiosis and
aspects of plant cell biology in general. The broader impacts of this work
include the potential for future improvements in phosphate acquisition by
plants. Phosphate is essential for plant growth and is often limiting for crop
production. Phosphate fertilization costs are increasing and fertilizer runoff
contaminates aquatic ecosystems, consequently, improvements in the efficiency of
phosphate fertilizer use are needed. Fundamental knowledge of AM symbiosis and
phosphate sensing by plant cells may provide the basis for new approaches to
increase phosphate use efficiency in crop plants. This project will provide
training for researchers at various stages of their careers from high school
students to postdoctoral researchers. In particular, it will introduce high
school students and minority undergraduate students to concepts of plant
genetics and plant cell biology.