* 1353603
* SBIR Phase II:  Superior Spinel-perovskite Composite Catalysts for Combustion of Volatile Organic Compounds
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2014,09/30/2016
* Richard Long, NEXTECH MATERIALS LTD
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 09/30/2016
* USD 865,641.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project will investigate a new
series of low-cost non- precious metal catalysts for combustion of volatile
organic compounds (VOC) at NexTech Materials. Catalytic combustion is an
efficient approach for the VOC destruction at mild temperatures. NexTech
proposes nano-sized transition metal mixed oxides as catalysts for this
application. The results from Phase I efforts indicate that the catalysts can
oxidize VOC (e.g., propane, butane, hexane, butene, toluene and propanol) to CO2
and H2O at 200-250 deg C and gas hourly space velocities of 45,000-150,000
ml/g-hr. The temperature for complete conversion of VOC on the composite oxides
is 100-150 deg C lower than that on the conventional precious metal catalysts
under the same reaction conditions. The oxide catalysts are also more tolerant
to silicon and phosphorous, two common impurities in VOC stream, than the
precious metal catalysts. The promising catalysts will be scaled up, washcoated
in monoliths, and evaluated under real VOC combustion conditions in Phase II
project. The replacement of precious metal catalyst to the composite oxide is
expected to save 80% catalyst cost and 30% operation cost.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is to abate VOC
emissions from industrial processes and natural-gas-fueled engines. Since VOC
are toxic to human health and contribute to a number of environmental problems
(e.g., photochemical smog), environmental legislation has imposed increasingly
stringent targets for permitted levels of atmospheric emissions. This catalytic
combustion technology can remove VOC by oxidizing them to CO2 and H2O on the
catalyst surface before they are released into air. As compared to conventional
Pd and Pt catalysts, the substitution of NexTech?s composite oxide catalysts
could drastically improve the combustion efficiency and reduce the cost, which
allows VOC catalytic combustion technology more widely used in the world for
reducing air pollution. The generated information can provide new insights into
understanding activation process of O2 and small organic molecules and their
interactions on the transition metal oxide surface. The data will be utilized to
understand VOC oxidation behavior and design more active VOC combustion
catalysts in the future. The generated information can also be applied to
develop active catalysts for combustion of natural gas, light hydrocarbons,
soot, H2, CO and other fuels.