* 1353466
* "LTREB: Impacts of polyandry over the lifetime of a social mammal"
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2014,02/28/2022
* John Hoogland, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 02/28/2022
* USD 498,695.00

Mating involves costs such as increased exposure to diseases and parasites, and
a female usually obtains all the sperm she needs from a single mating.
Paradoxically, however, polyandry (i.e., mating with multiple males) is
ubiquitous among animals of all types. Longterm research with prairie dogs has
revealed that reproductive success (RS) is higher for polyandrous females than
for monandrous females. To investigate the costs and benefits of polyandry,
researchers from The University of Maryland will perform a manipulative field
experiment that will compare monandry versus polyandry for female prairie dogs
matched for age, body mass, colony size, and the adult sex ratio. This
comprehensive experiment will be the most detailed examination of polyandry to
date for a mammal living under natural conditions. The researchers will use two
innovations, ultrasounds and remote-controlled serpentine robots (snakebots), to
count offspring at previously un-observable portions of the life-history.
Further, they will capitalize on a powerful combination of behavioral
observations of matings with molecular analyses of paternity to investigate
genetic mechanisms by which polyandry might enhance female RS. This longterm
research of polyandry under natural conditions will have sweeping consequences
for our understanding of several key issues in Animal Behavior, including mate
choice, generation and maintenance of genetic diversity, sexual selection, and
population viability. Broader impacts include training 8 undergraduates per
year, many of whom will be under-represented minorities; a Critter-Cam, which
will enable amateur and professional biologists to view live interactions among
marked prairie dogs; assistance to 5 organizations working to conserve prairie
dogs; lectures to pre-K through high school students; 2 websites with
information about prairie dogs; and frequent radio and television shows about
prairie dogs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data
Management&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Behavioral and genetic data will be stored and
available to the general public in databases such as the DRYAD data repository
(http://datadryad.org/) and NCBI Genbank (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genbank/).