* 1353671
* The Effects of Civil Protection Orders on Procedural Justice, System Efficacy, and Safety in Domestic Violence Cases
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2017
* Susan Miller, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Mark Hurwitz
* 06/30/2017
* USD 307,406.00

Civil protection orders have become a critical component of the legal system's
efforts to address intimate partner abuse (IPA); they are the most common legal
tool battered women use against their partners and ex-partners. The study will
enhance our understanding of procedural justice theory and situated justice
theory by drawing on the perspectives of victims of intimate partner abuse who
use civil protection orders. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Procedural justice theory
suggests that if citizens view legal processes and procedures as fair, both
positive and negative legal outcomes will be viewed as acceptable. Unlike prior
conceptualizations of procedural justice, situated justice emphasizes the
broader context of peoples' lives and how that, in turn, impacts their
perceptions of the law. The perceived fairness of the process is critical to
understanding both faith in and future use of the legal system. The study will
draw on the experiences and decisions of women who have sought civil protection
orders shortly after a hearing and again three months later. To gain a rich
understanding of women's experiences, courtroom observations, researcher-
administered surveys, and semi-structured interviews will all be conducted over
time. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center for Disease Control and Prevention
estimates that the health-related costs of rape, physical assault, stalking, and
homicide by intimate partners exceed $5.8 billion annually; of this total,
nearly $4.1 billion are for direct medical and mental health care services and
nearly $1.8 billion reflect productivity losses. Although increases in the
number of survivors filing for orders and contacting the police will initially
lead to higher costs, prior research has found that every dollar spent on
protection orders in Kentucky led to a savings of $30.75. Research findings will
provide court systems in Delaware and nationwide with a better understanding of
the civil protection order process from the perspectives of women seeking
orders, contributing to improved efficiency and effectiveness.