* 1353718
* IDBR: TYPE A: Mass-Sensing Nanostructure-Enhanced Laser Tweezers
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Lih Lin, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2018
* USD 504,764.00

Non-Technical Decscription: Understanding how cell size is controlled is a
fundamental area of cell biology that has not been well understood. The size and
mass of a cell convey important physiological properties that are closely
regulated by various environmental and genetic factors. Characterizing the
dependence of cell growth rate on cell mass for individual cells can elucidate
the mechanisms underlying cell cycle progression, and there are also examples of
human diseases characterized by increased cell size (hypertrophy) such as
cardiac hypertrophy that can lead to heart failure and sudden death. In general,
being able to monitor size and mass of single cells over time can provide
important physiological information and has potential impact in cell biology,
tissue engineering, cancer, and disease research. A barrier to studying size
control in mammalian cells is the inaccuracy in measuring size, mass, growth
rate, and the dynamics of pathways controlling growth and proliferation. Often
the cell mass is estimated indirectly by measuring cell size, however, it has
been shown that the mass density of a cell is not constant through its cell
cycle. Recently, there has been research on using mechanical resonators to
measure the cell mass directly. These approaches either require exquisite
microfluidic structures and setup or are restricted to adherent cells. The
locations of the cells on the mechanical resonators also cannot be accurately
controlled, which limits the sensing accuracy. This project aims to develop a
precise cell mass sensing and monitoring system that can work with both adherent
and suspension cells by combining nanostructure-enhanced laser tweezers (NELT)
with an array of MEMS resonators. This multi-disciplinary project will provide
training opportunities for two graduate students, one postdoc, and NSF REU
program will be pursued to provide research experience for undergraduate
students. The PI and her group will continue participating in education outreach
activities through UW College of Engineering Discovery Days for K-12 students.
New education materials resulting from the research will be incorporated in the
outreach demo activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Decscription: The
proposed approach utilizes high efficiency optical trapping on a photonic
crystal (PhC) platform that has been demonstrated by the PI's group. The system
integrates PhC nanostructures on the surface of an array of MEMS resonators to
achieve precise placement of live cells on the resonators with low optical
intensity. The MEMS resonator consists of a suspended micro-disk structure whose
resonant frequency depends on its mass. Cell mass will be measured by
characterizing the resonant frequencies of the MEMS resonators. The platform
will be placed under a fluorescence microscope for optical imaging and analysis.
This system does not require exquisite microfluidic setup and can simultaneously
achieve the following functions: (1) Suitable for both adherent and suspension
cells. (2) High-precision measurement of a cell mass versus time, or single-
point mass measurement in time with high throughput. (3) Optical imaging of an
array of cells as a function of time to obtain size and other information on
cell status. This project seeks to achieve the following aims: (A) Design and
fabricate PhC nanostructures to achieve optical trapping with low intensity for
live cells. Finite-difference time domain (FDTD) simulations will be used to
design and optimize the PhC nanostructures to achieve highest trapping
enhancement for the specific size of cells or particles. The PhC will be
fabricated on a regular Si substrate first then integrated with the MEMS
resonators. Optical trapping will be performed for polystyrene beads with
various sizes to confirm that enhanced trapping efficiency can be achieved. (B)
Design and fabricate PhC-integrated MEMS resonators to achieve mass-sensing with
high accuracy. The same particle will be released and re-trapped on the MEMS
resonator, and frequency response re-measured. The process will be repeated to
allow assessing mass-sensing accuracy. (C) Perform mass sensing and monitoring
of adherent and suspension cells. Cells will be synchronized in their cell cycle
using serum starvation, thymidine-nocodazole block and double thymidine block
for cell mass measurement. An array of reconfigurable optical traps will be set
up using a spatial light modulator for the study. A dissemination plan for the
proposed instrument will be implemented with the project. The plan involves
disseminating the research results and the capability of the instrument through
technical conferences, publications, and the PI's research group website;
working with UW Center for Commercialization to seek licensing and
commercialization of the proposed technology.