* 1353360
* Acquisition of hierarchical control in skilled action sequencing
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Matthew Crump, CUNY Brooklyn College
* Continuing Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 06/30/2018
* USD 356,073.00

A critical issue in cognitive science is understanding how behavior unfolds in
time. Most human behaviors, from walking and talking, to driving, typing and
playing instruments, consist of a series of ordered actions. Little is known
concerning how people learn the serial ordering of actions and how this ability
changes with expertise. This investigation uses the task of skilled typing to
study how high- and low-level cognitive processes interact to allow typists to
order their keystrokes rapidly and accurately. Typing is a useful model system
for this purpose because experts are plentiful and typing performance can be
measured precisely in terms of keystroke timing and errors. Prior studies have
shown that typing skill is controlled hierarchically by two processing loops: an
"outer loop" turns ideas into words and sentences and an "inner loop" translates
words into motor movements for executing individual keystrokes. Three related
projects test how these loops control serial ordering across levels of typing
skill. Project 1 uses a large-scale web-based approach to quantify how novices
and experts become sensitive to the statistics of natural keystrokes and learn
to optimize typing performance for predictable letter patterns. Project 2
explores how the inner loop becomes gradually connected to the outer loop,
allowing verbal codes used for language production to control serial ordering of
fingers on the keyboard. Project 3 tests how the inner loop schedules the timing
of individal keystrokes after it has received word-level instructions from the
outer loop.

Typing, especially on computers and smartphones, has become an indispensable
modern skill. This work can provide new statistical signatures of typing skill
that can be used to promote rapid skill acquisition. The science of typing can
also serve as a model for investigating other domains that rely on hierarchical
control loops to accomplish complex serial ordering, such as playing a musical
instrument, assembly work, and interactive technologies. The project also
provides training opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students at an
institution that serves several minority and underrepresented groups.