* 1353914
* Emergence of Geometric Order and Cell Identity in the Cone Photoreceptor Mosaic
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* David K Lubensky, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Evan Balaban
* 07/31/2018
* USD 525,000.00

Animals begin their life by undergoing a remarkable process of self-
organization: Starting from a tiny, single-celled egg, they develop into an
incredibly complex organism. Moreover, they do so without centralized control.
No master builder directs each cell to its correct position in the final body
plan. How exactly living cells are able to collaborate to create precisely
constructed tissues and organs is the central question of developmental biology.
This project will study a particular example of such self-organization in the
fish eye. It will use a combination of approaches, including observations of eye
organization, perturbation of this organization by laser pulses, and computer
simulations. These techniques will provide a deeper understanding of the fish
eye system. This fundamental knowledge about biological self-organization has
potential applications ranging from new disease treatments to the design of
synthetic self-organizing systems inspired by the mechanisms at work in the eye.
As a collaboration between a physicist and a biologist, the project will create
opportunities for interdisciplinary education at many levels. The investigators
will place a special emphasis on involving students from traditionally
underrepresented backgrounds in research early in their undergraduate
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will combine biological experiments
with mathematical modeling to study the emergence of the striking crystalline
arrangement of cone photoreceptor cells in the zebrafish retina. The guiding
hypothesis is that the formation of this ordered lattice depends on anisotropic
mechanical stresses imposed on the retinal epithelium by the annular ligament, a
rigid ring of tissue that surrounds the retinal margin. Prior work has shown
that a mathematical model of the interaction between mechanical forces and
planar cell polarity can reproduce many of the observed features of the regular
arrangement of cones, and, in particular, the model correctly predicted the
presence of strongly anisotropic interactions between cells in perturbed retina.
The current project will test the guiding hypothesis directly. The investigators
will use new transgenic strains generated on a pigment mutant background to
perform the first imaging and laser microsurgery of retinas in living, adult
fish. This will provide a fine-grained quantitative characterization of the
degree of mosaic order in space and time. Then, the investigators will observe
how this order is affected by ablation of the annular ligament and the
photoreceptor cells, using microsurgery to measure stress anisotropy in the
retina.