* 1353636
* SBIR Phase II:  Autoclave Equivalent Composites Via In-Situ Pressurization
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2014,08/31/2016
* Zachary Wing, Advanced Ceramics Manufacturing
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 08/31/2016
* USD 783,995.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will develop
materials and processes that enable any composite resin system to be produced
Out Of Autoclave (OOA) with excellent inner and outer surfaces. To ensure high
quality and reliability, aerospace composites are processed inside autoclaves
that combine heat and pressure. The capital and labor costs and manufacturing
times associated with autoclave processing are significant but necessary to
ensure composite quality. Achieving high-complexity geometries poses additional
hurdles. Current methods used in these cases include a small selection of OOA
pre-impregnated parts, the use of thermoplastic bladders, or the bonding of
autoclaved components. A large opportunity exists for OOA technology to reduce
material and labor costs while also enabling one piece, seamless composite
structures with extremely complex internal & external geometries, allowing
manufacturing of parts which were previously unachievable. The Phase II project
will further the development of a self-pressurizing technology that allows OOA
processing of any resin system without a loss in quality. The Phase II will
expand the operating temperature and pressure window, improve forming processes,
and characterize performance on commercially relevant pre-impregnated systems.
Phase II results will yield a mature forming process and several tooling grades
with verified performance.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is the realization of a
manufacturing technology that will enable the composites industry to form more
complex geometries and allow greater competition throughout the industry.
Society will see benefits through the broader use of fuel-efficient composites
in air and land based vehicles and smaller carbon waste streams. The use of
advanced fiber reinforced composites in aircraft has become a necessity to
achieve higher performance and greater fuel efficiencies. Boeing's 787 and
Airbus's A350 are two such aircraft that exemplify the push to increase
composite content above 50% by weight. The proposed technology will impact new
aircraft as well as the design and manufacture of other vehicles.
Technologically, this project will lead to a better understanding of self-
pressurizing materials and their potential applications, as well as advance
domestic manufacturing capabilities. Finally, undergraduates at the University
of Arizona will have an opportunity to work on the project in conjunction with
industrial scientists and engineers.