* 1353566
* SBIR Phase II:  Cloud-based platform to support experiential entrepreneurship education online at scale
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Bhavik Joshi, LaunchPad Central Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 07/31/2017
* USD 1,239,628.00

This SBIR Phase II project aims to provide web based software-as-a-service
platform to deliver an experiential entrepreneurship methodology at scale. This
two-sided platform consists of the tools for entrepreneurs to search for a
repeatable and scalable business model and tools for instructors, mentors and
portfolios managers to triage for early signs of failure and course correct. The
project team is comprised of the chief architect, practitioners, and mentors of
the highly experiential Lean Startup methodology. Collectively they possess the
domain expertise to build and scale a platform for evidence-based
entrepreneurship delivering the methodology and content to a global community of
entrepreneurs, investors, and mentors. Phase II technology goals are to address
one of the core pain points of effective mentoring by leveraging data science
expertise to develop a self-learning algorithm capable of providing non-
prescriptive suggestions (like an experienced mentor would ask a team) based on
certain trigger events the startups would record in the platform.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader/commercial impact of this SBIR Phase II
project is taking place at national, regional and local levels. With the success
of the NSF Innovation Corps (I-Corps) program, other signification technology
commercialization programs at a national level are adopting the platform to
accelerate evidence-based commercialization efforts. Regional Economic
Development agencies and the local Chamber of Commerce are bringing these best
practices and tools to entrepreneurship ecosystems at the regional and local
levels respectively. The simplicity and pragmatic nature of the offering has
allowed for adoption all the way from high school students to undergraduate and
graduate students in business and engineering to PhD and Post Doctorates and the
Chief Innovation Officers at Fortune 500 enterprises.