* 1353021
* SBIR Phase II:  In Situ Optical Probe for Real-time Monitoring of Protein Expression Bioreactors
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2014,09/30/2016
* Elizabeth Gibson, ASL Analytical, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 09/30/2016
* USD 909,999.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project proposes to
develop an on-line, probe-based monitor for the real-time, continuous
measurement of key analytes in protein expression bioreactors. This directly
addresses the need for improved biopharmaceutical production monitoring. The
current manual sampling and off-line analysis methods have significant
limitations including contamination risks and inherent time delays that severely
limit process control. The primary objectives of this effort include the
optimization of a high brightness super luminescent diode (SLD) light source and
the accompanying optical probe. The SLD provides the light throughput that is
required for quantitative in situ measurements, and is perfectly suited for
light coupling to an optical-fiber probe. This approach has the added advantage
of multiplexing, thereby enabling a single monitor system to simultaneously
track analyte concentrations in multiple bioreactors. Both the probe and SLD
will be rigorously tested through a series of benchtop and live fermentation
evaluations. The ultimate outcome of this effort will be a market-ready, probe-
based bioreactor monitor compatible with the major expression platforms in the
biopharmaceutical industry.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this proposed project, if successful,
will be to enable the fast-growing biopharmaceutical industry to make game-
changing advances in the development and production of critically important
drugs. By replacing current manual chemical measurement methods performed during
the production of biopharmaceuticals with automated and continuous monitoring,
this real-time probe-based monitor will enable needed improvements in process
efficiency, lead to reduced development costs, and accelerate the time to market
for state-of-the-art drugs. Because of the high value of these medications, and
the driving market need, the commercial potential for this real-time monitor is
significant with a specific market niche estimated at $510 million in the U.S.
alone, residing in the larger global biologics market estimated at $239 billion
by 2015. Ultimately, these advantages will translate to lower costs and greater
access for consumers to life-changing medicines.