* 1353485
* SBIR Phase II:  Monolithic Integration of LED Arrays and Silicon TFTs for Super High Brightness Microdisplays
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2014,02/28/2018
* Vincent Lee, Lumiode, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 02/28/2018
* USD 1,144,473.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project aims to develop
a new high brightness light engine platform by monolithically integrating high
performance silicon transistors with compound semiconductor optoelectronic
materials. Dense arrays of light emitting diodes (LEDs) have been previously
fabricated to show the opportunity of using such arrays in microdisplay and
projection concepts. However, without active control circuits, the ultimate
brightness and resolution are limited. The technology developed in this SBIR
uniquely allows for the fabrication of LED arrays with integrated control
circuits on a single substrate enabling a light engine platform with high peak
brightness, high dynamic range, and high efficiency. Prototype LED arrays and
transistor devices have been fabricated, and the next step to realize this
platform is the development of advanced silicon circuitry to directly control
the LED arrays and color generation methods to achieve full-color displays. The
anticipated results of this project are on-chip driving circuits and development
of color generation methods which will be integrated with arrays of LEDs to form
a commercially-ready prototype.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project is the development of a light engine
with a power efficiency, brightness, cost, and form factor unavailable in
incumbent systems. In particular, three markets are identified where this
technology significant advantages over current technologies. These include the
microdisplay market, the pico projector market, and the projector market. This
light engine platform offers a small form factor, long lifetime, environmental
robustness, high energy efficiency, and the high brightness required for
sunlight readability. These features are necessary to create truly ubiquitous
display devices and enable new see-through augmented reality experiences or
smaller, more integrated portable projectors, not possible with current
technologies. Commercialization of this device will impact all of these areas
and also enable a range of new downstream applications including other non-
display industries, such as, 3D scanning and novel user interfaces.