* 1353896
* Collaborative Research: Megaherbivore and climatic controls on fire and vegetation dynamics during the last deglaciation
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2019
* Stephen Jackson, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 05/31/2019
* USD 733,042.00

Ecologists have long sought to understand how species reshuffle into novel
ecological communities during periods of major environmental change, and the
consequences of this reshuffling for the services that those ecological
communities provide for human society. This project capitalizes on a major
historical event - massive changes in plant communities roughly 17,000 years ago
- to determine the relative roles that climate change, species interactions, and
fire played in the creation of novel communities. Results from this research
will inform contemporary debates about the potential for climate change to
create 'no analog' communities that differ fundamentally in their structure,
function, and the services they provide to society. They will also guide
management practices intended to restore communities to prior states and improve
our understanding of the consequences of widespread
extinctions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project builds on prior evidence that
plant communities changed dramatically during the last deglaciation because the
extinction of large grazers released plants from herbivore suppression. New
research will test the novel Megafaunal Release Hypothesis by assessing the
relative importance of climate and species interactions on vegetation and fire
dynamics. The investigators will collect and analyze a series of lake-sediment
cores in the eastern US, and quantify relationships among independent climatic
and ecological proxies within and across sites in order to test the Megafaunal
Release Hypothesis. Eight new lake sites will be analyzed for indicators of past
vegetation composition (fossil pollen), fire regime (sedimentary charcoal),
megafaunal abundance (spores from fungi found in dung), and temperature (organic
geochemistry). Broader impacts include the mentoring and training of a
postdoctoral research scientist, a graduate student, and several undergraduates,
and the expansion of collaborations among paleontologists, geographers, and
ecologists to understand future environmental change. All data will be made
publicly available through standard community data repositories.