* 1353003
* Collaborative Research:  Heat Flow and Hydrothermal Transport in the Panama Basin Linked with Geophysical and Oceanographic Data
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2017
* Robert Harris, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 03/31/2017
* USD 151,047.00

Investigation of hydrothermal heat and mass flux between the crust and the ocean
between the Costa Rica Rift axis and Ocean Drilling Program Hole 504B is
designed to aid in development of an integrated crust-hydrothermal-ocean
circulation model. Heat flow will be measured along a 300 km long corridor as an
integral component of a large multi-disciplinary, multi-institutional project
called OSCAR (Oceanographic and Seismic Characterization of heat dissipation and
alteration by hydrothermal fluids at an Axial Ridge). In combination with
oceanographic plume mapping that will guide assessment of hydrothermal flux at
the spreading axis, the new heat flow results will show how conductive flux
varies as the plate ages, in particular where the transition from focused, high
rate flow to diffuse, lower flux circulation occurs. This is a long-standing
question in mid-ocean ridge studies. The influence of disrupted basement
structure on local heatflow will be assessed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;US scientists
will work closely with UK and German colleagues that lead the main project.
Addition of the heat flow acquisition enables addressing a main theme of the
InterRidge Third Decade plan- heat and chemical exchange between the crust and
the deep ocean. A female graduate student whose main training is in analytical
modeling will gain experience in seagoing data acquisition, exposure to
international scientists, and insight into the advantages and limitations of
having surface-only data to constrain a subsurface flow model.