* 1353688
* ABR: Evolution of Left-Right Asymmetry in Chordates using Cephalochordates as a Proxy for the Ancestral Chordate
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* Linda Holland, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Krieg
* 07/31/2018
* USD 642,869.00

Linda Z. Holland, P.I. PROPOSAL NUMBER: 1353688 PROPOSAL TITLE: ABR: Evolution
of Left-Right Asymmetry in Chordates using Cephalochordates as a Proxy for the
Ancestral Chordate

Nontechnical description/broader impacts Cephalochordates (amphioxus and
lancelets) are closely related to vertebrates but simpler both structurally and
at the gene level as their genomes have not undergone the two rounds of whole-
genome duplication that occurred in ancestral vertebrates. While these
duplications are useful for humans as a defect in one gene can often be
compensated for by a duplicate, the lack of gene duplication in amphioxus makes
it ideal for determining how individual genes work together to create an embryo
and adult. Because amphioxus is so vertebrate-like, the genetic mechanisms that
pattern, for example, the kidney or brain are fundamentally the same for both
groups. The difference is that vertebrates have created additional complexity by
elaborating upon these basic mechanisms. A major outstanding question is how
left/right (LR) asymmetry evolved. Vertebrates are superficially symmetric, but
internal organs are asymmetrically arranged across the left/right (LR) axis.
This study aims to elucidate the genetic mechanisms of LR asymmetry using two
distant amphioxus genera (Branchiostoma and Asymmetron). Importantly, hybrids
between the two genera yield larvae intermediate in asymmetry. This study has
far reaching implications for understanding gene networks and how they evolve. A
collaboration with bioinformaticians will help identify genes that are active at
particular developmental stages. It will give undergraduates research
experience. During 2013-2014, 13 undergraduates including 6 under-represented
minorities participated in research in the Holland laboratory. One postdoctoral
fellow will be trained. Results will be presented at meetings and published in
scientific journals. Outreach with the Birch Aquarium at Scripps and the San
Diego Unified Schools' Enhancing Science Education through Technology program
will give middle school students virtual tours of the Holland laboratory with
direct interactions via SKYPE. The work will foster cross-disciplinary education
via exchanges of students/postdocs between the PI and collaborators, allowing
bioinformatics students to learn biology and biology students to learn
bioinformatics.

Technical description The basal chordate amphioxus has long been thought to hold
clues to vertebrate origins. This proposal addresses a major unresolved
question: What is the genetic basis of LR asymmetry in chordates and how has it
changed during evolution? The specific aim is to elucidate the evolution of LR
asymmetry in chordates using two distant amphioxus genera (Branchiostoma and
Asymmetron) as proxies for ancestral chordates. Except for left-sided expression
of the conserved triad of Nodal, Lefty and Pitx in embryos of both vertebrates
and amphioxus, the fundamental genetic basis of LR patterning in chordates is
elusive. It is proposed that specification of LR asymmetry begins with skewed
maternal Nodal and is refined by BMP suppressing Nodal on the right. The
simplicity of amphioxus embryos allows dissection of gene networks starting with
the egg and ending with a vertebrate-like embryo. Branchiostoma and Asymmetron
offer the "Goldilocks Principle"- alike enough to be sure that two structures
are homologous and unlike enough to elucidate genetic differences in LR
asymmetry. Hybrids between the two genera have intermediate asymmetry. The
Holland lab pioneered research on B. floridae, was the first to study Asymmetron
development and establish year-round breeding of both species in the laboratory.
sequencing the A. lucayanum genome and is currently sequencing the A. lucayanum
genome. The two genera are similar, but LR asymmetries differ in several
respects. Importantly, Branchiostoma has gonads on both sides, but Asymmetron
has them only on the right. The approach combines in situ hybridization,
antibody labeling, manipulating gene function, RNA-Seq and bioinformatics.
Comparisons of the molecular basis of LR patterning and germ cell migration in
both species will elucidate the fundamental basis of LR asymmetry in chordates
and test the overall hypothesis that vertebrates evolved from an amphioxus-like
ancestor. The results promise to be applicable not just to cephalochordates but
also to vertebrates and may transform ideas on evolution of the myriad
variations vertebrates added to the basic theme of a small non-yolky embryo
gastrulating by invagination.