* 1353638
* SBIR Phase II:  Widefield Three-Dimensional Superresolution Microscopy Module
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Paulo Silveira, Double Helix Optics Inc
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 08/31/2017
* USD 796,405.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project is focused on
the design, development, and testing of a ground-breaking three-dimensional (3D)
multifunctional quantitative optical microscopy module with single-molecule
sensitivity suitable for live cell studies and nanometer scale sensing. In spite
of the current revolution in optical microscopy, commercial solutions to achieve
resolution beyond the diffraction limit have been slow to market, lacking in
flexibility, and costly. Furthermore, most commercial products are too tailored
to the systems being investigated and are difficult to generalize for widespread
use. The instrument to be developed is based on an integrated design of the
illumination, optics, data collection, and reconstruction algorithms for
fluorescence imaging. These techniques enable the determination of the 3D
position of emitters with great precision leading to 3D imaging with better
resolution and depth of field than competing methods. Experimental results have
consistently shown 3D capability with resolutions below 20 nm, representing one
order of magnitude improvement over optical microscopes currently in use at most
research institutions.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project addresses a major
opportunity in the expanding microscopy market. The module's unique
characteristics and accessible price point will offer multifunctional 3D
superresolution imaging capability to thousands of laboratories in the US and
worldwide. In an effort to accelerate commercialization, the project seeks to
implement a cost-effective, flexible modular subsystem that can be integrated
with existing commercial scientific microscopes. With its widespread
accessibility, the instrument will impact multiple fields of science and
engineering including biophysics, cellular biology, and biomedical science and
engineering. From a broader perspective, this project will increase scientific
and technical capabilities by providing nanoscale optical imaging for everyday
biological research, thereby strengthening the US presence in the worldwide
optical microscopy industry.