* 1353809
* Dynamics of Posture and Reaching
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2014,01/31/2017
* James Lackner, Brandeis University
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 01/31/2017
* USD 449,061.00

An essential issue in the movement sciences is to understand how people maintain
upright posture and balance. In everyday life, people often simultaneously turn
and reach to pick up objects or to place objects. Such movements are typically
accurate and seem virtually effortless. However, when an arm movement is made
during ongoing trunk rotation large inertial forces are generated on the
reaching arm. These forces are so large that huge errors in reaching and
destabilization of posture would occur if the central nervous system (CNS) did
not take them into account. In this program of research, two series of
experiments will examine the interaction of the control of self-rotation and of
arm-torso dynamics. Series 1 will evaluate the kinematics of reaching and
turning, postural sway, arm joint torques, and ground reaction forces at the
feet. Series 2 will assess these variables in tasks involving active and passive
torso rotation and reaching. The results will indicate whether the CNS control
of trunk rotation and arm reaching are a) parallel and independent, b)
hierarchical with information about intended trunk rotation contributing to
separate control of torso and arm movements, or c) distributed with a single
internal model for reaching and turning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Falling in the
elderly is a major health problem. Neurological diseases that affect torso and
or limb movement control (e.g., Parkinson's disease) also increase the
likelihood of falls. This research should provide a scientific basis for
developing rehabilitation strategies that compensate for trunk-generated forces
on the limbs and minimize the likelihood of falling.