* 1353411
* SBIR Phase II:  Ultra High Efficiency Printable Quantum Dot Light-Emitting Display
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2014,03/31/2017
* Paul Holloway, NanoPhotonica
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 03/31/2017
* USD 1,271,038.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project aims to further
enhance the efficiency and lifetime of quantum dot light emitting diodes (QD-
LEDs) used for displays. An active matrix QD-LED prototype display will be
demonstrated using solution processing. The lifetime of QD-LED will be extended
by determining degradation mechanisms, and development of new materials,
modified device processing and encapsulation techniques. The effects of charge
imbalance and light trapping on the efficiency of QD-LED will be determined and
optimized. External quantum efficiencies will exceed 18%. Lifetimes of QD-LEDs
exceeding 10,000 hours for all three primary colors will be demonstrated, which
meets the requirement for mobile display applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact/commercial potential of this project will be a demonstration that
quantum dot light-emitting diodes (QD-LEDs) have the commercial advantages of
high efficiencies and long lifetimes. QD-LED will be welcomed by the display
industry which is now desperately searching for next generation technologies.
The demonstration of an active matrix QD-LED display prototype with a solution
printing process will be a critical step towards the commercialization. The
systematic investigation of technical details involved in the printing process
of active matrix QD-LEDs will enable the construction of a pilot facility and
eventual mass production. The simple architecture and solution fabrication
process will provide significant cost advantages over conventional processes.