* 1353346
* EAGER: Immunization in Influence and Virus Propagation on Large Networks
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2015
* B Aditya Prakash, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* jun huan
* 08/31/2015
* USD 88,821.00

Given a graph, like a social/computer network or the blogosphere, in which an
infection (or meme or virus) has been spreading for some time, how does one
select the k best nodes for immunization/quarantining immediately? This team was
the first to show that the propagation (specifically, the so-called "epidemic
threshold") depends on a single number, the first eigenvalue of the adjacency
matrix of the network, for any graph and almost any propagation model in the
literature. This team also gave linear-time provably near-optimal algorithms for
static pre-emptive node/edge removal, by minimizing the eigenvalue on arbitrary
graphs. They were also the first to give a a linear-time algorithm to
automatically detect the number and identity of possible culprits under perfect
information, carefully using the Minimum Description Length principle, again on
arbitrary graphs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The major thrust of this proposal is:
Given a graph, a virus model (SIR, SIS etc.), a set of already infected nodes,
and a fixed&lt;br/&gt;budget of k nodes/edges to immunize or quarantine, can one
quickly find an optimal or near-optimal solution to best contain the
virus?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Merit: This is the first to study the
short-term immunization problem on arbitrary graphs. The problem has received
limited attention in past literature: the few current results (except the PI's
past work, see related work) all are on specific graphs like random graphs, and
not arbitrary graphs. The focus of this work is on scalable techniques (linear
or sub-quadratic on nodes/edges) which can be applied to large
graphs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Impact: The work has numerous immediate
applications in public health and epidemiology, e.g., designing dynamic "what to
do next" policies etc. Leveraging state-of-the-art simulators from the Virginia
Bio-Informatics Institute, this work helps in realistic simulations, as well as
in making more informed choices and policy decisions for future. The work also
has high broader impact, as propagation-style processes on networks appear in
many other settings like viral marketing, cyber security, social media like
Twitter and blogs etc.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Education: The PI will incorporate
research findings in graduate level classes, give tutorials at conferences, and
aim to engage undergraduate students from underrepresented groups into this
exciting area of research through programs like NSF REU and MAOP/VTURCS
(Minority Academic Opportunities Program and VT Undergraduate Research in CS) at
VT.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For further information, please see the project web
page: &lt;br/&gt;URL: http://www.cs.vt.edu/~badityap/NSF-PROJECTS/EAGER-13/