* 1353815
* Terraces, large phylogenetic trees, and trait evolution
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2019
* Mike Steel, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 12/31/2019
* USD 694,415.00

Scientists are using massive data sets of DNA sequences and new computing
technologies to place all 2 million biological species into a grand synthesis,
the evolutionary tree of life. Evolutionary trees permit predictions about the
traits that organisms possess based on traits present in closely related
species. This has important practical benefits in areas like medicine,
conservation biology, and crop improvement. Although building small trees from
DNA from just a few genes is straightforward, many obstacles remain to scaling
up this effort to all life. One of the most serious is missing data. Under some
conditions, even a few gene sequences missing for a handful of species can
produce evolutionary trees that lack detailed resolution. This grant is a
collaboration among biologists, mathematicians and computer scientists to
understand the circumstances in which missing data cause problems, and to
develop methods to overcome them. The research will generate mathematically
provable results and new software to help biologists build more reliable large
evolutionary trees. These products will be tested with real world data sampled
from flowering plants, one of the most diverse branches of the tree of life,
with over 250,000 species. The high quality evolutionary trees generated because
of this project will provide a societal need by providing clear evolutionary
knowledge to inform conservation planning and prioritization. The research team
will organize a workshop for graduate students around the country to train them
in the use of these new tools, and will develop educational materials for high
school students involving computer visualization of the tree of
life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The construction of very large
phylogenetic trees from sequence data mined from databases can be challenging
because of the recently discovered problem of terraces--potentially vast regions
in "tree space" in which all trees have precisely the same optimality score due
to missing data. This research focuses first on developing a better conceptual
understanding of four problematic impacts of terraces on large tree
construction: (i) increased ambiguity, (ii) biased confidence assessments
obtained from bootstrapping or Bayesian posterior probabilities, (iii)
impediments to tree search algorithms, and (iv) downstream effects on
comparative inferences that rely on trees. Next, the research will develop
analytical methods and software implementations to overcome these problems.
Finally, it will test these new methods by applying them to 27 large-scale
phylogenies newly constructed within flowering plants, each with 1000+ species,
examining trait evolution, as an exemplar of downstream comparative inference,
in a subset of these.