* 1353267
* Developmental mechanisms conferring an adaptive transition in the evolution of compound eyes
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2014,09/30/2018
* Andrew Zelhof, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Evan Balaban
* 09/30/2018
* USD 510,000.00

Animal visual systems vary greatly in morphological form. Development of
differences in eye morphology are driven by a need to adapt to the light
conditions that an animal experiences and also by the animal's behaviors and
survival response repertoire. Understanding the many functional blueprints for
designing ways to see and the genes required for these designs will have a
direct impact on our basic knowledge regarding the comparative biology of visual
systems. Additionally, this work has the potential to deepen our understanding
of our own human eyes and also to reveal fundamental design principles for
generating artificial systems for light detection and seeing. This study will
compare and determine the variations in gene activity that contribute to the
differences in morphological form and light sensitivities of eyes in two closely
related insect species. The project will integrate research activities with
academic programs established at Indiana University that encourage the
participation of underrepresented minorities in STEM disciplines. Additionally,
it will provide training for teachers to enable them to develop new curriculum
and methodology to improve science literacy in elementary and high
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The individual rhabdomeres of photoreceptors of
apposition compound eyes are organized in a "fused/closed" rhabdom configuration
in the ommatidia of the flour beetle, Tribolium, or in an "open/separated"
rhabdom configuration in the ommatidia of the fruit fly, Drosophila. The studies
in this award will focus on how conserved cellular processes are modified to
produce these kinds of adaptive transitions within the constraints of
constructing a functional tissue. The three objectives of this study are
designed to 1), ascertain the spatial and temporal expression profiles of the
Tribolium homologs of the Drosophila proteins known to be required for the
generation of open rhabdoms; 2), address the functional consequence of the
absence or presence of these proteins in Tribolium; and 3), develop and apply
the use of TAL effector nucleases (TALENs) to generate null mutations in
Tribolium with the goal of testing genetic relationships between the genes
investigated in objectives 1 and 2. Overall this investigation will provide
fundamental insights into how conserved cellular mechanisms are adapted,
modified, or eliminated to generate novel and adaptive morphological
organizations.