* 1353831
* EAGER: US Ignite: FitGENI - The Impact of Video Fidelity on Fitness Efficacy
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2014,03/31/2015
* Kevin Hill, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Lyles
* 03/31/2015
* USD 299,930.00

This project will assess the effectiveness of live fitness sessions broadcast
via gigabit networking. Participation in regular group fitness programs and
access to personal trainers is a way to improve the health of individuals, thus
increasing lifespans and reducing the overall cost of healthcare. Significant
challenges exist in the participation in regular fitness programs including
cost, time and geography. There are over 251,000 registered fitness trainers in
the USA which deliver group fitness and personal training programs at their
local health clubs on a daily basis. This proposal seeks to explore the
effectiveness of live broadcast fitness via gigabit networking and the impact of
varying the video fidelity. The study will utilize the KinectHealth software
application, GENI racks and the OpenFlow networking protocol. Kinect Health 3D
was a Bronze price winner in the recent MozillaIgnite competition.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Obesity and its consequent diseases is a national problem
that is a significant component of rising health-care expenditures. Exercise and
even modest exercise-driven weight loss can significantly lower fasting blood
sugar, improve glucose tolerance, and reduce blood triglyceride levels. This
project will explore a network-mediated method of encouraging and facilitating
regular exercise and will document its associated bandwidth requirements.