* 1353612
* SBIR Phase II:  Novel macrocyclic chelating groups for use in targeted radioisotope diagnostic and companion diagnostic/therapeutic applications
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2014,09/30/2016
* Darren Magda, Lumiphore, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 09/30/2016
* USD 899,312.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project proposes to
develop novel "caged" macrocyclic chelating groups that display faster and more
stable binding as compared to acyclic and mono-macrocyclic chelators currently
used. Metallic radioisotopes offer versatile imaging and therapeutic properties,
but loss of metallic radioisotopes from their site-directing molecules can lead
to deleterious side-effects or reduced contrast and efficacy. There is a
recognized, compelling need for improved chelating groups for use in
radiopharmaceuticals. Such chelating groups must rapidly bind radioisotopes, so
that they are compatible with the practicalities of clinical laboratory
preparation. They must also stably bind the cation so that none is released in
vivo, at least prior to its decay. The optimized chelating groups to be
developed under this project will stably coordinate metal cations currently used
for radioisotope-based diagnosis and therapy, display facile complexation
kinetics, and provide a convenient synthetic handle for attachment to targeting
moieties. By means of this approach, the novel chelators will both improve the
utility of existing radiopharmaceuticals and permit the use of radionuclides
that are at present underdeveloped in the clinic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact/commercial potential of this project, if successful, will be that
aromatic macrocyclic bifunctional chelators (AMBFCs) will be developed that will
potentially change the landscape in the way cancer is detected and treated.
Because the AMBFCs can be used in cancer imaging, the physician benefits from an
effective feedback loop on therapeutic progress, remission, and prognosis that
could further shorten the time of treatment. AMBFCs in companion
radiodiagnostics also could reduce the cost of ineffectual medication, which is
a strategic goal of the FDA. Plus, by employing novel radionuclides in the
AMBFCs to kill tumors and their metastases, the benefit could materially cut
down the time and cost of therapy. All of these features could promote better
clinical outcomes and reduce the overall cost of healthcare by saving lives with
earlier intervention. Through improved clinical outcomes from this unique
science, AMBFCs will advance the national health, prosperity and welfare of
others.