* 1353391
* Understanding biological motion
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2014,09/30/2019
* Hongjing Lu, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 09/30/2019
* USD 550,705.00

A major issue in the psychological sciences is how people can infer the
intentions of others. Humans are remarkably adept at predicting the actions of
other people and making inferences about their intention and goals. The present
investigation examines how humans make such inferences from the physical
movements of others. The work is guided by a computational theory of biological
motion understanding that quantifies the action representations that allow
people to make inferences in action recognition and prediction. The larger goal
is to explain how perception and reasoning operate synergistically to infer
hidden goals and intentions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research has
broad impact in several domains. The inference capacity of most people exceeds
that of today's best machine vision systems. For example, in the investigation
of the bombing at the Boston marathon, extensive video from surveillance camera
systems was available but it was the trained human eye that led to arrests.
Human investigators scrutinized hundreds of hours of videos frame by frame and
identified suspects who displayed suspicious behavioral patterns. Hence,
understanding how humans make inferences and predictions about actions will play
an important role in guiding the development of more advanced machine vision
systems, useful in forensic sciences as well as many other real-world
applications. In addition, individuals with autism or nonverbal learning
disabilities often show difficulty in inferring the meaning of observed actions.
Investigation of the key computational components underlying action
understanding may potentially guide the development of behavioral interventions
to facilitate compensatory strategies for understanding actions.