* 1353531
* SBIR Phase II:  Scaling up the Synthesis of Novel Poly(ethylene glycol) Based Dendrimers for Targeted Drug Delivery Applications
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2014,03/31/2016
* Attila Gergely, PolyInsight, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 03/31/2016
* USD 364,902.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project is aimed at the design
and manufacture of agents useful for the diagnosis and treatment of breast and
other cancers. The primary product is a novel water-soluble molecule constructed
from poly(ethylene glycol) (or PEG), containing multiple arms with folate groups
as well as a diagnostic agent. The folate groups will target cancer cells
preferentially over healthy cells and the fluorescent diagnostic agent will
allow effective breast cancer diagnosis. This targeting molecule differs from
currently available materials in that the length and number of the PEG arms as
well as the attachment of folate groups can be very carefully and reproducibly
controlled, addressing a critical weakness with previous multifunctional
devices. The precision synthesis steps are catalyzed by an enzyme, leading to
very pure products. Currently three folate-targeted diagnostic molecules are in
Phase III clinical trials, but all are based on small molecules and a single
folate targeting group. The advantage of a polymer-based device with multiple
folate groups will be a longer circulation time in the body with more effective
targeting of cancer cells.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is significant since by
2020 approximately 18.2 million Americans will be diagnosed with cancer. Breast
cancer is the most frequently diagnosed cancer in both white and African-
American women. One in eight American women develops breast cancer, and a new
patient is diagnosed in every three minutes. Chemotherapy has many side effects
such as hair loss and nausea, and requires extended patient care. Specific
targeting is a significant advantage for diagnostic and chemotherapeutic agents.
When a drug is delivered directly to the cancer cell to kill it, the collateral
damage of healthy cells is minimized. New delivery devices are badly needed for
cancer diagnosis and therapy, and if successful this project will provide both a
new diagnostic agent as well as a platform technology for additional products.
Another impact of this project is the use of an enzyme-catalyzed green
manufacturing process which minimizes wasteful by-products. In the longer term,
the market potential will be significant as the technology is adapted to
specific diagnostic and therapeutic products.