* 1353570
* SBIR Phase II:  Development of microalgae for commercial hydrogen biofuels
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2014,09/30/2016
* Svetlana Oard, BHO Technology, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 09/30/2016
* USD 925,733.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project proposes to use
an innovative approach to metabolically engineer algae that will enable low-
cost, carbon-free hydrogen production at medium to large scale. The metabolic
pathway for hydrogen production in microalgae is tightly regulated. Process
models for hydrogen production are based on anaerobic sulfur-deprivation
preventing generation of oxygen, which inactivates hydrogenases. However,
hydrogen yields are too low for an economical commercial process. Hydrogen
production rates are difficult to improve due to complicated metabolic pathways
guarding hydrogen production. Novel proprietary Chlamydomonas strains with
synthetic genes for hydrogenase and maturation proteins were created and proven
in Phase I. This project will continue the metabolic engineering to increase
electron availability for hydrogenase and develop stable strains for scalable
and commercially viable production of hydrogen. The proposed research will
expand fundamental understanding of: 1) electron flow toward algal hydrogenases
under sulfur-rich conditions and sulfur-deprivation, 2) requirements for
maturation of hydrogenases, and 3) requirements to protect hydrogenases from
oxygen. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project, if successful, will be the commercial generation of cost-effective,
renewable, and environmentally clean hydrogen that could greatly impact the
nation's ability to reduce its use of foreign oil and create many new jobs. The
commercial hydrogen production currently is burdened by major dependence on
electricity and carbon dioxide emission. The proposed approach provides a
commercial process for hydrogen production that will generate electricity and
sequester carbon dioxide. The abundance of low-cost, renewable hydrogen should
expand hydrogen markets to generate electricity and fuel vehicles. Just 200,000
ha of algal ponds using improved strains could displace 20% of imported crude
oil. Thus, the project will have great commercial impact by enhancing national
energy security. Moreover, this technology will promote diversification and
sustainability of agricultural production in the U.S. through development of
algae farming, which will not require arable land. Potentially, this technology
will produce the most ecologically clean biofuel theoretically available, and
could have great social impact by decreasing the carbon footprint and promoting
economic diversification in rural areas.