* 1353338
* Understanding Higher Order Color:  Beyond the Cardinal Mechanisms
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2014,01/31/2018
* Rhea Eskew, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Lawrence Gottlob
* 01/31/2018
* USD 498,354.00

Humans typically rely on vision as their primary sense in their interactions
with the world. Understanding how higher-order cortical brain processes
contribute to human visual perception is a critical issue in cognitive science.
Color offers a unique opportunity for understanding the brain mechanisms of
perception because the very first step in color processing, the absorption of
light by cells in the retina (photoreceptors), is fully understood. This
knowledge allows the color scientist to manipulate early signals in the nervous
system and measure the perceptual result. Perceptual and neurophysiological
experiments have shown that signals from the different photoreceptors in the eye
are combined, approximately by addition and subtraction. Our ability to see
colors and to discriminate one color from another are the result of these neural
sums and differences. For about the past half-century, perceptual scientists
have tried to understand the number and nature of these neural color mechanisms:
Are there few color mechanisms or many? Do they just add and subtract
photoreceptor signals or do they perform more complex calculations? The present
work combines computational modeling with novel experimental techniques and
strategies. In some cases, random visual flickering elements will appear over a
test stimulus. If the noise and test are processed through the same color
mechanisms, the noise should hinder the ability of a person to see the test
color (by a process like camouflage). If the noise and test are processed in
separate mechanisms, the noise should have no effect on the ability to see the
test at all. The properties of the color mechanisms will be quantitatively
studied by varying the color of the noise relative to the
test.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding how the brain processes color
information is an important part of the more general understanding of how we
perceive the world around us. There are practical applications of this research
as well: Color is an important part of signaling systems and information
displays. Having a quantitative model of color vision will help the designer of
cockpit and automotive displays, medical information and imaging displays, and
even digital television systems, to more efficiently and accurately convey
information to users.