* 1353368
* SBIR Phase II:  Quantitative Phase Imaging for Life Sciences
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2014,10/31/2018
* Catalin Chiritescu, Phi Optics Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 10/31/2018
* USD 1,546,326.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project proposes to develop a
faster and more accurate optical instrument for studying live cells and tissues.
The study of live cells has yielded numerous discoveries (e.g. germ theory, the
Krebs cycle, cell division) and is important for drug discovery and disease
treatment. Live cells are transparent and need to be observed for long periods
of time (days, weeks) in their natural state. To make the cells visible and
measure them quantitatively, current state of the art instruments require
injecting the cells with staining agents or light emitting fluorophores. Both
processes are invasive, labor intensive and expensive and long term observations
of live cells is difficult: staining embalms the cells and the fluorophores fade
quickly and kill the cells in hours. The Phase I project produced a proof-of-
concept prototype that provides quantitative imaging of live cells by processing
the light transmitted through the cells in their natural state. Completion of
the Phase II objectives will upgrade the Phase I prototype to a commercial grade
instrument: improve optical design and build a housing enclosure, develop
commercial grade software and automate the hardware controls and develop task-
specific software applications to solve particular biological problems.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of
this project is to enable life scientists with a new and powerful instrument for
studying live cells. The greatest impact of the commercial instrument developed
in Phase II project will have is enabling researchers to do science better than
before, i.e., more accurately, more quantitatively, and more noninvasively. The
range of breakthroughs enabled by the instrument will likely include: novel drug
discovery by accurate monitoring of cell response to treatment, fundamental
studies of cell proliferation and growth, minimally invasive automatic diagnosis
of cancer biopsies, and fast and accurate blood testing instruments. Scaling up
the production of the instrument will create new jobs and increase the US
dominance in the biotechnology area. Due to their full automation, the
instruments can also operate in areas with limited access to trained personnel
and provide the digital data necessary for remote diagnosis, such as Medically
Underserved Areas/Populations in United States.