* 1353263
* Neural Mechanisms Regulating Reward Responses
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2014,12/31/2019
* Jennifer Cummings, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 12/31/2019
* USD 710,000.00

How does the brain decide when it is time to work to obtain food or put its
effort into finding a mate? What changes in the brain to assign priorities to
specific rewards depending on the internal state of the animal? In these
experiments, the investigators will study how the hormone, estradiol, acts in
the brain of the female rat to decrease food intake and the motivation for food,
while enhancing reproductive motivation. The investigators will study the
chemistry of the brain as it responds to the presentation of a cue that has been
previously paired with a reward. These studies will investigate how changes in
the neurotransmitter, dopamine, is affected by reward-related cues under
different hormonal states. These results will enhance the understanding of the
role of hormones to influence motivation and decision making processes, and will
contribute to the understanding of neuroplasticity in general.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the female rat, estradiol decreases food intake and the
motivation for food while enhancing female reproductive motivation. Further,
dopamine (DA) increases in the nucleus accumbens (NAc) upon the presentation of
a cue that has been previously paired with a reward, and NAc DA is implicated in
attribution of incentive salience for that reward. How DA signaling is affected
by reward-related cues under different hormonal states, and the mechanism
through which estradiol affects the incentive salience of these cues, is
critically important to our understanding of motivation in the female rat.
Experiments will use fast scan cyclic voltammetry to measure spontaneous DA
release in the core and shell of the NAc during responding for a mate or food
under different hormone conditions, using our novel paradigm to quantify female
reproductive motivation. The role of DA in mediating the switch from choosing
food to choosing a mate in the female will be determined. Graduate students and
undergraduates will be involved in these studies. Findings will be disseminated
through scientific publications as well as presentations at conferences at the
local and national level. Specific activities for students in the laboratory
included pre/post assessment of laboratory skills and development of a
BrainsRule! presentation to local and Detroit middle school students about the
neural mechanisms of motivation and choice.