* 1353682
* Collaborative Research: IDBR: Type A:  The Nanosizer: A New Tool For the Photochemical Fabrication of Bioactive Nanoarrays
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Chad Mirkin, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 07/31/2017
* USD 330,000.00

This award is being made jointly by two Programs- (1) Instrument Development for
Biological Research, in the Division of Biological Infrastructure (Biological
Sciences Directorate), and (2) Nano-Biosensing, in the Division of Chemical,
Bioengineering, Environmental and Transport Systems (Engineering Directorate).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;Researchers at
Northwestern University, and the University of Miami will develop an instrument
to produce nanoarrays of biologically active probes. This new tool will produce
combinatorial arrays of oligonucleotides and oligopeptides with sub-micrometer
feature diameters over large areas (10's of square centimeters). The work will
achieve order of magnitude improvements in feature size, production rate, and
cost over current technologies providing access to fundamental biological
experiments that could not otherwise be undertaken, including new ways to
measure gene or protein expression at the single cell level. The development is
a highly interdisciplinary effort which combines chemistry, materials science,
engineering, and nanotechnology. Project activities will also include summer
internships for undergraduates from minority-serving four year colleges, and a
range of other outreach activities involving the Museum of Science and Industry
in Chicago to promote scientific awareness, and with Breakthrough Miami to
create internship opportunities for high school students from financially
disadvantaged communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description:&lt;br/&gt;An instrument to create ultradense patterns of
biologically active molecules will be developed to model the spatial and
chemical complexity of biological systems or create arrays for determining gene
or protein expression at the single-cell level. The goal of the proposed
activity is to combine new surface chemistries with new instrument capabilities
to make a go-to tool for the in situ synthesis of combinatorial arrays of
oligonucleotides or oligopeptides with feature size and shape control over
square centimeter areas The Nanosizer is enabled by two breakthrough advances to
recently emerge from the Mirkin and Braunschweig groups, namely 1) the
development of massively parallel pen arrays that are individually addressable
by light, thereby combining the advantages of massively parallel pen arrays with
photolithography (near- and farfield), and 2) new surface immobilization
chemistries and photochemistries for the rapid printing of molecules onto
surfaces. This project combines these two features into an automated platform
that can photoactivate a surface with individually addressable tips, expose it
to a range of reagents, and repeat for several cycles to create spatially
encoded combinatorial arrays or nanopatterns of biologically active molecules on
surfaces. When the appropriate instrumentation milestones are reached, initial
filings of patent applications will be made through institutional
commercialization offices, and partnerships will be sought with instrumentation
manufacturers. Early dissemination of the research findings will occur through
conferences followed by full reports in scientific journals. When milestones of
significant public interest are reached, institutional public relations offices
will be contacted to produce a press release. CAD drawings for photomasks for
preparing tip arrays and microfluidic cells will be made available on the
websites of the PIs so researchers can implement the Nanosizer on existing AFMs.