* 1353952
* IDBR: TYPE A:  Directly Integratable Photoacoustic Microscopy with Established Optical Microscopy for Comprehensive Sub-cellular Biological Imaging
* BIO,DBI
* 04/15/2014,03/31/2018
* Cheng Sun, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 03/31/2018
* USD 645,094.00

An award is made to Northwestern University to develop a photoacoustic
microscopy (PAM) technology platform that is compatible with commercial optical
microscopes. PAM differs from other established optical microscopic technologies
by directly sensing the physiologically-specific optical absorption properties
in tissue rather than optical scattering or fluorescence properties. Hence, it
holds promise to greatly enhance the imaging capability of current biological
research by offering a new type of imaging contrast. Despite this great promise,
however, PAM can be performed only by a very limited number of research groups
in the US due to the lack of a commercially available system, which is mainly
because the existing PAM systems are incompatible with commercial optical
microscopes. Thus, researchers have to construct their own PAM systems, which is
clearly beyond the capability of biological researchers and may not be
economically feasible. To address this barrier, this project aims to make PAM
more accessible to the vast majority of biological researchers who are already
using advanced optical microscopy in their daily research. This project will
benefit biological investigations that require quantitative imaging of, for
example, tissue hemodynamics, interactions of a cell and its microenvironment,
cell/tissue regeneration, and drug evaluation. The PAM system can either be used
independently for label-free volumetric imaging or be integrated with
confocal/two-photon microscopes for multimodal imaging. The key intellectual
merit of this project comes from its novel designs that enable PAM to be broadly
accessible by making PAM compatible with existing optical microscopy. Two
incompatibility issues prevent existing PAM from being seamlessly integrated
with modern optical microscopes: (1) PAM's slow and bulky mechanical scanning
mechanism cannot match the high-speed optical scanning used in modern optical
microscopy and (2) PAM's opaque and sizeable ultrasonic detectors cannot be
easily fit into the extremely limited working space associated with high-power
objective lenses. This project provides effective solutions to address these two
issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key broader impact of this research is that it
will, for the first time, lay a solid foundation for PAM to be broadly
accessible by the vast majority of biological researchers rather than just a few
optics research groups. Breakthroughs in biological research often follow
technology advancement; however, developing a novel technology applicable to
biological research is only the beginning. The key step to bringing a societal
benefit is to make newly developed technologies approachable by users. Owing to
the great strengths of PAM to offer unstained functional imaging in tissues and
cells at high resolution in three dimensions, the integrated system has the
potential to augment a wide range of biological research fields. This project
requires active involvement of students at both the undergraduate and graduate
levels. A unique aspect of this project is that students will gain
interdisciplinary expertise across fields from physics, optics, chemistry, and
engineering to medical sciences. Moreover, the large biological research user
base of the Center for Advanced Molecular Imaging and the ability to draw wide-
spread public attention by the Chemistry of Life Processes Institute will
warrant the maximum dissemination of the technology being developed in this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is being made jointly by two Programs-
(1) Instrument Development for Biological Research, in the Division of
Biological Infrastructure (Biological Sciences Directorate), and (2)
Biophotonics, in the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental and
Transport Systems (Engineering Directorate).