* 1353715
* QEIB: Extended multitrophic diversity maintenance theory
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2020
* Peter Chesson, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 07/31/2020
* USD 605,008.00

Understanding the forces that maintain biodiversity in natural communities has
eluded ecologists for centuries. Much of the progress made to date has come from
development of theory that provides specific predictions that can be tested
experimentally or observationally. This project will extend existing
biodiversity theory in new and important, though challenging, ways. The
investigator will develop theoretical predictions for how and when two
fundamental ecological interactions - competition and predation - interact to
influence species diversity. These predictions will advance basic ecological
research as well as conservation and management efforts to preserve biodiversity
in the face of species invasion and increasing anthropogenic disturbance. The
project will provide strong training in quantitative theory development and
modeling, further enhancing our ability to predict the effects of future
challenges to biodiversity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current diversity theory
suggests that the effects of competition and predation commonly counteract one
another, predicting that coexistence is weaker in the presence of both than when
only one of these mechanisms is present. When will adding a predator to a
community make coexistence more likely, and how will substituting one predator
for another affect their influence on community diversity? The investigators
will begin with a model that can be linear or nonlinear, allowing the effects of
different interactions (competition within a trophic level, effects from higher
and lower levels) to be separated and to understand how nonlinearities affect
the ways in which these processes combine. They will examine the roots of
nonlinearities in biological factors such as life-history traits and behavior.
They will also examine food web structure to predict how the numerous indirect
interactions in complex food webs alter the relative strengths and joint action
of predation-based and competition-based mechanisms. Models will be developed to
predict the consequences of species extinctions on other members of food webs
and communities. Finally, models will be developed to examine how trophic
cascades and the roles of competition-based and predation-based coexistence
mechanisms are affected by the relationship between trophic position and the
spatial and temporal dynamics of key species. The value of the resulting
extended theory will have considerable value to basic ecology and to diverse
applications aimed at preserving biodiversity. Quantitative training of graduate
students and postdoctoral researchers will be extended to secondary education
through collaboration with high school teachers. The prospect of developing
these ties to strengthen biomathematics is novel, and may strengthen several
areas of ecology and biology.