* 1353170
* EAGER: Sustainable Structural Binders from Iron Carbonation
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2015
* Narayanan Neithalath, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 08/31/2015
* USD 70,000.00

This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project is to evaluate
the feasibility of a novel approach towards producing binders for structural
concrete applications through the carbonation process of waste/by-product
metallic iron powder. The specific objectives include the determination of
carbonation efficiency of iron powder under ambient temperature and pressure,
the need to introduce complex formation agents and dissolution aids to increase
the reaction product formation, and a preliminary understanding of the
mechanical behavior of the binder. The reaction product(s) will be characterized
using advanced characterization tools to discern the effects of source materials
and processing conditions, and to link those to the mechanical properties of the
material. The production of H2 as a by-product of the reaction requires careful
consideration since it impacts the pore structure. Preliminary indications of
the reaction kinetics in these systems will be arrived at through a combination
of experimental techniques and simple models, which are expected to be vital
towards further material design and process optimization for desired mechanical
properties. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project charts a novel course towards
developing sustainable binder systems for concrete by not relying on portland
cement hydration or alkaline activation of aluminosilicates. The use of a
waste/by-product material (which is currently landfilled) as the major source
material, and a greenhouse gas as the enabler of the reaction forwards the twin
benefits of resource conservation and recycling, and CO2 sequestration.
Establishing the feasibility of iron carbonate binder formation and adequacy of
the material properties could accelerate the development of high-performance,
net carbon-negative materials for a variety of applications including room-
temperature processed moderate strength ceramic-like matrices. From an
educational perspective, this research will continue the on-going efforts to
mentor graduate and undergraduate students and to engage high-school students in
research.