* 1353796
* A Study of How Philosophy Research and Practice Can Better Contribute to STEM Research and to Public Policy
* SBE,SES
* 06/15/2014,05/31/2015
* Robert Frodeman, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 05/31/2015
* USD 81,997.00

The goal of this research project is to develop an account of how philosophy
research and practice can better contribute to STEM research and to public
policy. During the 20th century, philosophy became a rigorous academic
discipline, but often at the expense of engagement with non-philosophical
audiences. One development that sought to remedy this situation was applied
philosophy, which attempts to bring philosophical thinking to bear on real-world
problems. It often focuses on issues of science, technology, and society. One
example is bioethics, which developed as a new approach to philosophy
characterized by direct engagement with non-disciplinary peers including
physicians, patients, lawyers, engineers, and scientists as they confront policy
problems. More recently, other efforts at policy-relevant philosophy have
emerged, including feminism, environmental justice, experimental philosophy, and
public philosophy. Such efforts face a common challenge: engaging with non-
philosophers while maintaining sufficient interesting for philosophers in
general.

This project will develop new insights for applied philosophy by drawing from
theoretical accounts and case studies, as well as the history of institutional
attempts, to extract lessons for how to better integrate philosophic insights
with the demands of policy professionals. It will better organize our
understanding of policy-relevant philosophical practice in order to open new
research avenues for philosophers both in terms of practical opportunities and
theoretical questions. The research will also help both the STEM disciplines and
policy makers make better use of philosophic insights. Cultivating a new
generation of policy-relevant philosophers has the potential of significantly
improving policy and discussion about science and technology across multiple
sectors.