* 1353606
* CAREER:  A Scalable, Declarative, Imprecise Database Management System
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2013,04/30/2017
* Christopher Re, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 04/30/2017
* USD 345,950.00

The unprecedented amounts of data available to individuals, companies,
governments, and scientists promises to revolutionize the way entertainment,
business, governance, and science operate. And while data are cheap and
plentiful, much of this data is lower quality than the precise data that has
been managed for the last 30 years. Building an application that processes this
imprecise data is difficult: it requires that developers handle both standard
data management challenges (e.g., concurrency and scalability), while at the
same time coping with imprecise and incomplete data, which is typically done
using statistical or machine learning techniques (e.g., interpolation and
classification). The Hazy project addresses this challenge by building a system
that integrates the paradigms of relational database management systems with
statistical machine learning techniques. This project conducts the following
major tasks: (I) designing a language to integrate these techniques with
standard SQL, (II) proposing an algebra to implement this language along with
support for automatic optimization (similar to a standard RDBMS), and (III)
discovering techniques to efficiently maintain the statistical models as the
underlying data are changed or updated. The end goal is a system that makes it
as easy to develop scalable applications that use imprecise data as it is to
develop their precise counterparts. Hazy allows users to process larger amounts
of data with more sophisticated statistical processing than ever before. In
turn, this enables new applications in a divese set of areas, such as life and
physical science sensing applications, health-care and environmental monitoring,
and enterprise-based and Web-based information
extraction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research of this project is used to develop
the data and infrastructure for new practicum-style courses that are under
development at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. In addition, this
infrastructure will be used as part of an outreach effort to enable high school
students to gain access to data analysis tools. The source code of Hazy is
released into open source and the results are disseminated on the project Web
site (http://www.cs.wisc.edu/hazy/).