* 1353783
* SG: RUI: Pollinator competition and plant competition as mechanisms for evolutionary diversification in two hummingbird-pollinated plants of the Caribbean
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2014,01/31/2021
* W. John Kress, Amherst College
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 01/31/2021
* USD 156,573.00

Ecologists have long sought to understand how competitive interactions within
and between species shape patterns of species diversity in natural communities.
Plant-pollinator competition differs from competition among animal species in a
significant way: pollinators may compete for plants as much as plants compete
for pollinators. This project examines the mechanisms by which competing
pollinators partition flowering plants and whether such partitioning leads to
floral diversification. The researchers will identify mechanisms using a
combination of experiments in a large, enclosed garden mimicking a natural
system, and field measurements of natural selection in wild populations of
plants. The research adds a significant conceptual component to studies of
ecological dynamics by directly linking ecological interactions between
consuming pollinators to natural selection of their mutualist plant resources.

The project is a collaboration between an undergraduate college and a research
institution. A minimum of ten undergraduates will be involved in every aspect of
the work, from experiments with hummingbirds in the enclosed garden, to
measurements of selection and reproductive success of plants in wild
populations, to statistical analyses of data. Individuals from the host country
of Dominica, West Indies, will participate in the field and laboratory studies
to strengthen an international collaboration and to provide lasting knowledge in
the host country once the project is completed. Findings will be disseminated to
the public through popular articles in magazines in the USA and Dominica,
podcasts in the USA, radio interviews and public lectures on Dominica and in the
USA, on departmental websites, and public exhibits at the Smithsonian
Institution.