* 1353781
* Collaborative Research: Causes and consequences of regular spatial patterning in foundation species: theoretical development and experimental tests in an African savanna
* BIO,DEB
* 11/01/2014,10/31/2019
* Daniel Doak, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 10/31/2019
* USD 170,000.00

New satellite imagery has revealed that many natural ecological systems form
surprisingly uniform patterns. This project will advance our understanding about
how these patterns form and how they affect resources such as water and
nutrients and the abundance and distribution of plants and animals. Research
will combine experimental field studies in tropical savanna in Kenya with
mathematical modeling to investigate the causes and consequences of the regular
pattern of large mounds formed over wide areas by soil-dwelling termites.
Researchers will investigate the physical and biological mechanisms that space
termite colonies, and how the mounded landscape shapes food webs and determines
overall productivity and stability of the system. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is expected to add to the scientific basis for managing rangeland
ecosystems, where self-organized patterns may be important indicators of
ecological degradation and components of landscape restoration. Project data
will be made freely available to the public. The project will also contribute to
science education in multiple ways. A post-doctoral researcher and a number of
undergraduate students, including students from underrepresented groups, will
participate first-hand in the field research. Many more students will benefit
from new instructional units based on the research and added to the curricula at
the home universities of the researchers in the U.S.