* 1353176
* SBIR Phase II:  Grip-Act-Reposition Miniaturized Stable Working Platform for Minimally Invasive Procedures Inside Active Organs
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2014,01/31/2017
* Roger Bagwell, Actuated Medical, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 01/31/2017
* USD 1,253,347.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will finalize
the Grip-Act-Reposition (GAR) Miniaturized Stable Working Platform for Minimally
Invasive Procedures Inside Active Organs - with initial focus on treating Atrial
Fibrillation (AF). A common procedure for treating AF is Radiofrequency (RF)
Catheter Ablation in the heart. A catheter with an electrode is used to deliver
RF electrical current to tissue ? burning paths that electrically isolate the
fibrillation trigger sources. With existing catheter-based devices, ablation
lines must be formed from a high number of discrete lesions created
sequentially. Forming contiguous lesions in the beating heart is challenging,
resulting in long procedure times and first-time success rates as low as 30% for
some forms of AF. GAR will revolutionize catheter-based minimally invasive
procedures. GAR will (i) provide a mechanism to enter a body cavity or organ,
including those such as the heart or lungs which move constantly; (ii) clamp to
a tissue wall, and (iii) create a stable platform from which to operate and/or
deliver various local treatments (energy, pharmaceuticals) to tissues.
Additionally, the rotating gear mechanism and simple grasp-and-release function
will allow repositioning within the cavity in a continuous line or arc without
losing contact with the tissue wall.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project is to a) improve healthcare in both
the U.S. and worldwide and b) generate revenue and US manufacturing jobs in a $5
billion market space. Atrial Fibrillation (AF) affects 2-3 million Americans,
and approximately 20 million people worldwide. The cost to the U.S. healthcare
system is an estimated $6.65 billion annually in procedures and, more commonly,
maintenance medications. Major limitations to existing catheter ablation
procedures are cost ($12,000+), time (4+ hours), and success rate (30-80%).
Typical solutions to AF are often treatment with medications costing $3,000+
yearly with many side-effects. GAR will reduce procedure time - in the case of
RF ablation to 1 hour- and improve success rates, reducing the need for repeat
catheter ablation procedures. Cardiac ablation will become a more viable
treatment for patients on maintenance medications. Additionally, GAR can be
applied in other medical applications and conditions, such as repairing
difficult bleeds in the intestines, where precise navigation within a moving
organ, loose tissue, or a body cavity is desired. The project will also result
in additional collaboration between academic and commercial institutions to take
the technology to market, along with training opportunities for both high-school
and college interns.