* 1353759
* IDBR: TYPE A - Microfluidic Fungal Transformation System for Ultra High-Throughput Functional Genomics
* BIO,DBI
* 05/15/2014,10/31/2017
* Won-Bo Shim, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 10/31/2017
* USD 302,791.00

An award is made to the Texas A&amp;M University to develop an instrument based
on microfluidic chips that enables ultra-fast genetic transformation and
screening of fungi. Fungi play important roles, both beneficial and detrimental,
in human life and in the earth's ecosystem. Rapidly improving molecular genetics
and genomic technologies have allowed scientists to understand the inner
workings of fungi and to utilize such information for making significant
improvements in fungi-based bioproduction and mitigating fungal human and crop
diseases. Despite this revolution in functional genomics, deleting or replacing
genes in fungi is still the preferred method to unambiguously characterize their
functions, a process that remains costly, time-consuming, and labor-intensive.
The project is to develop an instrument that enables highly efficient genetic
transformation of fungi using electric field and acoustic pressure, followed by
rapid screening of the successfully transformed mutant strains using the latest
microfluidic lab-on-a-chip technology. The developed instrument will be beta-
tested by several fungal biology researchers and subsequently broadly
disseminated through hands-on demonstrations at conferences and video journals.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This instrument is expected to revolutionize functional
genomics research worldwide in both fungal biology and more broadly in
microbiology by providing a streamlined gene-knockout instrument with orders-of-
magnitude improvement in efficiency and cost savings. The instrument will also
have significant long-term impacts on the agricultural and biotechnology
industry. The proposed instrument development process requires close
collaboration between engineers and microbiologists, and therefore will provide
invaluable multidisciplinary research environment to train the next-generation
of leaders in science and engineering. Notably, the project will also offer our
post-docs, graduate students and undergraduates to engage in outreach activities
aimed at high schools and the general public in the interest of communicating
scientific research and exciting discoveries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is
being made jointly by two Programs- (1) Instrument Development for Biological
Research, in the Division of Biological Infrastructure (Biological Sciences
Directorate), and (2) Biotechnology, Biochemical and Biomass Engineering, in the
Division of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental and Transport Systems
(Engineering Directorate).