* 1353945
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Developing a Communication Network for the Use and Management of a Fogwater System
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2014,02/28/2015
* Leslie Dodson, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 02/28/2015
* USD 17,829.00

Project Overview

The proposed research will design, implement and evaluate an information system
used to support and manage a novel fog water delivery system intended to supply
potable water to rural villages in southwest Morocco. Preliminary work with the
three primary stakeholder groups has demonstrated that the proposed information
system must function across a range of literacy levels, diverse technical
skills, myriad devices, mixed genders, dispersed locations and multiple cultural
circumstances. These design requirements introduce interesting technical
research questions in the context of socially important development work.

Intellectual Merit

The proposed work will add to existing knowledge at the intersection of gender,
resource management, and information/communication technologies. Prior research
has not investigated the integration of information systems in the design of
alternative water supply systems, particularly in the context of low-literacy,
low numeracy and cultural constraints related to gender. Despite a typically
stronger relationship with natural resources, women frequently do not have a
role in decision-making or management of those resources. The proposed research
will directly address this issue by generating new and useful knowledge about
the design and implementation of gender-aware information systems for natural
resource management while contributing to relevant scholarship in international
development and information and communication technology for development.

Broader Impacts

This research will lead to tangible benefits for study participants and
stakeholders. Female water users will potentially benefit from an easy-to-use
mobile-phone based system to report on water service problems; project managers
will benefit from an efficient, consolidated monitoring and management system,
and the local water manager will benefit from a convenient and culturally
appropriate communication system that links to local residents.