* 1353816
* Collaborative Research: IDBR: TYPE A: Unconventional Antenna Probes for  Ultra-High-Resolution Magnetic Resonance Imaging
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Michael Lanagan, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 07/31/2018
* USD 234,330.00

Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) facilities with enhanced spatial resolution and
reduced scan time are in urgent demand for investigating a comprehensive range
of biological systems from single cells to humans. The main advantage of high-
field MRI scanners is their potential to provide improved anatomic and temporal
resolution. Over the past decade, the magnetic field of clinical scanners has
increased from 1.5 Tesla (T) to 3 T, revolutionizing functional MRI to map the
brain activity. Higher image resolution may also eliminate the need for chemical
contrast agents injected in the body and allow for earlier detection of disease.
Recently, 9.4 T MRI scanners have been explored for the human anatomy studies.
Additional advancements are anticipated for animal and plant imaging, which will
be carried out in 7 T to 20 T MRI scanners. Cell imaging will be possible for
the micron scale resolutions that are achieved with 11.7 T and higher field
scanners. The performance of conventional coil probes, however, degrades at the
higher frequencies required by high-field MRI systems, therefore, new high-
frequency MRI probes are needed. This research will address fundamental
electromagnetic challenges of high-resolution MRI by developing unconventional
antenna probes for high-field MRI scanners to replace standard radio frequency
coils. The results of the project will enhance the capabilities of high-field
MRI and have an immediate impact on ongoing studies in animal behavior.
Researchers of biological anthropology, fisheries and biology will benefit from
new tools with shorter scan times and higher resolution. This work will also
open the paths for new antenna probes for human and clinical
MRI.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative effort between the groups from the
Electrical and Computer Engineering Department (Michigan Tech University), the
Materials Research Institute ((Penn State University), and the Huck Magnetic
Resonance Center (Penn State University) will explore a new approach to
integrating antenna and MRI technologies, and propose novel patch antenna probes
miniaturized by using gradient index metamaterials as a solution for antenna
compatibility with MRI environment. Novel antenna probes will provide such
advantages for high MRI frequencies as low loss, high Q factor and strong signal
due to optimized coupling between patch and feeding systems that will increase
image volume resolution by a factor of 10 over that of the present-day coils in
a 20 T MRI scanner. The project includes computational electromagnetic modeling,
design, and optimization of antenna probes; engineering composite dielectric
substrates and fabricating antenna systems; and testing probes at the antenna
facilities and in MRI scanners on phantoms and biological samples. The probes
will be directly tested in biological research: the brain development of
zebrafish will be initially explored as a model for other systems. The size
flexibility of novel antennas will provide for customized volumes of uniform
radio frequency field and allow for analyzing diverse samples including mice and
single cells. There are outstanding opportunities for the broad and immediate
dissemination of the project results through the Penn State's Center for MRI,
which is a shared-use facility for all departments including anthropology and
bioengineering, the Hershey Medical Center, and the NSF supported Center for
Dielectric Studies comprised of industrial companies.