* 1353123
* Co-evolution of the immune system and the fetal/maternal interface in viviparous mammals
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2014,02/28/2019
* Robert Miller, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 02/28/2019
* USD 800,000.00

The immune system is exquisitely capable of distinguishing self-tissues from
foreign invaders, often with the goals of protecting the former and destroying
the latter. This creates a problem for those animals that birth live young
following a prolonged pregnancy. How the immune system avoids attacking the
embryo that is genetically half foreign has been a central question in
immunology for almost 60 years. Using state-of-the-art, high-throughput gene
sequencing technology to investigate patterns of gene expression, this project
will investigate regulation of the immune system in the pregnant uterus at
different time-points during gestation. The model species to be used is the gray
short-tailed opossum, a marsupial mammal native to South America. As a
marsupial, they are a very distant relative to humans and mice, but still have
live birth following a short gestation. Genes identified from sequencing that
are candidates for immune regulation will be further investigated by localizing
their expression to specific cell types in pregnant tissues. By comparing
species such as humans and mice to distant relatives such as opossums,
mechanisms that are ancient and conserved, and therefore likely important, will
be uncovered. This project will provide a greater understanding of how the
immune system is regulated to deal with pregnancy and has potential broader
impact on reproductive health. This project also provides outreach to faculty
and students at Central New Mexico (CNM) community college. A CNM faculty member
and two students will spend each summer in the principal investigator's
laboratory working on some aspects of the project. Students for this research
opportunity will be chosen with the advice from CNM faculty members. Preference
will be given to students who are in the process of transferring to the four-
year university setting to give them the opportunity to engage in independent
projects with research active faculty.