* 1353152
* Collaborative Research: Evaluating the contributions of horizontally transferred bacterial genes and endogenous duplication events to the diversification of diatoms
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2014,12/31/2019
* Norman Wickett, Chicago Horticultural Society
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 12/31/2019
* USD 300,176.00

The goal of this project is to identify the sources of novel diatom traits,
which have contributed to their extraordinary metabolic and species-level
diversity. Some traits are encoded by genes acquired from distantly related
bacteria, an entirely different kingdom in the tree of life. Other genes appear
to have been generated by processes acting within diatom genomes. This project
will generate genome-scale data for 250 phylogenetically disparate diatom
species. These data will be used to: (1) infer evolutionary relationships, (2)
identify the sources - whether intrinsic or extrinsic - of new genes, and (3)
correlate the pattern and timing of gene acquisitions with the origins of novel
traits.

This study would result in the training of a post-doctoral researcher,
undergraduates and graduate students. With an estimated 200,000 species, diatoms
are one of the most diverse groups of marine and freshwater phytoplankton. These
microscopic "plants" play a major role in the global cycling of carbon and
oxygen, producing the oxygen for one of every five human breaths. They
manufacture the fatty acids that make their way up the food chain, eventually
into fish, which humans harvest for fish oils. Diatoms possess a broad range of
novel traits that, together, have facilitated their rise to prominence in the
world's oceans. Ultimately, this project will reveal how nature has assembled
the mosaic genomes of one of the world's most diverse and ecologically important
lineages.