* 1353939
* "IDBR: TYPE A" Development of a High Resolution Fluorescence Force Microscope
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2017
* Khalid Salaita, Emory University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 06/30/2017
* USD 814,479.00

An award is made to Emory University to develop a high resolution fluorescence
force microscope (HRFFM) to generate molecularly specific force maps orders of
magnitude higher in spatial, orientation, force, and time resolution compared
with the current methods. Forces are central to living systems, but few tools
exist to investigate them at the molecular level. Developing the basic tools and
instrumentation to characterize and visualize the molecular interplay between
physical forces and biochemical signals is paramount in gaining a global
understanding of signaling pathways in living systems. The HRFFM instrument will
address these needs by mapping forces that are orders of magnitude higher in
spatial, orientation, force, and time resolution compared with the current
methods for cellular force imaging. The research, education, and outreach
efforts will be integrated though their emphasis on forces and optical
microscopy. K-12 outreach will be organized with Students for Science, a program
that brings microscopes to the classroom, thus challenging students to visualize
and probe the "micro- world". The program will expand multidisciplinary
education across multiple departments at Emory University though restructuring
of two courses that will bring together students interested in the interface
between the biological and physical sciences. Importantly, practical knowledge
about the HRFFM instrument will be disseminated to the broad scientific
community through multiple channels. Firstly, a force imaging Wikipedia style
website providing a community resource and educational information on force
imaging will be developed. Students working directly on the project will post
and record instructional YouTube videos on topics including: force chip
preparation and polarization imaging. Analysis programs, protocols and
references will also be posted, creating an interactive community focused on
molecular forces in cell biology. The HRFFM instrument will be showcased at
workshops and seminars across academic institutions nationally, thus ensuring
that the broader cell biology and biophysics communities are fully aware of the
advent and utility of this new tool.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current gold
standard for measuring cellular mechanics, traction force microscopy, is based
on polymer surfaces that deform under tension. Unfortunately, the lack of
molecular specificity, ~1 µm spatial resolution, ~1 s time resolution, and ~1 nN
force sensitivity inherent to traction force microscopy obscures the molecular
underpinnings of cellular mechanotransduction. For example, traction force data
is reported in units of nN/µm2; three orders of magnitude less sensitive than
the resolution required for measuring molecular forces. The HRFFM instrument
will address these shortcomings and map forces with pN-range force resolution,
~ms time resolution, ~20 nm spatial resolution, chemical specificity, and 3D
force vectors in living cells. Moreover, the HRFFM instrument will provide a
common platform bridging the single molecule FRET and super-resolution imaging
communities, as well as creating a unique connection between the fields of cell
biology and single molecule biophysics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is being
made jointly by two Programs: (1) Instrument Development for Biological
Research, in the Division of Biological Infrastructure (Biological Sciences
Directorate), and (2) Physics of Living Systems, in the Division of Physics
(Math and Physical Science Directorate).