* 1353426
* The phylogeny of diving beetles (Coleoptera: Dytiscidae) and factors of species diversification
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2014,09/30/2019
* Kelly Miller, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 09/30/2019
* USD 535,683.00

Hyperdiversification (extraordinarily high species diversity) is found in
several animal groups, but its origins are not well understood. In this project,
the investigators will produce a phylogeny of the diving beetles (Dytiscidae,
4200 known species) and investigate correlations between evolutionary origins of
reproductive strategies and species diversification. The group is important as
predators in aquatic systems and as food for both aquatic and terrestrial
insectivores. The research will investigate coevolution of female reproductive
tracts, sperm, and mating behaviors in a phylogenetic context to discover
correlations and their contribution to hyperdiversification. Understanding the
different impacts of traits on speciation should lead to a better understanding
of species radiations that are not due to ecological changes.

This project will train both graduate students and undergraduates in species
origins and diversification, phylogenetic analysis, coevolution and evolutionary
theory, and the factors involved in these processes. The institution is a
minority serving university and students from underrepresented groups in science
will gain training in STEM fields. A course will be developed based on this
project and material will be disseminated through publicly accessible web sites
for researchers, educators and students.