* 1353886
* Ultrafast Omics Reveals Key Players in the Response of Plants to Abiotic Stress
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2019
* Ron Mittler, University of North Texas
* Continuing Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 04/30/2019
* USD 720,000.00

Environmental stresses such as heat or light stress can have a devastating
impact on plant growth and yield under field conditions. Although much is known
about the different signaling events that mediate plant responses to these
stresses, virtually nothing is known about the rapid changes that occur in
plants within seconds or minutes of stress initiation. Recent studies from the
principal investigator's laboratories identified over 600 different genes,
including 30 putative new Arabidopsis genes that respond to abiotic stress
within seconds. Some of these responses occurred at the affected tissue as well
as in tissues that were not directly subjected to stress and included
metabolites and transcripts with important function in abiotic stress tolerance.
Interestingly, many of these ultrafast responses were altered in mutants
impaired in reactive oxygen signaling, which were more susceptible to stress,
indicating that reactive oxygen species, ultrafast responses and plant
acclimation are intimately linked. The hypothesis in this project is that the
ultrafast molecular and physiological alterations that occur in plants within
seconds or minutes of stress initiation set the stage for many of the known
signaling events that orchestrate the activation of acclimation responses to
environmental stresses and impact plant growth and productivity. The proposed
research will highlight an unknown aspect of the plant abiotic stress response,
namely ultrafast molecular and metabolic responses to stress. This could have a
dramatic and transformative impact on the way we view and understand abiotic
stress and its effects on plant metabolism. Results obtained from this study
could lead to the development of new and novel approaches to enhance the
tolerance of crops to local and/or global climatic changes using pathways and
compounds that were not previously considered or known. The proposed study could
also identify novel antioxidants and other compounds that function to reduce the
effects of stress on cellular function. These could have a significant impact on
many different biochemical and medical fields. The proposed project will provide
training to 1 postdoctoral fellow, 1 graduate student, 4 undergraduates and 12
high school students including minorities. Outreach-based learning modules
focusing on the importance of agriculture to our society, the effect of climatic
change on agriculture, the use of genetic tools to improve crops, and the use of
advanced imaging tools to study plant biology will be offered by the PIs to K-12
students through the outreach programs offered by the Elm Fork Education Center
and the Elm Fork Natural Heritage Museum. These programs will also be offered to
K-12 teachers nationwide.