* 1353571
* RUI: Color processing in inferior temporal cortex of macaque monkey
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2018
* Bevil Conway, Wellesley College
* Continuing Grant
* Sridhar Raghavachari
* 08/31/2018
* USD 674,881.00

How does the brain process sensory signals to generate perception and knowledge?
This project advances color as a premier system with which to tackle this
fundamental question. Contrary to popular opinion, the experience of color is
not directly predicted by physical properties of stimuli, exposing the important
role that the nervous system plays in transforming information received by the
eye into behavior. It is thought that color, like other aspects of vision, is
computed by a series of brain structures. But the location of these structures
and the computations they perform to bring about color are not known. The
proposed work exploits advances in functional brain imaging (fMRI) to identify
regions involved in the highest levels of color processing, and will determine
how these regions are connected to each other and the rest of the visual
pathway. Under carefully controlled experimental conditions, the research will
determine which brain regions are necessary for which color tasks using fMRI-
guided transient pharmacological blockade. The results are predicted to show
that blockade of color-processing regions lower in the visual-processing
hierarchy will impair less sophisticated color behaviors such as color
discrimination, while blockade of higher-order brain regions will impair more
cognitively demanding behaviors such as color categorization. The research
environment represents a unique collaboration between a liberal arts women?s
college and a major research institution, and will provide exceptional
opportunities to train the next generation of female scientists in the most
advanced neuroscientific techniques. The results of the work will be widely
disseminated through peer-reviewed publications, presentations at national and
international conferences, and popular media such as the World Science Festival,
providing a mechanism to enhance general literacy in science and technology
research. In addition, the techniques, questions and results will be
incorporated into undergraduate curricula at Wellesley College and freely
available on course websites. (http://academics.wellesley.edu/Neuroscience/Neuro
320/)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Much is known about how color signals are
encoded by the retina and transmitted to the cerebral cortex, but surprisingly
little is known about the mechanisms that decode these signals to bring about
perceived colors. Extensive preliminary work suggests that color responses are
localized within inferior temporal cortex, a large area of the brain known to be
involved in the perception and recognition of objects. The proposed experiments
test the hypothesis that the color-biased regions of inferior-temporal cortex
comprise an interconnected hierarchical network that is necessary for color
perception. Specifically, the work will examine the extent to which posterior
color-biased regions decode color appearance (hue, saturation) and anterior
regions compute more cognitive phenomena such as our ability to carve the
continuous hue space into discrete categories. The hypothesis will be tested
using a combination of functional magnetic resonance imaging, psychophysics,
fMRI-guided pharmacological inactivation, and fMRI-guided tracer injections. The
work will answer two fundamental questions: 1. To what extent are different
color-biased regions necessary for color-discrimination and color-categorization
behavior? 2. Are the color-biased regions connected, and if so, does the pattern
of connectivity reflect the predicted hierarchy from posterior to anterior along
the temporal pole? Addressing these questions will not only advance our
understanding of color processing, but will uncover general principles that
underlie how the cerebral cortex processes information. This new knowledge will
promote the development of more biologically plausible machine vision systems.
The work will yield broad impacts both from scientific discoveries and from
complementary activities such as the mentorship of undergraduate women and
underrepresented minorities engaged in STEM research; expansion of cross-
institutional partnerships; development and dissemination of undergraduate
neuroscience course materials; enhancement of public scientific literacy; and
strengthening of connections between arts and sciences.