* 1353044
* Cellular mechanisms underlying the development of visually-guided behavior
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Carlos Aizenman, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Evan Balaban
* 06/30/2018
* USD 600,000.00

The only way to truly understand how the human brain works is to understand how
it is first put together during early development. To do this, we need to first
grasp, at a basic level, the fundamental principles by which developing brain
circuits are initially formed and how early experience can shape these
connections. This project addresses these questions by studying the development
of the visual system of tadpoles from the African clawed frog, Xenopus laevis.
This relatively simple brain circuit allows investigators to ask highly
tractable questions about early brain development and answer them by designing
experiments that investigate development at the level of single brain cells to
the more complex behavior of brain circuits, and ultimately, to complex
behaviors. Thus, these studies will provide an understanding of the mechanisms
underlying visually guided behavior from initial perception in the eye all the
way to behavioral output. An in-depth, integrated, view of this developing brain
circuit can be used to derive fundamental principles of brain development.
Remarkably, these principles have been shown to be applicable to all vertebrates
including humans. This proposal continues a program established by the
investigator to run a Neuroscience Summer Fellowship at Brown University for
underrepresented minority high-school students, with the goal of increasing the
participation of these students in careers related to Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM).

Specifically, this proposal seeks to understand the mechanisms by which neural
circuits in the Xenopus tadpole optic tectum allow the organism to process
incoming sensory information and transform it into meaningful motor output. This
sensory-motor transformation is essential for the organism to interact with its
environment. Data from many levels of analysis will be integrated, including
recording from retinal ganglion cells in the eye, recording the balance of
excitation and inhibition and spike output of the tectum in vivo, recording
network activity of multiple tectal cells in vivo using calcium imaging,
quantifying visually guided behavior with a high speed camera, and using dynamic
clamp to probe the integrative properties of tectal neurons in response to
behaviorally relevant stimuli. Together these data will give us an unprecedented
understanding of the steps and circuitry involved.