* 1353766
* OPUS: Coupling of Carbon, Nitrogen, Silica and Phosphorus Cycles in Coastal Ecosystems: Climate Effects and Trophic Implications
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/2014,02/28/2017
* William Kemp, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 02/28/2017
* USD 198,864.00

Located at the interface between land, atmosphere and ocean, estuaries are
shaped by their physical properties and the surrounding landscape. These dynamic
coastal systems respond to changes in climate and human actions over years and
decades. Many estuaries receive large inputs of nutrients from adjacent
ecosystems that fuels the high productivity of both plants and animals.
Estuaries are also sites of intense cycling (re-use) of key elements like
carbon, nitrogen, phosphorus and silica. This project uses the Chesapeake Bay
region to investigate how elemental cycles maybe synchronized over regions and
seasons, how linkages between different element cycles are affected by estuary
shape, climate and increased nutrients, and how living resources, such as
zooplankton and shellfish, respond to changes in element cycles. These processes
will be evaluated in linked estuarine networks using a large monitoring database
and simple computational models. Comparisons among subregions, such as different
river tributaries, will generate a broader knowledge about estuaries in
general.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Society will benefit from a deeper understanding
of how different regions and element cycles of complex estuaries, such as the
Chesapeake Bay, are linked and respond to change because this new knowledge will
inform watershed management plans. This work will advance knowledge of how
climate modifies living resource and water quality responses to nutrient
management. Project investigators will collaborate with Chesapeake Bay resource
managers to analyze data and and interpret results, making the results
immediately useful for developing nutrient waste management strategies that
improve water quality and sustain living resources. This study will also
stimulate development of a new graduate course that teaches the logic,
importance and methods of synthesis research.