* 1353312
* EAGER: Understanding Barriers to Workplace Collaboration for People with Visual Impairments
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2015
* Stacy Branham, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2015
* USD 164,982.00

People with visual impairments face significant barriers to participation in
public life and productive contributions in the workplace. Barriers due to
inaccessible information and communication technology can make it difficult for
a person with visual impairments to excel in school or find employment
commensurate with his or her abilities and potential. Fortunately, accessible
computing technology enables people with visual impairments to access
information that was previously inaccessible. For example, people with visual
impairments can use screen reader software to translate electronic documents
into speech or Braille. However, barriers still exist in the context of using
computers to participate in the contemporary classroom or workplace because
these are now places where active, real-time, face-to-face collaboration with
other people has become the norm, and because there is a gulf between the look
and feel of assistive technology such as screen readers and the look and feel of
contemporary graphical user interfaces such as those used routinely by people
without disabilities. Screen readers are difficult to learn and use, and operate
quite differently than contemporary graphical user interfaces, and most sighted
people do not know how to use screen readers, and so the opportunity for shared
artifacts in communication and collaboration is
reduced.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of this proposal is to explore and
identify barriers to collaboration between people with and without visual
impairments. This research will support the development of tools that will
bridge the gap between the non-graphical user interfaces used by people with
visual impairments and the graphical interfaces used by sighted people, enabling
individuals with any level of visual ability to collaborate at school or work.
Building on prior research on developing accessible user interfaces for people
with visual impairments, this project will explore the challenges of collocated
synchronous collaboration between people with and without visual impairments.
The researchers will conduct formative interviews and observational studies of
professional adults with and without visual impairments to understand the
barriers to collaboration within and across these populations. Very little prior
research has explored these issues. This project will conduct a deep exploration
to reveal accessibility barriers that were previously hidden and
unknown.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This research will identify
existing barriers to employment that can be addressed through changes in policy
or practice, or through the development of new technology. Enabling people with
visual impairments to work alongside their sighted peers will significantly
improve educational and employment outcomes for millions of people. The research
project itself will be developed in the context of a collaboration between
people with and without visual impairments, and will include blind and visually
impaired people from the local community.