* 1353444
* "IDBR: TYPE A"  A fluorescence microscope optical insert that creates video-rate 3D imaging capabilities using an innovative "expanded point information content" design
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2018
* Mark Winey, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 05/31/2018
* USD 650,786.00

Non Technical Description: Scientists at the University of Colorado at Boulder
will develop a modified biological microscope whose purpose is to demonstrate
how a novel approach to optical design, called expanded point information
content (EPIC), can convert existing live-cell fluorescence microscopes into
fully 3D video-rate imaging instruments at a fraction of the cost and complexity
of commercial confocal designs. The new microscope will demonstrate to
biologists engaged in studies of live cell dynamics that it will be possible to
record high resolution 3D images at speeds an order of magnitude faster than
existing microscopes and simultaneously locate features in depth to an accuracy
of 70nm or better, without the need to change focus. The project is grounded in
the field of computational optics and is based on the premise that, by optically
altering the microscope point spread function, much more information about the
original three-dimensional sample can be encoded into pairs of simultaneously
recorded images and then rapidly retrieved by digital image processing. If this
procedure (known as point spread function engineering) is done in a controlled
manner, the expanded information from each 3D object point, once processed, will
provide biologists with the capability to obtain 3D animations of subcellular
dynamic events that occur at video rates or faster.

Technical Description: In a broader context, the new EPIC approach represents a
potentially transformative concept that could revolutionize the way next
generation optical imaging instruments are designed, not only in microscopy, but
also in other devices such as endoscopes and telescopes. Implementation of the
EPIC design requires only simple modifications to a standard optical imaging
system, such as inserting a phase plate, adding a second camera and installing a
software package. In this project, these modifications will be implemented on a
commercial biological microscope. Once completed, the new microscope will be
tested by collaborating biologists in challenging studies of living cells. It
will also provide the basis for teaching and training young scientists and
engineers, providing opportunities for conducting multi-disciplinary training
workshops where biology students learn about optical microscopy and image
processing, and engineering students learn about challenges in live-cell
dynamics investigations. A final planned activity will be to work with
collaborating commercial partners to bring the new EPIC microscope add-on system
to the marketplace, thereby making it readily accessible to the many hundreds of
biologists who use fluorescence microscopes as a primary laboratory tool.