* 1353246
* SBIR Phase II:  PET Radiotracer Synthesis
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2014,05/31/2020
* Kiel Neumann, Ground Fluor Pharmaceuticals, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 05/31/2020
* USD 1,340,310.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project develops positron
emission tomography (PET) imaging products to manage neurodegenerative
disorders, cancer, and cardiovascular disease. PET is now a key diagnostic and
management tool in oncology, and compounds labeled with [18F]-fluoride provide
optimal signal to noise ratios and resolution in medical imaging applications.
Ground Fluor Pharmaceuticals (GFP) developed proprietary single-step
fluorination technology that allows [18F]-labeled medicines to be prepared
efficiently from cyclotron-produced [18F]-fluoride. Under this Phase II research
project GFP will apply its new technology to produce the imaging agent 6-
[18F]fluoro-L-DOPA (FDOPA), a compound useful in diagnosing Parkinson's disease
and in cancer imaging, that is not currently readily available because of the
difficulty in its production. GFP will scale-up and manufacture pharmaceutical
grade ALPDOPA (GFP's precursor to FDOPA) under pharmaceutical cGMP conditions,
and offer this material for research studies and for clinical imaging. GFP will
develop an FDA drug master file and will provide technical and regulatory
assistance to cyclotron pharmacy customers adopting GFP's technology for
commercial production of FDOPA. In addition to helping to bring this valuable
imaging agent to market, GFP will assist academic and pharmaceutical research
groups in the development of new [18F]- fluorinated imaging products.

The broader impact/commercial potential is to expand the scope and utility of
PET as medical diagnostic tool, thereby improving treatment and management of
serious medical problems. Although [18F]-fluoride possesses, perhaps, the most
advantageous properties for imaging, is relatively inexpensive, and is widely
available, it is difficult to incorporate into medicines for imaging. GFP has
developed a general enabling technology that uses the relatively inexpensive and
widely available form of [18F]-fluoride to create new molecular imaging agents
to advance personalized medicine. This technology, and the compounds it creates,
will provide the physician with new opportunities to diagnose, assess, and more
efficiently treat unmet medical needs. The manufacturing technology developed
here is a broad platform applicable to the preparation of a wide range of new
imaging agents. The commercial potential of PET imaging is significant; the
worldwide market for PET is expected to grow to $15 billion by 2015.