* 1353463
* Assessing the impact of mate choice on genetic architecture and testing the "good genes" model
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2014,12/31/2017
* Derek Roff, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 12/31/2017
* USD 550,000.00

In many organisms, humans included, one or both genders are able to exercise
choice among potential mates. Mates are typically chosen based upon particular
traits and these are often exaggerated in the chosen individuals. Such
preferential mating is expected to generate an association between the genes
underlying the preference and the genes underlying the preferred trait. Over
time, continued selection on the preferred trait is also expected to reduce its
genetic variability. PIs Roff and Fairbairn develop theory that predicts the
strength of the genetic association between the preference and the preferred
trait and explains how genetic variation in the preferred trait may be
maintained within such mating systems. To test this theory the PIs will measure
the genetic variances of female preferences and male calling song parameters in
sand crickets over ten generations of laboratory evolution. Crickets are
excellent subjects these studies because females choose males based on song
characteristics that can be readily quantified in the laboratory. The key test
will be comparisons among populations in which females mate (i) according to
their preferences, (ii) with randomly selected males, or (iii) with non-
preferred males. These comparisons will also be used to test the hypothesis that
male song is a reliable signal of male genetic quality and hence enables females
to choose males that have "good" genes. This research tests fundamental theory
for the evolution of mate choice and breaks new ground in revealing the genetic
underpinnings of exaggerated sexual display traits. In addition, the PIs will
use their experimental, mate choice protocol as an instructional tool for
illustrating the concepts of sexual selection and adaptive evolution. In
collaboration with local high school teachers and using resources and materials
provided by this grant, they will develop educational modules and participate in
transferring these to local classrooms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DATA
MANAGEMENT&lt;br/&gt;This project will generate two types of data, informational
data in the form of measurements and object data in the form of preserved
specimens. The former types of data will be made available to the general
scientific community by submission to the Dryad repository (datadryad.org) as
the results of the research become published. The preserved specimens will be
retained for future analysis.