* 1353787
* The 18th International Conference on Research in Computational Molecular Biology (RECOMB 2014)
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2014
* Russell Schwartz, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 08/31/2014
* USD 12,000.00

This International Conference on Research in Computational Molecular Biology
(RECOMB) 2014 is the eighteenth in a series of international conferences in
computational molecular biology. Computational biology has become one of the
essential tools of modern biological research and RECOMB is one of the oldest
and most prestigious conferences in the field. It is arguably the premiere
meeting for work on innovative computer science applied to biology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The meeting will be held in Pittsburgh, PA on April 2-5,
2014, jointly hosted by Carnegie Mellon University and the University of
Pittsburgh. Funding is requested specifically for student travel awards to
support U.S.-based students presenting work at the meeting. While every effort
is being made to keep the meeting affordable, cost can nonetheless be an
obstacle for potential attendees, especially student attendees. These travel
awards will cover registration, hotel, and travel costs for a selected group of
student presenters, competitively chosen based on the caliber of their work as
assessed by the conference program committee and the individual merit and need
of the students. Special attention will be given to women and minority
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference series aims at
attracting research contributions in all areas of computational molecular
biology, including work on analyzing genomes and other molecular sequences,
understanding the interaction of complicated systems that underlie biological
function, working with molecular structures that make up these systems, making
sense of biological image data, and advancing the computer models and algorithms
needed for all of these tasks. The meeting will feature a prestigious group of
keynote speakers, oral presentations chosen from submitted papers by a program
committee of top researchers in the field, and poster presentations selected
from submitted abstracts. In addition, the meeting will offer ample
opportunities for one-on-one interactions between active researchers and
students. The proposed travel awards will particularly extend this opportunity
to U.S.-based students who might otherwise lack the opportunity to participate
in the meeting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The meeting and proposed travel fellowships
will have particular value for educational purposes, creating a unique training
opportunity for computational biology students who might not otherwise be able
to present work at a prestigious international meeting. Particular invitation
will be made to women and minority applicants, who remain underrepresented in
computational work in general.