* 1353961
* Maintaining the PULSE: Sustaining Efforts of the Vision and Change Leadership Fellows to Transform Life Sciences Education
* BIO,EF
* 10/01/2013,12/31/2016
* Kathryn Miller, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 12/31/2016
* USD 299,412.00

An award has been made to Washington University to coordinate the efforts of the
PULSE Vision and Change Leadership Fellows to pilot, widely implement, and make
sustainable a series of programs, collectively "The PULSE Roadmap for Change,"
to catalyze departmental transformation as part of the mission of the
Partnership for Undergraduate Life Science Education (PULSE). In September 2012
the PULSE partners (HHMI, NIH, and NSF) appointed 40 Vision and Change
Leadership Fellows to stimulate transformative changes in undergraduate life
science education as recommended in the Vision and Change report. Fellows were
selected from two-year colleges, liberal arts colleges, comprehensive
universities and research universities. The Fellows have organized into working
groups with the overarching goal of helping departments transform their programs
in a national effort to increase student learning of core concepts, increase
student retention in the sciences, and prepare all students to be more curious
and scientifically literate citizens. The current award is to oversee,
coordinate, and provide communications and information management support for
the efforts of the working groups that each focuses on a part of the Roadmap.
The programs and mechanisms that have emerged from the efforts of the different
working groups are a complimentary set of initiatives and tools that target life
sciences department educational change. They will be most effective when used
synergistically and in a coordinated manner. The Vision and Change report
contained a number of recommendations for improving undergraduate life sciences
education but did not furnish an implementation strategy. The initiatives and
tools that have been developed by the Fellows form a "Roadmap for Change"
address this issue and will serve as a blueprint for departments to adopt the
Vision and Change recommendations: departments will become aware of the need for
change, evaluate their current state of adoption, develop strategic plans,
implement changes, assess their progress, and be rewarded for progress toward
the goals. The working groups are focused on creating materials to promote
awareness of the need for change, regional network development to foster change,
certification program to evaluate, recognize, and reward departments that adopt
the recommendations, a Vision and Change Ambassador program to assist
departments in developing strategies and implementing tools and methods for
change. This award also encompasses development and piloting of assessment tools
and strategies to evaluate the desired change and the impact of the programs on
life sciences education nation-wide. The award will support efforts to find
mechanisms to sustain for the long term the initiatives begun under the PULSE
program. Results from the overall PULSE "Roadmap for Change" project will be
posted on the pulsecommunity.org website and shared with the life sciences
community at professional meetings.

This project is being funded jointly by the Directorate for Biological Sciences
and the Directorate of Education and Human Resources, Division of Undergraduate
Education as part of their efforts to support Vision and Change in Undergraduate
Biology Education.