* 1353912
* SBIR Phase II:  Production of an Acyl Glycinate Surfactant by Fermentation
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2014,09/30/2020
* Kevin Jarrell, Modular Genetics, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 09/30/2020
* USD 1,620,998.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project is aimed at optimizing
production of a bio-surfactant in preparation for commercial launch of the
product. During Phase I, the company developed an engineered microorganism that
synthesizes the surfactant, and a key customer confirmed the identity and purity
of a sample of the surfactant. During Phase II, synthetic biology methods will
be used to increase the efficiency of the microorganism producing the
surfactant. In addition, multiple samples of purified surfactant will be shipped
to customers for evaluation. Customer feedback will identify any product
features that require modification and will result in development of a detailed
product specification, which will include metrics such as: purity, color,
acceptable variation in composition and molecular weight, etc. The objectives of
this Phase II project are to optimize surfactant characteristics and microbial
production efficiency so that the surfactant can be profitably manufactured and
sold for use in consumer products formulations.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is that it should enable
the company to demonstrate that synthetic biology methods can be used to
increase the efficiency of production of a bio-surfactant so the surfactant can
be sold as a commercial product. Progress toward that goal should enable the
company to attract a partner, for example a large chemical company, who will
agree to collaborate on commercialization of the bio-surfactant. If the bio-
surfactant can be made and sold profitably, the company will be positioned to
fund future research and development aimed at commercial launch of additional
bio-surfactants. Benefits to society are that chemicals produced using this
technology will be manufactured using domestically grown renewable raw
materials, which do not compete with food. Furthermore, the energy required to
produce these chemicals is low since the fermentation reaction is performed near
ambient temperature. The chemicals are inherently safer than traditional
chemicals because toxic solvents are not used, and the surfactants are
biodegradable and do not contribute to increased greenhouse gas accumulation.
These bio-surfactants will initially be used in personal care products, such as
body washes and shampoos. However, the surfactant market is large and diverse,
creating an opportunity for use of bio-surfactants in products as varied as
laundry detergent, paints and coatings, and floatation-agents used in the mining
industry to purify valuable minerals.