* 1353854
* Systems Analysis of Calmodulin and the CBP60 Gene Family in Control of Plant Immunity
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Jane Glazebrook, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Brad Day
* 07/31/2019
* USD 650,000.00

Many proteins are controlled by binding of a small protein called calmodulin. In
most cases, calmodulin must bind calcium ions, which changes the shape of the
calmodulin, before it can bind to other proteins. In this way, calmodulin
transmits information about the presence of calcium ions, which control many
biological processes. Some calmodulin-binding proteins are important for control
of immune responses in plants. In this project, several aspects of calcium and
calmodulin function in plant immunity will be investigated. First, the molecular
mechanisms by which these proteins control immunity will be determined. Second,
a quantitative model describing their positive and negative effects will be
developed and used to understand possible benefits of having both positively and
negatively acting members in this protein family. Third, a broader understanding
of the roles of calcium and calmodulin will be gained by testing other
calmodulin binding proteins for roles in plant immunity and determining which
immune responses they affect. The project includes a program to improve the
teaching skills of graduate students and post-doctoral fellows. Undergraduates
will receive research experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CBP60a, CBP60g and SARD1
(which does not bind calmodulin) play critical roles in modulating the
production of the defense hormone salicylic acid (SA) and controlling gene
expression following pathogen recognition. Thus, these proteins appear to link
the Ca2+ influx to downstream responses. This project includes three aims that
seek insight into how Ca2+ and calmodulin control plant immunity: 1-Determine
the biochemical mechanism of CBP60 immune function. CBP60 proteins may bind
directly to promoters of regulated genes, or to transcription factors. It is
possible that they bind to certain calmodulin-like proteins that are negative
regulators of immunity. These ideas will be tested using various assays for
protein-protein interactions and protein-DNA binding. 2-Characterize the effect
on immune system stability of CBP60 proteins acting positively and negatively on
activation of defenses. The existence of both positively and negatively-acting
CBP60 family members may improve system stability and/or provide resilience in
the face of pathogen attack. These ideas will be tested using quantitative
systems modeling of the CBP60 signaling node. 3-Identify components of the
protein network mediating Ca2+ control of immune signaling. Many proteins
besides CBP60s may be involved in transduction of the Ca2+ signal. Interactions
among pathogen-inducible calmodulin-like proteins and other proteins annotated
as having Ca2+-related functions will be tested. Plants with mutations in these
genes will be screened for altered immunity phenotypes.