* 1353942
* IDBR Type A: Optimization of microsecond mixing devices for biological kinetics via simulation and experiment
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2014,05/31/2018
* Blair Perot, University of Massachusetts Medical School
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 05/31/2018
* USD 691,426.00

An award is being made to the University of Massachusetts Medical School, to
develop microsecond mixing devices that will enable researh in biological
kinetics. This award made by the Instrument Development for Biological Research,
in the Division of Biological Infrastructure (Biological Sciences Directorate)
is jointly funded by and the Fluid Dynamics program in the Division of Chemical,
Bioengineering, Environmental and Transport Systems (Engineering Directorate).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Proteins, RNA and
protein-RNA complexes perform many essential functions in cells. Biochemcial
reactions occur within a cell on the microsecond to millisecond timescale during
which these molecules are present as transiently populated intermediate
structures, and are difficult to observe with conventional methods. The folding
and assembly of proteins and RNA are examples of biochemical reactions that
involve transient intermediates, which scientists investigate in order to better
understand how the final functional conformation is generated. Such fundamental
studies also help to understand why some minor less populated conformations can
result in aberrant function, such as aggregation, as in some human diseases. One
approach to studying these partially or transiently populated conformations is
to monitor them while the transient conformation is still present at a high
population. This requires initiating a reaction very quickly, typically in
microseconds, and observing it using a technique that reveals structural
information. This project will provide opportunities for graduate students and
undergraduates to be traiend in interdisciplinary research that straddles
biophysics and fluid dynamics. The investigators hope to partner with companies
to commercialize their device, once it is developed and tested.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the
researchers will develop microfluidic devices manufactured from quartz that can
initiate folding and assembly reactions by mixing of solutions in microseconds.
A unique feature of the device will be its compatibility with small-angle x-ray
scattering measurements (SAXS) and other optical probes. SAXS is a spectroscopic
tool that reveals information about the size, shape and low-resolution structure
of macromolecules. The ultimate goal is to generate structural snapshots of
macromolecules at various time points during a reaction (e.g., RNA folding). In
these microfluidic devices, once the solutions are mixed, distance becomes
linearly proportional to time. By translating the microfluidic device across the
beam a series of time measurements is obtained. Previous implementations of
microfluidic devices for use with SAXS have been limited by either time
resolution or large sample consumption. In this project, the research team will
optimize the mixing efficiency using computational fluid dynamics simulations to
design a device that can extend from microseconds to hundreds of milliseconds in
time range. The device can be easily optimized for use with other probes of
secondary, tertiary and quaternary macromolecular structure. This project is an
interdisciplinary collaboration between an experimental biophysics group, a
computational fluid dynamics group, a national laboratory dedicated to x-ray
physics and a microfabrication company specializing in quartz machining. The
resulting optimized device will be available to all scientists studying
biological macromolecules via SAXS beamlines at national synchrotrons. Workshops
involving tutorial and experimental sessions will be provided to new users
interested in this technology.