* 1353740
* Natural Variations and Forced Changes in Historical and Future Precipitation and Drought
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2019
* Aiguo Dai, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 05/31/2019
* USD 499,886.00

Abstract

This project is focused on the detection and attribution of climate change,
meaning the task of distinguishing forced climate change from the naturally
occurring internal variability of the climate system. The method for making this
separation is to take a large ensemble of climate change simulations for the
20th and 21st centuries and use its ensemble mean as an estimate of forced
climate change. Assuming that the ensemble mean gives a sufficiently accurate
representation of the forced change, this estimate can be factored out of the
observed record to reveal the natural variability. The detection and attribution
methodology is applied to variables including surface air temperature,
precipitation, and the self-calibrated Palmer Drought Severity Index (scPDSI),
on both global and regional spatial scales. The ensemble of climate model
integrations to be used for the study comes from version 5 of the Coupled Model
Intercomparison Project (CMIP5).

The forced climate change signal in the ensemble mean is determined using
principle component analysis, which unlike trend analysis does not assume that
climate change proceeds linearly in time, and can capture features such as
changes in the strength of the annual cycle due to the seasonality of forced
climate change. The forced signal from the model ensemble would be factored out
of the observed record using methods including simple subtraction, regression,
and maximum covariance analysis. Regional patterns of forced change and natural
variability (drought in the Southwest US, for one) would be examined for
relationships with large-scale modes of climate variability including the
Interdecadal Pacific Oscillation (IPO), the Atlantic Multidecadal Oscillation
(AMO), and El Nino/Southern Oscillation (ENSO) events. Further work would
attempt to establish mechanisms relating sea surface temperature (SST) patterns
to changes over land (drought, in particular) through anomalous atmospheric
circulations. Finally, once the natural variability is separated from the forced
climate change, an assessment would be made of the potential value of the
natural variability modes for statistical climate prediction on decadal
timescales.

The work seeks to distinguish the relative contributions of natural variability
and forced change in the observed climate record, a distinction which is of
great societal value. A separation of forced change and internal variability
would be quite helpful for planning purposes, as the natural variability
component is likely to reverse at some point, while the forced secular changes
will likely be permanent. The project also seeks to identify the predictive
skill associated with natural modes of climate variability, and any such skill
would be useful for a variety of stakeholders affected by variations in climate.
In addition, the PI has conducted a variety of outreach efforts to audiences
including the media, K-12 students and teachers, and farmers, regarding
potential changes in climate and drought, and will continue to do so under this
award. The award will support and train two graduate students, thereby providing
for the future workforce in this research area.