* 1353143
* The distribution of epistatic effects within and between genes
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2014,05/31/2018
* Marc Ostermeier, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 05/31/2018
* USD 600,000.00

Mutations are an important part of evolution and genetic diseases. A mutation's
effect on an organism can be positive, negative or neutral. However, mutations
that have one type of effect in isolation can have the opposite effect when
combined with another mutation elsewhere in the genome. This phenomenon, termed
epistasis, clearly affects evolutionary mechanisms and genetic diseases, yet
relatively little is known about its extent or degree of impact. This research
will provide the most extensive systematic study of epistasis within and between
two genes to date. The data collected and analyzed will inform future laboratory
and modeling experiments to address important questions about evolution and the
mechanisms underlying genetic disease. During the course of this research, two
pre-doctoral students and one undergraduate will be trained in research. The
research supported by the grant will be incorporated into a class on protein
engineering taught by the principle investigator.

This project will examine (1) the fitness distribution of nearly all single
amino acid mutations for the bacterial genes TEM1 beta-lactamase (TEM-1) and the
beta-lactamase inhibitor protein (BLIP), (2) the fitness distribution of an
extensive set of 5000 double mutant alleles within each of those genes, (3) the
fitness distribution of an extensive set of 5000 pairs of alleles of TEM-1 and
BLIP in which each gene has one amino acid mutation. An index of fitness will be
estimated for each line using novel DNA mutagenesis and band-pass genetic
selection technologies developed by the principal investigator with the
extensive use of next generation sequencing. The distribution of epistatic
effects will be determined by a quantitative comparison of the fitness data from
the single amino acid substitutions with the fitness data from those same
substitutions in the double mutant lines. This distribution of fitness effects
will be used assess the frequency and strength of epistatic interactions across
the genome.