* 1353959
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Production and Political Use of Social Science during Extended Periods of Cold War Unrest and Instability
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2014,05/31/2015
* John Warner, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 05/31/2015
* USD 17,999.00

Project Overview&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This historical study examines how the
psychological sciences in Argentina became a crucial weapon in the ideological
battle for loyalty during the Cold War in the global South, which is
characterized by political instability, ideological polarization, and bloodshed.
The proposed study includes both archival research and interviews with key
historical actors in Argentina. There are two core questions that will be
investigated: How did political actors use the psychological sciences to advance
ideological goals during the height of Cold War political extremism in
Argentina, from 1966 to 1983? How did psychologists and psychiatrists embed
political values into psychological theory and practice during this
period?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study
focuses on the interaction between social-scientific knowledge production and
the volatile politics that characterized the Cold War below the equator. The
vast majority of Cold War studies of social science focus on social science
under the peace and stability of the US and Soviet superpowers. By contrast,
this study contribute to the growing body of literature that examines how
ideological polarization, grassroots activism, and political violence in the
global south affected the production and political use of social science during
the Cold War. Argentina provides a useful case for study because of its rich
tradition in the psychological sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Co-PI plans to present his research findings to
psychologists at seminars and conferences in Buenos Aires and to publish in a
Spanish-language psychology journal, in addition to presenting them at
psychology conferences and publishing them in psychology journals in the US. The
Co-PI also plans to donate his collected oral histories of psychologists who
were politically active during the Cold War to the Memoria Abierta Oral Archive
in Argentina. Doing so will not only shed light on a period for which
documentation is sparse due to political repression, but also to advance the
human rights organization's goals of preserving memory of state violence,
enriching democratic culture, and preventing the return of authoritarianism in
Argentina.