* 1353793
* Economic Resilience And Social Collapse
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Ronald Faulseit, Field Museum of Natural History
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2016
* USD 172,081.00

Although the collapse of complex societies has long been an important and
sustained scholarly research focus, concepts such as resilience and post-
collapse reorganization have only recently received significant attention.
Current interdisciplinary research has led to novel characterizations and
approaches for understanding resilience in social, political, and economic
institutions. Rather than static equilibrium-based models, these phenomena are
conceptualized as dynamic and cyclical. Archaeology is uniquely positioned to
contribute to these studies by incorporating data that cover very large temporal
scales. Additionally, archaeological research, steeped in anthropological
tradition, provides theoretical tools to evaluate changes in human behavior,
such as decision-making strategies, related to adaptive or resilient
organizational practices. In this study, Drs. Ronald K. Faulseit and Gary M.
Feinman, of the Field Museum in Chicago, undertake research to characterize
persistent and/or adaptive strategies in political and economic behavior based
on the archaeological record and study its impact on political reorganization in
the aftermath of political collapse. In particular, they will study change
and/or continuity in organizational strategies (e.g., market exchange vs.
controlled distribution) for the production and consumption of material goods
before after the decline of the important political center of Monte Albán in the
Oaxaca Valley of Mexico. The identification of economic strategies that are
resilient to political instability and change is relevant to understanding
phenomena that confront the United States today, as global economic relations
are increasingly connected to politically unstable regions, such as Central
Asia. The project incorporates a program of public outreach that is integrated
with the efforts of professional Mexican archaeologists designed to share and
disseminate research findings with the local indigenous community.

The project challenges the long-held notion that independent market exchange
played a minimal role in pre-modern political economies. Instead, household
production strategies evident in the Oaxaca Valley during the period of Monte
Albán's dominance, suggest dependence on regional market systems that functioned
independent of the state. The premise of this research asserts that these
economic structures were resilient to the subsequent fragmentation of the
centralized political system and provided a stable platform for relatively quick
political reorganization after its decline. The project team, which incorporates
professionals and students from Mexico and the US, will integrate a broad
program of intensive survey and surface collection, with a focused program of
excavation at Dainzú-Macuilxóchitl, a second-tier center situated within the
Monte Albán polity that reorganized after its decline into a prominent city-
state. The project involves detailed topographic mapping to examine the
orientation and layout of architectural mounds and other man-made features at
the site, coupled with spatial analysis of the distributions of surface
artifacts to identify locations of production activities. These data will be
evaluated to characterize the organization of and relationship between
sociopolitical units (e.g., households, neighborhoods, residential wards),
particularly as they pertain to broad patterns of pre- and post-collapse
socioeconomic behavior. To complement these data, comprehensive excavations are
designed to examine more closely the evidence for behavioral patterns associated
with craft production and specialization activities within a specific production
area identified through previous research.