* 1353613
* SBIR Phase II:  Development of an Adaptive Dual-Fuel Injector to Enable High Efficiency Clean Combustion for SUV and Light Duty Truck Engines
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2014,11/30/2018
* Deyang Hou, QuantLogic Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Linda Molnar
* 11/30/2018
* USD 973,945.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will prototype,
characterize, and verify performance merits and the commercial viability of an
Adaptive Dual-Fuel (ADF) Injector. Diesel engines are 30~40% more efficient than
port-injected gasoline, spark-ignited engines. Gasoline and E85 fuels are among
the most widely available fuels, but are mostly used on spark-ignition gasoline
engines with much lower thermal efficiency than diesel engines. The key
innovation of the ADF injector enables direct-injections of both gasoline/E85
and diesel fuel selectively on-demand from a single injector. The ADF injector
can enable advanced combustion modes that have demonstrated simultaneous
reduction of NOx and Particulate Matter (PM) emissions and improved engine
efficiency through advanced low temperature combustion. The advanced combustion
mode enabled by the ADF injector can improve the thermal efficiency of
gasoline/E85 engines by approximately 30~40% by using gasoline and/or E85 fuels
in a compression ignition combustion mode. The adaptive dual-fuel injector also
provides flexibility for enabling engines to run on either pure diesel,
gasoline-diesel, or E85-diesel dual fuels. The Phase II work includes
prototyping, spray visualization imaging and laser based measurements,
computational optimization, and single-cylinder engine combustion testing to
demonstrate the commercial viability of the proposed ADF injector.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader/commercial impacts of this project
pertain to significant benefits for energy security and environmental
protection. The potential customers include engine OEMs and auto makers. This
project will significantly benefit US consumers through fuel cost saving, enable
low cost methods to meet the new CAFE standards, and benefit the US economy by
expanding the ?green? manufacturing base. The dual fuel injector, developed and
analyzed in this work, provides new capabilities, which can enable
transformative combustion methods for ultra-high efficiency, clean combustion.
The industry-university collaborative engineering research directly support
graduate student research and will train and educate the workforce of the
future, providing them with the knowledge and skills needed to address the
challenges of energy utilization. The research and development efforts, which
focus on a critical problem of global importance, will be widely disseminated to
engine designers, OEMs, and researchers, while the next generation of engineers
is being trained.