* 1354867
* RCN: The Stream Resiliency Research Coordination Network
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2014,04/30/2020
* Jeremy Jones, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 04/30/2020
* USD 499,044.00

Stream and rivers are being assaulted by myriad environmental stresses,
including elevated nutrient inputs, species extinctions and invasions, and loss
of biodiversity. In the contiguous US, nitrogen inputs have tripled relative to
levels during pre-European settlement, primarily due to synthetic fertilizer
production, atmospheric deposition from the combustion of fossil fuels, and
through agricultural practices. Consequently, many streams have dramatically
higher nutrient concentrations than they did historically, which can lead to
algal blooms, fish die-offs, and increased export of nutrients to marine
ecosystems. Streams can be important for regulating nutrient exports from
continents to oceans, but the functioning is, in part, mediated by biodiversity,
and rates of species losses in streams are among the highest on the planet.
Therefore, understanding interactions among changing nutrient inputs, and
declining biodiversity are major and immediate challenges for conservation and
management of freshwater ecosystems. The number of available datasets on stream
nutrient concentrations, stream flow, and biodiversity has increased rapidly,
but many have yet to be evaluated for temporal or spatial trends, analyzed with
state of the art statistical and modeling techniques, or compared across
regions. Further, many large datasets are coming online in the near future, and
stream ecologists need to develop strategies to best utilize this emerging
information. The goal of the Stream Resiliency Research Coordination Network is
to link stream ecologists with hydrologists, statisticians, modelers, and
resource managers to develop a synthetic understanding of how streams and river
ecosystems will respond to chronic nutrient inputs and changing species
diversity. The network will meet through a series of workshops and webinars to
develop new approaches to analyzing existing and forthcoming stream nutrient and
organism datasets, and conduct state of the knowledge syntheses. An initial one-
day planning workshop associated with the 2014 Joint Aquatic Sciences meeting
will be hosted to engage the research community. Following the planning meeting,
four three-day workshops will be held addressing topics focused on understanding
long-term change in stream ecosystems, how ecosystem processes vary across river
networks from small headwater streams to larger rivers, and the interactions
among organisms in the context of changing climate, altered land-use, and loss
of biodiversity. Each workshop will include one day focused on training in data
analysis and modeling approaches not typically used by stream ecologists, and
two days focused on data analyses and synthesis. In the last year of funding, a
workshop will be hosted at the annual meeting of the Society for Freshwater
Science to report back to the scientific community the activities of the
network, and host a series of presentations about the state of
knowledge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Key functions of the network include enabling
interactions among researchers and managers, and providing opportunities for
young scientists to collaborate with established scientists. The network will
focus on developing novel conceptual frameworks and new analytical approaches to
facilitate the synthesis of a wealth of existing datasets, as well as to provide
the foundations for interpreting and guiding new research projects and sampling,
and training opportunities for the next generation of scientists in the methods
needed to deal with long-term datasets spanning large spatial scales. Each
workshop will include training of a targeted statistical or modeling approach,
provide educational opportunity for both graduate students and established
researchers, and produce tangible applied products for natural resource managers
and policy makers. In addition, an online graduate level seminar will be hosted
focusing on stream functioning in a changing environment, providing an
opportunity for students across the globe to learn about the activities and
findings from the network.