* 1354184
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Ecological consequences of the effects of a zoonotic pathogen on its reservoir host
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Dustin Brisson, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 06/30/2018
* USD 369,999.00

Many infectious diseases of humans are caused by pathogens that are transmitted
from wildlife. One important example is Lyme disease, in which the bacterial
pathogen lives inside small mammals, such as the white-footed mouse, and is
transmitted to people by ticks that first bite an infected mouse and then a
person. Human risk of Lyme disease increases with the abundance of white-footed
mice. Recent data collected by the investigators suggest that mice infected with
the Lyme disease bacterium live, on average, 17% longer than do uninfected mice.
This is an unexpected finding, given that the bacterium causes illness in people
and other animals. It is important because longer life spans likely result in
larger populations of infected mice. How might the bacterium increase life span
in mice and what are the consequences for disease transmission to other mammals
(including humans) and for the forest ecosystem?

This research will experimentally determine the effects of the Lyme bacterium
on: (1) mouse survival and abundance; (2) mouse foraging behavior; (3) how
commonly mice are bitten by ticks; (4) the rate at which other (non-mouse) hosts
for the tick become infected; and (5) the ability of mice to control populations
of an exotic forest pest, the gypsy moth.

The proposed research will provide both content material and research
experiences for the Community Science program at the University of Pennsylvania.
This program is designed to increase the understanding of biology by high school
teachers in inner-city Philadelphia schools and to expose high school students
to scientific research and careers in science.

Lyme disease is a common and serious problem for humans in North America and
elsewhere. The investigators will develop and test a vaccine to protect mice
species from the pathogen that causes the disease. If this vaccine works as
expected, it may reduce transmission of the pathogen to humans. Through a
carefully designed experiment on wild mice, the investigators will be able to
evaluate both the intended and potential unintended consequences of wildlife
vaccination.