* 1354900
* Plant Adaptation in Variable Environments
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2014,02/29/2016
* P. Suresh Rao, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 02/29/2016
* USD 111,500.00

All organisms face uncertainty in their environment, yet their strategies for
managing that uncertainty are diverse: some avoid it by only using a narrow
range of habitats or resources, while others tolerate it by being flexible and
adjusting as conditions change. Understanding how these different strategies
arise, and the circumstances that favor one strategy over another, is critical
to explain why species live where they do, and how they will respond to future
environmental change. In this project, the researchers are studying how plants
respond to uncertainty in the amount of water they experience by conducting
controlled experiments with plants that occupy seasonally-flooded wetlands in
western North America. These plants occupy different habitats within the
wetlands - ranging from the deepest to the shallowest positions - and thus are
expected to show a range of responses to different water conditions. By
evaluating how these plants adjust to uncertainty in soil moisture and flooding,
the scientists will gain a general understanding of the different ways that
organisms handle changes in their environments. This knowledge is broadly
significant for predicting how organisms will respond to future environmental
uncertainty, including climate change, habitat loss, and biological invasions.
In addition, these results will directly affect the management of plants and
animals that occupy wetlands, and the results of this work will be directly
communicated to practitioners involved in the conservation and restoration of
wetland ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In these experiments, the investigators
manipulate the overall levels of water availability (ranging from drought to
flooding), as well as the extent of variability in soil moisture and flooding,
in a series of controlled experiments in a growth chamber environment. The study
organisms are three annual species of Lasthenia (Asteraceae) that are adapted to
different hydrological environments within vernal pool wetlands in California.
The researchers will measure the survival and reproductive output of these three
species under the different water treatments, while also measuring changes in
leaves and root architecture to quantify plant phenotypic responses to
fluctuating hydrological conditions. These data will be used to test the
hypothesis that phenotypic flexibility (i.e., plasticity in leaf and root
traits) will be important for predicting plant performance when water levels
fluctuate, but that this plasticity may reduce performance when water levels are
constant. We also predict that the three species will exhibit unique responses
to the water treatments that reflect adaptations to their respective
microhabitats.