* 1354154
* IOS: Nutrient Exchange and Regulation at the Aphid Symbiotic Interface
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2021
* Alexandra Wilson de Andrade, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 08/31/2021
* USD 831,000.00

Symbioses between eukaryotic hosts and bacterial consortia are fundamentally
important to human health and ecosystem function. Gathering large amounts of DNA
sequence data has become relatively easy and thus, models of host/microbiome
function are accumulating. Critically, most models lack experimental tests.
Working in a system that involves one eukaryotic host paired with a single
bacterial symbiont the investigators will test models of symbiotic function to
identify fundamental design principles in symbiosis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will exploit a very productive collaboration to further examine the
nature of nutrient transport and regulation in insects; specifically, the
investigators will exploit the model aphid, Acyrthosiphon pisum, and its
symbiont, Buchnera aphidicola, to fully characterize the substrate and feedback
regulation of transporters between the aphid and bacterium. The first objective
targets testing whole genome based models of symbiotic function and regulation.
The research team will transiently express transporters of sap-feeding insects
in oocytes of the South African clawed frog to test genome sequence based models
of symbiotic function and host/symbiont regulation. Because aphids are both a
significant crop pest and excellent models for the study of symbiosis any work
that increases understanding of basic aphid biology increases our ability to
develop ecologically safe methods of pest control and may facilitate development
of the aphid as a model for understanding the process of bacterial infection.
Functional characterization of transporters in the pea aphid and related insects
will facilitate comparative work in other insect systems thus benefitting the
annotation of transporters in all arthropod genomes. The second objective
targets bringing NSF-funded basic research into the lives of Americans through
the production of six broadcast quality films about aphids, the science of
symbiosis and life as a scientist. The films will be supported by development of
curricular resources that target early childhood and middle school children.
Finally, this project supports the research program of a mid-career female
scientist.