* 1354048
* Collaborative Research: From Cacti to Carnivores: Using transcriptomes to explore the evolution of the highly diverse and globally distributed Caryophyllales
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2014,03/31/2019
* Stephen A Smith, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 03/31/2019
* USD 590,000.00

Biologists have long known that traits and gene sequences evolve at different
rates in different lineages of organisms, but it has been difficult to
understand the causes for these shifts in evolutionary rate. For example, the
Caryophyllales contain ~6% of all flowering plant species and exhibit extreme
life history diversity, including tropical trees, temperate herbs, long-lived
succulent cacti, and a diverse array of carnivorous plants. The rate of DNA
sequence evolution among these lineages differs greatly. This project will
leverage recent advances in genome sequencing technologies and computational
methods to evaluate the extent to which changes in life history and
ecophysiology in plants are correlated with changes in the evolutionary rate
over the entire genome. In collaboration with researchers worldwide, key traits
will be characterized and &gt;10,000 genes will be sequenced for 300
representative species of Caryophyllales. Analyses of evolutionary rate shifts
in both traits and the genome will be used to assess how life history and
ecophysiology have influenced genomic evolution, and vice versa.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project provides the first rigorous assessment of the
relationship between shifts in ecology and life history and genome-wide changes
in evolutionary rate. It will yield unprecedented insight into the evolution of
several genetic pathways of fundamental importance in flowering and crop plants,
including those associated with flower development, photosynthesis, and
pigmentation. Furthermore, this research will include the development of new and
refined bioinformatic tools of broad use to biologists. The project will support
the mentorship and training of a postdoctoral researcher, graduate students, and
numerous undergraduates on all aspects of the project, and will fund
professional development workshops for high school teachers and plant
biologists.