* 1354457
* The role of endoderm in cardiac morphogenesis
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2014,05/31/2018
* Fang Lin, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Krieg
* 05/31/2018
* USD 654,000.00

Name: Fang Lin&lt;br/&gt;Proposal number: IOS-1354457&lt;br/&gt;Proposal title:
The role of endoderm in cardiac morphogenesis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During
vertebrate heart development, a key conserved step is the migration of two
bilateral populations of myocardial precursors towards the embryonic midline,
where they merge to form the primitive heart tube- the foundation of heart
development. This migration is highly regulated and requires interactions
between the migrating myocardial precursors and their microenvironment, which
includes the adjacent endoderm. However, the mechanisms enabling endoderm to
promote myocardial migration are unclear. The Principal Investigator's lab has
identified a signaling pathway that is critical for migration of the endodermal
tissue layer and the myocardial precursors. In this project, they will apply
their expertise in zebrafish genetics, GPCR signaling, and in vivo imaging, and
use established tools to dissect the interactions between the endoderm and
myocardial precursors. This study is expected to lead to a clear understanding
of how the endoderm regulates myocardial migration, which may be broadly
applicable to other species. This contribution will be significant in that it
will establish a framework for the interplay between the endoderm and myocardial
precursors during vertebrate heart development, and provide insights into the
mechanisms whereby tissue interactions influence organ development. The
knowledge gained from this study will help us to understand how the heart
develops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The zebrafish represents not only a valuable
research model, but also an excellent teaching tool for students at all levels.
The zebrafish embryo is transparent and develops externally, making it possible
to observe developmental processes, including heart development, through a
simple stereomicroscope. Thus, zebrafish provides a deliverable classroom-based
learning opportunity. The PI is passionate about bringing science to the
classroom, inspiring new generations, and promoting an awareness of basic
biological research among the public. She believes that these efforts have a
positive impact on society. The PI will continue to conduct outreach educational
projects at local K-12 schools, to provide undergraduates with research
experience, and to contribute to graduate and postdoctoral fellowship training.