* 1354336
* The Influence of Sociality in Cancer Treatment Decision-Making
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Carolyn Sargent, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 07/31/2018
* USD 174,822.00

Carolyn Sargent of Washington University will research how transnational
communications about disease generate therapy management group decision-making.
The research will contribute to scientific understandings of how disease shapes
social interaction and how meanings of illness acquire legitimacy and influence
treatment decisions. Medical anthropologists have long emphasized the ways in
which many treatment decisions are influenced not just by communications between
doctor and patient, but also by a range of larger social networks. The research
focuses on meanings and strategies about breast cancer among immigrants from the
Senegal River Valley (Mali, Mauritania, Senegal) in Paris, France, an
appropriate research context because of the robust and complex transnational
decision-making networks that have emerged. Migrant communities such as these
have proven to be an ideal social laboratory for exploring the formation of
decision-making networks as these are typically spaces where a range of social
relationships are observably emergent. Three central questions are posed: (1)
how sufferers, families, interpreters and clinicians collectively and
progressively define and manage cancer; (2) how social relations are
restructured around the collective experience of cancer and how the symbolic
importance of cancer figures into these reconfigurations; (3) how transnational
meanings and strategies are continuously generated by means of cell phone and
other communications. To investigate these questions, the researchers have
designed a two-year study, to follow 40 women with breast cancer, as well as
caretakers, clinicians and interpreters. Regular home visits will be conducted
to assess kinship obligations, social hierarchies, and moral conventions, using
semi-structured interviews and a mix of qualitative methods. Participant
observation in women's immigrant associations will allow the researchers to
assess popular representations of breast cancer and treatment modalities.

The broader impact of this research lies in its implications for public health
policy and clinical practice. The research explores the impacts to medical
treatment that arise when biomedical practitioners, patients, and families do
not share a common language or core illness constructs and treatment
expectations. It points to areas that merit attention to ensure that policies
acknowledge the potential for serious disruptions in the provision of care to
gravely ill patients when these issues remain unaddressed. The researchers'
connections with clinicians and public health officials will facilitate the
dissemination of research findings and produce relevant workshops, working
papers, and publications.