* 1354040
* Integrating Biodiversity and Biogeochemical Dynamics from a Hydrodynamics Perspective: Long-Term Ecological Research in the Luquillo Mountains
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2015
* Nicholas Brokaw, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 08/31/2015
* USD 80,250.00

The Luquillo Long Term Ecological Research project has examined environmental
drivers of biodiversity dynamics and biogeochemical cyles in a tropical, montane
forest for over 28 years. This proposal funds planning meetings to bring project
participants together to develop future research directions that arise from
syntheses of their long-term data, are motivated by strong linkages to
ecological theory, and that are widely applicable to other tropical, forested,
montane regions. The resulting research agenda will be broadly applicable across
LTER sites as it will encompass ecosystems that include a complex mixture of
pristine and highly urbanized and suburbanized habitats. A second goal will be
to design research to understand ecological dynamics in light of disturbance
regimes that are dominated by changes in both land use and climate.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed planning meetings will include graduate
students and postdoctoral researchers together with research scientists and
information managers. Engaging early-career students and researchers in the
process of research design and proposal development is an important aspect of
comprehensive education and training. Students will be recruited from under-
represented groups, which are abundantly represented in Puerto Rico. Over a
longer term, the research directions developed will strengthen the Luquillo
Forest's connections with other major projects in Puerto Rico, such as NEON,
STREON, IGERT, CZO, and ULTRA-Ex. Moreover, the project's Schoolyard program
reaches teachers and hundreds of middle and high school students through field
research and web-based middle school curricula.