* 1354006
* The role of selected traits in generating patterns of species diversification in a continent-wide radiation of birds (Thraupidae)
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2014,02/29/2020
* Kevin Burns, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 02/29/2020
* USD 424,918.00

Through studying the beak size of Galapagos finches Charles Darwin developed his
fundamental idea of natural selection. These finches, and their relatives in the
tanager family, continue to inform science today in a project to study why they
have been successful in generating so many species. Beak size, feather color,
songs, and ecological niche play important roles in the extraordinary
diversification of this large American lineage that represents over 4% of bird
species. This project will develop a phylogeny and a trait data matrix to
compare evolutionary patterns and correlations of these traits with
diversification rates. The results will determine whether the factors that drive
natural selection in the Galapagos finches are the same factors driving
speciation in other tanagers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates the
broad question of how biodiversity is generated, which is essential information
to the long term success of efforts to conserve biodiversity. This project will
support the education and research training of least eight graduate and
undergraduate students who will produce theses and publications. In addition, a
large number of undergraduates will be involved in the production of online
publications on tanagers, which will be published in six languages through
Cornell University's Lab of Ornithology. This outreach will benefit researchers,
wildlife biologists and conservationists. In addition, project researchers will
present public lectures on this work to amateur birders, wildlife biologists,
and conservationists.