* 1354943
* Deciphering environmental controls over the hysteresis of biome switches at savanna-forest boundaries
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2022
* William Hoffmann, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 08/31/2022
* USD 507,498.00

Savannas and evergreen forests are the most important tropical vegetation types
in terms of area, biodiversity, total carbon stocks, and use by humans, so
shifts in the distribution of these biomes have large implications for
conservation, global change, and human welfare. Predicting these shifts,
however, is challenging. Some modeling studies forecast widespread expansion of
forest into tropical savanna, while others forecast massive collapse of tropical
forest. The difficulty of predicting and managing savanna-forest transitions
arises largely from complex fire-vegetation feedbacks that are influenced by
humans, climate, previous fire history, and the characteristics of plant species
at a site. An improved understanding of these feedbacks is necessary for
developing the next generation of earth system models and for informing
management of the seasonally dry tropics. The latter is particularly true in
Brazil, where a failure to recognize the natural role of fire has led to
policies of fire suppression in areas of native savanna, resulting in forest
encroachment into many areas of natural savanna and loss of species that depend
upon this habitat. In addition to providing valuable data for managing these
systems, this project will promote the acceptance of the natural role of fire
with an article to be prepared for a popular science magazine and a white paper
to be distributed to managers of Brazilian savanna reserves and state ministers
of environment. These documents will review the evidence for the natural role of
fire and the consequences of fire suppression. As the project generates results,
journalists will be invited to visit the study sites to inform the public of the
natural role of fire in Brazilian savannas. Four US undergraduate students will
be given international research experiences that will contribute directly to the
research objectives of this proposal while stimulate interest and expertise in
tropical ecology among US students. Understanding the impacts of fire and fire
history on vegetation dynamics is important for fire management in the
US.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding of the drivers of species change at the
forest-savanna ecotone has been hindered by strong positive feedbacks and other
non-linear processes that cause complex dynamics and hysteresis (i.e. the
dependency of system not only on its current environment but also on its past
environment). These legacy effects confound our ability to observe vegetation
responses to environmental change. The proposed research will combine field data
and modeling to test for and quantify sources of hysteresis in savanna-forest
dynamics. The aims of the research are (1) quantify key processes that underlie
switches between savanna and forest states, (2) use this information to refine
and parameterize the CLM(ED-SPITFIRE) model for simulating savanna-forest
dynamics, and (3) perform simulations to understand environmental controls on
the distribution of tropical savanna and forest, with emphasis on causes of
hysteresis. This model represents the coupling of a demography-based ecosystem
model (ED), a mechanistic model of fire occurrence (SPITFIRE), and a model of
land surface processes (CLM) that can optionally be coupled to a general
circulation model (CESM). Much of the data needed to refine, parameterize, and
validate the model are available from previous NSF-funded research. Gaps in this
information will be resolved with a fire experiment at a natural savanna-forest
boundary in Brazil. In the experiment, flammability trials will be used to
understand thresholds that mediate vegetation-fire feedbacks. Measurements of
biomass production and turnover will quantify the relative roles of primary
productivity and mean residence time in governing biome shifts. Monitoring of
tree dynamics will provide a more complete understanding of the distinct roles
of savanna and forest tree species in these shifts.