* 1354402
* Collaborative Research: Understanding Transient Behavior of Climate Feedbacks and Its Role in Decadal Climate Variability and Prediction
* GEO,OPP
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2020
* Yi Deng, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Colene Haffke
* 04/30/2020
* USD 316,188.00

Representation of climate feedbacks in a coupled-model remains the largest
source of uncertainty in its projection of future climate change driven by
increasing greenhouse gases. The sign and magnitude of a feedback, however,
depends critically on the dynamical and thermodynamical properties of a
background climate. Due to internal variability of the climate system and
fluctuations in external forcing, climate models inevitably excite low frequency
variability and generate a wide range of background climates. The drift of
feedbacks with these background climates, hence the transient behavior of
climate feedbacks, presents a major challenge in our assessment of the risk of
climate change acceleration and abrupt climate change. Delineating the evolving
nature of feedback processes in a model is of particular importance for
understanding the source of both the skill and bias in decadal climate
prediction. However, the lack of a local measure of feedback strength has
greatly limited our ability to make connections between actual model predictions
(e.g., local temperature change) and transient behavior of climate
feedbacks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use a newly-developed
technique, the coupled atmosphere-surface climate feedback-response analysis
method (CFRAM) to tackle this problem. The study will take advantage of modern
reanalysis products and the multi-model ensemble products from the decadal
prediction experiments of the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project (CMIP5) to
explore CFRAM's full potential in quantifying local and transient behavior of
climate feedbacks and understanding the skill and bias of a model's ability to
simulate decadal climate prediction. Specific research tasks that will be
undertaken are (i) to quantify the relative contributions of various feedbacks
to the annual cycle and interannual to decadal variations in surface air
temperature (SAT) using reanalyses data; (ii)to evaluate the fidelity of CMIP5
models in representing the SAT annual cycle and decadal prediction of SAT; and
(iii) to examine the attribution of models skills and biases in the ability to
simulate decadal climate predictions and identify feedback processes that have
major contributions to both systematic errors in the SAT annual cycle and
forecast errors in decadal prediction of SAT.