* 1354195
* Understanding the Biochemical Continuity of the ER and Chloroplast
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2018
* Dean DellaPenna, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 04/30/2018
* USD 672,328.00

Chloroplasts are green organelles of plant cells and are the metabolic factories
of the cell. Chloroplasts convert light into chemical energy, which is then used
by the cell to synthesize hundreds of thousands of compounds upon which life on
the planet depends. Like any factory, chloroplasts do not operate in isolation
but rather collaborate with other organelles to synthesize most plant compounds.
Collaborative synthesis is most common for non-polar (fat-soluble) compounds
such as plant oils, pigments and volatile flavor compounds, but how non-polar
biosynthetic intermediates move between plant organelles has remained unknown.
The project builds on the discovery of a novel mechanism for this movement of
compounds between organelles; to extend the factory analogy, we have found that
rather than using carts to transport intermediates between organelles, as has
long been assumed, the chloroplast and other organelles build a shared wall
(membrane) which creates a common pool of non-polar intermediates to be accessed
by enzymes in either organelle. The investigators will take biochemical, genetic
and molecular approaches to test the range of compounds accessible at this
interface and define its limits and operating principles. The resulting data
will have broad implications and impacts in the engineering of plant metabolism
to produce non-polar metabolites for food, feed, fuel and industrial
applications. Training of undergraduates, especially for student's who are the
first to attend college in their family, will be an integral component of the
research. Data from these studies will be distributed to the public through
peer-reviewed manuscripts or through seminars or talks and poster presentations
at meetings. Once published, all transgenic or mutant lines, constructs, and
other molecular tools will be either donated to the Arabidopsis stock center or
will be provided upon request to interested parties in keeping with standard
research practices.