* 1354272
* Contemporary co-evolution of gamete recognition proteins
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Don Levitan, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 08/31/2019
* USD 400,000.00

This project examines variation over time in the interacting sperm and egg
recognition proteins in a species of sea urchin that has experienced a profound
shift in population density over the past 200 years. The proteins on the surface
of eggs and sperm determine which males can reproduce with which females and
often define whether one species is distinct from another. This study will
determine what makes fertilization possible among some individuals but not
others. It combines two disciplines to understand how ecological processes (when
are novel proteins more successful?) can drive evolution (when do new proteins
proliferate in the genome?). Insight will be gained into how populations might
rapidly evolve reproductive traits to adapt to rapid changes in the abundance of
species. It will also provide data on how reproductive behavior can influence
the association between interacting genes. Students, particularly those from
underrepresented groups, will be trained in molecular biology and field ecology.
Understanding the evolution of reproductive compatibility may help in the
management of small populations and captive breeding for species of conservation
interest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Theory predicts that gamete recognition might be
relaxed when population density is low and gamete competition is relaxed.
Fertilization experiments will examine how specific sperm and egg proteins
interact to determine reproductive compatibility and how patterns of sperm
availability influence selection on these proteins. Sea urchins provide a model
system for exploring these questions that would be impossible in species, such
as mammals, with internal fertilization. The ability to age sea urchins, which
can live for over 200 years, coupled with long-term data on human-driven changes
in sea otter population density enables this unique historical study of
evolution in action. This research will provide key insights into why some males
and females have increased reproductive compatibility and why selection often
favors the evolution of incompatible types.