* 1354975
* SG: Genome-wide analysis of phylogenetic conflict in the wheat tribe, Triticeae
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2014,02/28/2019
* Richard Ree, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 02/28/2019
* USD 149,794.00

The wheat tribe, Triticeae, comprises about 350 grass species, including wheat,
barley, and rye. Genetic exchange among species has played a major role in the
group?s complicated evolutionary history, so a clear understanding of the
relationships among species remains elusive. In species that exchange genetic
material, the genomes can be mosaics derived from multiple sources, and as a
result, evolutionary relationships inferred from genetic data can differ
depending on which portion of the genome is used for the inference. Gene
exchange has been convincingly implicated in the Triticeae, but the extent is
still unknown. This research addresses the question by applying a genome-wide
approach, sampling large numbers of short DNA sequences from throughout the
entire genome from a broad sample of Triticeae species. The density of genome
sampling, combined with the ability to determine the genomic location of the
sampled sequences, will lead to a better assessment of the extent of genetic
exchange, including which species are involved, and which regions of the genome
are most affected.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this work will be
informative to Triticeae breeders who rely on the processes of hybridization and
gene exchange as tools for crop improvement. The methods of data analysis
developed in this project will be useful for studies of other groups of
organisms that undergo gene exchange. The funding will support training for one
graduate student, along with discussion groups and training for a selected group
of undergraduates from Olive-Harvey College, a minority-serving two-year college
in Chicago.