* 1354219
* Bacterial Controls of Endophyte Phenotypes: an Unexplored Dimension of Diverse Plant-fungal Symbioses
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* David Baltrus, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Brad Day
* 07/31/2019
* USD 653,073.00

The vast majority of plants on earth harbor fungal endophytes within their
healthy leaves. These endophytes enhance plant physiology and defense against
pathogens, and shape the productivity of crops and wild plants. It was recently
discovered that endophytes harbor their own endosymbionts -- endosymbiotic
bacteria that live within fungal tissues (endohyphal bacteria). Fungal traits
such as stress tolerance and cellulose degradation are enhanced by bacterial
symbionts, suggesting an important, yet previously unknown, role in structuring
beneficial relationships between fungi and their host plants. Broader impacts
will directly reach high school students, undergraduates, graduate students, and
the public via a rotating display in the University of Arizona Mycological
Herbarium, an extensive series of workshops for students at a large, urban,
Hispanic-serving school, field experiences and laboratory internships for high
school students, training for high school teachers, development of curriculum to
achieve State of Arizona science standards, integration of project material into
undergraduate courses at the University of Arizona, and mentoring junior
researchers at multiple life stages. More broadly, the work will contribute to a
new understanding of the factors shaping one of the most important, but least-
studied, symbioses in which plants engage,thereby contributing to human health
and sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project addresses the hypothesis
that phenotypic variation in endophytic fungi, and the outcomes of their
associations with plants, reflect a major role of endohyphal bacteria. Using
tractable model systems, the specificity and lability of these associations and
their outcomes will be tested. Transcriptomics will be used to identify how
bacteria and fungi communicate, and to determine which pathways are upregulated
in these dynamic symbioses. Overall, examining the diversity, plasticity,
specificity, and gene expression associated with phenotypic effects of bacteria
on fungi in the lab, in experimental plants, and across an environmental
gradient will clarify the ecological importance of this tripartite symbiosis.