* 1354215
* Leveraging Pathogen Diversity for Gaining Insights into Molecular Plant - Microbe Interactions
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2019
* Boris Vinatzer, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Brad Day
* 05/31/2019
* USD 599,936.00

Plants are exposed to many pathogens and consequently evolved a sophisticated
immune system. On the other hand, pathogens evolved sophisticated mechanisms to
overcome the plant immune system. In this project, the investigators will take
advantage of genetic diversity in pathogen populations and in crop plants to
identify pathogen genes and plant genes that determine the outcome of plant-
pathogen interactions. These genes can be expected to provide new avenues
towards novel approaches in crop disease prevention and control. The project
will also offer multiple opportunities for training students in an
interdisciplinary and international context.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
investigators previously gained new insights into molecular plant-microbe
interactions by comparing strains of the tomato pathogen Pseudomonas syringae
pv. tomato (Pto) with each other. In particular, they identified the pathogen-
associated molecular pattern (PAMP) flgII, which is an epitope within the
flagellar filament structural protein (FliC) and which triggers an immune
response in tomato and other Solanaceae. To identify additional PAMPs, an
international strain collection of Pto and of its close relatives will be
expanded in the current project by isolating bacteria from rain, surface water,
and crops. Genome sequencing and population genomic analyses will be performed.
Pathogen emergence, spread, and crop adaptation will be investigated and new
PAMPs and other genes involved in pathogen - plant interaction will be predicted
based on signatures of natural selection. Candidate genes will then be tested
for their role in pathogen - plant interaction using biochemical and genetic
approaches. Such approaches will also be used to identify the tomato receptor of
the previously characterized PAMP flgII and, possibly, tomato receptors of other
PAMPs that may be identified in the current project.