* 1354062
* Collaborative Research: Wildlife subsidies interact with discharge to influence ecosystem function of a large African river
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2014,04/30/2018
* Emma Rosi, Cary Institute of Ecosystem Studies, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 04/30/2018
* USD 390,873.00

Animal migrations are some of the most remarkable spectacles of nature and can
result in significant engineering of ecological processes. For example,
migrating animals have the potential to move large amounts of carbon, nitrogen,
and other important nutrients among ecosystems. The Mara River in East Africa
supports the largest remaining overland migration in the world: 1.5 million
wildebeest and over 4,000 hippopotami. This project will use small-scale and
whole-stream experiments, river sampling and theoretical models to test how
nutrient inputs into the Mara River by wildebeest and hippopotami interact with
river discharge to influence ecosystem processes such as primary production,
nutrient cycling, and whole-ecosystem metabolism. The Mara River is one of the
few remaining unregulated rivers heavily influenced by large wildlife
populations, and provides a unique opportunity for research. Findings will
improve understanding of ecosystems where large wildlife play an important role,
and provide a baseline for comparison with systems where wildlife have
disappeared or been replaced by humans and domesticated animals.

This research will have relevance to regional concerns relating to both
wildlife and water quality. The Mara River is critical to the Serengeti Mara
ecosystem and provides water for nearly one million rural poor. Declining water
quality has been linked to outbreaks of typhoid and cholera, and eutrophication
of Lake Victoria. In addition, wildebeest migration and mass drowning events are
of local concern to managers in the Maasai Mara National Park. Research will
also address human inputs into the river, which may inform decision makers about
how more effective sewage treatment could benefit the region. The project will
train undergraduate students, graduate students, and a postdoc from the USA, and
graduate students from around East Africa. Partnerships with the National
Geographic Society and World Wildlife Fund (WWF) will distribute research
results through print, video and web-based initiatives. The WWF partnership will
use real-time monitoring data from the Mara, photos from live camera traps, and
blog updates to disseminate findings to stakeholders, resource managers, and the
public.