* 1354028
* Elucidating a novel photodegradation pathway: impact of halides on the photodestruction of organic contaminants in estuarine and marine systems
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2013,03/31/2016
* William Mitch, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 03/31/2016
* USD 230,841.00

PI: William Mitch&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: CBET-1066526&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
Yale University&lt;br/&gt;Title: Elucidating a novel photodegradation pathway:
impact of halides on the photodestruction of organic contaminants in estuarine
and marine systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Estuaries have long been considered
critical ecosystems, serving as nutrient-rich nurseries for a host of marine
life. However, as populations surge in coastal areas, there are increasing
concerns regarding the negative impacts on estuarine organisms of organic
contaminants from point sources, nonpoint sources, and even direct loadings from
aquaculture or oil spills. Although photolytic degradation is among the more
important controls on contaminant fate, there has been no systematic evaluation
of the effect of salt, the defining characteristic of estuarine and marine
systems, on contaminant photolysis. In a recent publication, the PI demonstrated
that seawater concentrations of halides enhanced the photobleaching of dissolved
organic matter (DOM) chromophores by 40%. Experiments controlling for ionic
strength demonstrated that the effect was specific to halides, and consistent
with the formation of oxidants that selectively target electron-rich
chromophores; such oxidants include singlet oxygen or reactive halogen species
(RHS; e.g., Br?) formed by the direct oxidation of halides by excited state
triplet chromophores. The PI presents preliminary data indicating that halides
also significantly enhance the direct photodegradation of tetracycline and the
indirect photodegradation of 17Ã¢-estradiol. Additionally, he employed probes to
demonstrate that halides increase the steady-state concentration of excited
state triplet chromophores, critical intermediates in the formation of singlet
oxygen and halogen radicals. Lastly, he presents results indicating that
promotion of singlet oxygen and halogen radicals may play important roles in
organic contaminant photodegradation, and in the case of halogen radicals, may
halogenate contaminants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research would employ
two approaches to systematically evaluate the impact of halides on the
photodegradation of organic contaminants subject to both direct and indirect
photolysis. On a practical level, the first approach would quantify the direct
and indirect photodegradation rates of contaminants across halide concentration
gradients to indicate the importance of halides for the photo-fate of
contaminants in estuaries. Experiments would be conducted with and without ionic
strength control to distinguish whether the influence of salts is a generalized
ionic strength effect or specific to halides. On a fundamental level, the second
approach would explore the underlying mechanisms. They will employ a probe to
quantify the steady-state concentrations and rates of formation and scavenging
of photo-excited triplet states of the organic contaminant (in the case of
direct photolysis) or DOM chromophores (in the case of indirect photolysis).
These experiments will be coupled with use of an additional probe to quantify
the steady-state concentrations and rates of formation and scavenging of the
selective oxidant, singlet oxygen, formed from the photo-excited triplet state
organic intermediates. Although similar probes have not been developed to
measure RHS, we will employ a RHS scavenger to indicate whether these species
play an important role in organic contaminant photodegradation in estuaries. As
an additional indication of a role for RHS, we will evaluate whether
halogenation of organic contaminants occurs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite years
of research on contaminant photolysis, there has been no systematic
investigation of a role for halides in promoting contaminant photolysis.
Generally, halides are considered to modify ionic strength, not to participate
in specific photochemical reactions. Accordingly, reaction pathways applicable
to freshwater systems have been applied to saline waters. The systematic
characterization of specific halide-assisted photolysis pathways would transform
our understanding of the role of salts in aqueous photochemistry, and enable
more accurate predictions of the fate of the increasing loadings of organic
contaminants expected in estuaries and marine systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
characterization of specific halide-assisted photolysis pathways would be very
relevant to understanding the turnover of marine DOM, an important component of
the global carbon cycle. Moreover, the definition of an abiotic pathway to
organohalogen formation would be important as the origin of halogenated organics
in marine systems is a significant issue in oceanography. In addition to the
research opportunities afforded to graduate and undergraduate students, a high
school science teacher will assist in summer research, with an eye to
incorporating experiments into the curriculum over the following year. With the
help of the teacher, underrepresented high school students will be identified to
assist in the research over the following two summers.