* 1354629
* Collaborative Research: Evolution of adaptive synergism between mutualistic partners during range-limit evolution
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2020
* Katrin Kellner, University of Texas at Tyler
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 04/30/2020
* USD 81,171.00

This research will elucidate how the ecological and evolutionary processes of
interacting species will respond to climate change at their range limits, with
implications for conservation of species in marginal habitat. Climate change
alters species distributions, with major consequences for species embedded in
complex ecological interactions, such as mutualistic symbioses (e.g., plant-
pollinator or host-microbe mutualisms). This project focuses on an insect-fungus
mutualism, leafcutter ants cultivating fungi for food, which are agricultural
pests in the southwestern USA and throughout the New World. Leafcutter
mutualisms are ideal to study how symbioses respond to climate change because
leafcutter ants are dominant components in ecosystems, and because experimental
ant-fungus combinations can be manipulated under laboratory conditions
simulating the altered temperature stresses expected under climate change. This
research adapts techniques developed for the study of gene-by-gene interactions
within an organism to test whether ant-by-fungus synergy enhances temperature-
stress adaptations and thus determines range-limits at the northern (USA) and
southern (Uruguay/Argentina) distributional limits of leafcutter ants.

Improved understanding of how interacting species respond to climate change has
scientific and societal benefits, contributing to development of models for
conservation of species in marginal habitat, and to models predicting whether
mutualistic pest species may become more problematic under climate change.
Collaborations with researchers in Uruguay and Argentina will provide training
of US researchers in an international setting. This project is a collaboration
among a major research institution, a regional institution, and an institution
serving underrepresented students where some of the field research will be
conducted, and will strengthen long term interactions and help foster enhanced
STEM education initiatives. Furthermore, collaborations with researchers in
Uruguay and Argentina will provide training of US researchers in an
international setting. Workshops will be conducted at public schools, museums,
and nature centers to foster understanding of local biodiversity, conservation,
and challenges under environmental change.