* 1354146
* Estimating the Bayesian Phylogenetic Information Content of Systematic Data
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2020
* Lynn Kuo, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 08/31/2020
* USD 600,000.00

This research will develop and test new analytical methods for estimating the
quality and information content of biological data sets used to determine
genealogical relationships (phylogenies) among species. Phylogenies are crucial
in many areas of biology, from identifying emerging pathogens to studying the
mechanisms of evolutionary change and the functioning of communities of species
in nature. The methods to be developed in this research project will be
announced in scientific journals, and will be provided in free, open-source
software enabling researchers to apply the new methods to their own data. This
project will also facilitate interdisciplinary training of postdoctoral
associates, graduate students and faculty in biology and statistics. High school
students will be involved in developing mobile apps that will provide useful,
free tools to the scientific community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Bayesian
statistical framework is widely used in phylogenetics and molecular evolution;
however, the means for estimating the information content of data remains poorly
developed. One reason for this may be the fact that marginal likelihoods and
topology posterior probabilities are required for estimating Kullback-Leibler
(KL) divergences, and accurate means of estimating these quantities have only
recently been achieved. Correspondingly, primary objectives for this research
are: (1) Evaluate the utility of KL-based information content measurement to
answer a diversity of questions important to systematists, including: (a) How
much information about tree topology is present in a data set? (b) Can
topological information be separated from information about substitution model
parameters? (c) How much information does one data subset have compared to a
different data subset? (d) Do two data subsets contain conflicting phylogenetic
information? (e) How much information is there about particular model parameters
(e.g. a divergence time of interest)? (f) How much information is there for
resolving particular clades? (2) Explore issues related to information content,
such as: (a) a topological information content definition of saturation; (b) a
KL-based method for estimating variable-tree marginal likelihoods for purposes
of model selection; and (c) polytomy analyses. (3) Implement KL estimation of
information content in existing Bayesian phylogenetics software to make it
freely available to the systematics community. These objectives will be pursued
using the variable tree IDR method to provide accurate estimates of all marginal
likelihoods needed for KL estimation. The recently published conditional clade
method allows accurate posterior probabilities of tree topologies to be
estimated from sample conditional clade frequencies. Computer simulation
experiments and analyses of relevant real world data sets will be used to
evaluate the effectiveness of KL in measuring information content and in
providing answers to the questions posed above.