* 1354088
* Causal illusions and forces
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2016
* Phillip Wolff, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 05/31/2016
* USD 117,369.00

A fundamental issue in cognitive science is understanding how people attribute a
causal relationship to events. People sometimes sense causal connections where
they do not exist, as in superstitious behavior or pseudoscientific beliefs.
They also factor into serious psychological conditions, such as obsessive-
compulsive disorder or pathological gambling, conditions characterized by
unrealistically high beliefs of causal control. Despite their pervasiveness,
causal illusions are neglected by most theories of causation because these
theories are intended to explain how people infer causal relations that actually
exist in the world, not causation that exists only in the mind of the perceiver.
The proposed research seeks to address this gap. In particular, the investigator
explores the idea that causal illusions arise because people's causal
representations are based on the feeling of force, and people make mistakes
about causation because they often rely on cross-modal information to infer
forces. Forces are understood though the sense of touch (or haptics), suggesting
that haptics play a foundational role in higher-order cognition by providing a
perceptual basis for the notion of causation. Much recent research indicates
that the sense of touch can be triggered not only through direct physical
contact with the body, but also indirectly through other modalities, such as
sight. Such cross-modal interactions might explain people's vulnerability to
causal illusions: because forces cannot be directly felt though vision, people
may make mistakes when they use visual information to infer forces. The proposed
research will also investigate the hypothesis that people's judgments of
causation are based on two sources of information, one based on the impression
of force and a second, based on spatial relations, which determines whether a
mechanism exists for the transmission of the force. Causal illusions are
proposed to occur when the impression of force suggests causation but lack of
appropriate spatial relations implies that the impression of force is not
substantiated. The hypothesis is tested by examining not only people's
sensitivity to physical forces, but also their sensitivity to spatial cues.

The proposed research reframes the discussion in the causation literature from
an analysis of how the cognitive system achieves accurate representations of the
world to an analysis of how and why the system can make mistakes and fall prey
to superstitions, quackery, and illusions. Results of the behavioral work will
also offer strong suggestions about how the notion of causation might be
realized in the brain and help guide research examining the neural basis of
causal thought. The work may also lead to better treatment of psychological
conditions associated with unrealistic beliefs about causal control (for
example, in gambling addiction). The animations and haptic controller programs
developed for this research will be freely available for researchers in the
wider scientific community.