* 1354022
* Collaborative Research: Effects  of pulsed floral resources on pollinator population dynamics
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2020
* Neal Williams, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 07/31/2020
* USD 437,246.00

This research will explore how one result of landscape change, the timing and
availability of flowers, affects populations of bumble bees, a prominent group
of native bees that pollinate many crops and wildflowers in North America.
Bumble bees are important because more than one-third of the food we eat comes
from crops that depend to some degree on the type of pollination they provide.
Although non-native honey bees remain a cornerstone of agricultural pollination,
native bees are increasingly the focus of agricultural attention in light of
ongoing challenges facing honey bees. Healthy populations of native bees rely on
continuous supplies of pollen and nectar. However, the availability of these
floral resources has been dramatically altered by unpredictable weather
associated with changing climate, and by human activities, including intensive
agriculture. The investigators will study how changes in the timing and
availability of flowers affect the number of bumble bees. This research is a
significant advance over past studies, which used patterns of bee visits to
flowers to make broad conclusions about the overall health of bee populations
and communities. In contrast, the current study will focus on reproductive
success of bee hives. The results will be key to developing strategies to
promote robust populations of bees and ensure food security, as well as to
conserve biological diversity. Specifically, the project combines manipulative
field experiments and original demographic population models to assess effects
of within-year resource variation (resource pulses) on population dynamics of
bumble bees. The experiments will be conducted with Bombus vosnesenskii, a
dominant bumble bee species in Northern California. Investigators will conduct
experiments in which flower availability and timing are systematically altered.
They will then measure how vital rates of individual colonies (e.g., worker
production, worker survival, and queen production) depend on the availability of
floral resources at different times in the colony life cycle. To ensure a
consistent baseline of hive quality, all measurements will be made on lab-reared
colonies started from wild-collected queens. Experimental results will be
combined with demographic models to predict long-term population viability of
bees under different landscape conditions. This research will answer questions
about how ongoing landscape change will affect Bombus vosnesenskii and other bee
species. It also will provide a previously-missing framework for population
viability analysis of bees and other social insects.