* 1354737
* Stochasticity in gene expression as a mechanism underlying developmental plasticity
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2014,02/28/2018
* Emilie Snell-Rood, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Krieg
* 02/28/2018
* USD 488,816.00

Why are some organisms specialized, while others can survive under many
conditions? This research tests the idea that patterns of gene expression in
individuals are molded to specific environments through processes analogous to
learning. This kind of mechanism should come with costs such as delayed breeding
or fewer offspring, leading to tradeoffs associated with being a generalist. The
proposed research will test these ideas using caterpillars of a crop pest
species, the cabbage white butterfly. This species feeds on a wide range of
plants in the mustard family, such as broccoli and canola. However, after an
individual has experienced one food source, they do poorly if switched to a new
food source, suggestive of a type of physiological memory. This research will
test whether genetic differences in specialization between agricultural and
nonagricultural populations are associated with differences in gene expression
variability and associated reproductive tradeoffs. The expected results will
have implications for understanding how crop pests adapt to monoculture crops,
which, in many cases, may be selecting for more problematic pests. The results
of this work will be communicated to the public across a number of events,
including outreach fairs at the national level, annual meeting of the behavior
society and in association with the butterfly house at the Minnesota State Fair.
Outreach modules will be developed that communicate the implications of this
work for controlling agricultural pests, in addition to the importance of
understanding developmental variation in the emergence of cancer.