* 1354585
* SG: ARTS: Hawaiian Philodoria green-island leaf mining moths: Revisionary systematics, phylogenetics and biogeography of a threatened fauna
* BIO,DEB
* 01/15/2014,12/31/2017
* Daniel Rubinoff, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 12/31/2017
* USD 149,947.00

Aging and tissue death is a normal part of plant growth, but a leaf-feeding moth
(Philodoria) has developed an extraordinary life-history strategy: its larvae
can delay plant tissue from aging thereby giving the moth an adaptive advantage
when food resources are limiting. This phenomenon has helped the insects achieve
extraordinary localized diversity and become a major component of island
ecosystems. This remarkable process is little understood, but has the potential
to transform a broad spectrum of biological processes and increase understanding
of the interactions between insects and plants. This project will generate a
systematic framework, integrating molecular and morphological data, to revise
the taxonomy and test hypotheses on the moth evolution, biogeography, and
diversification. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Educating the next generation of
biologists is essential at a time when global natural resources are diminishing.
Project participants will teach the importance of biodiversity to the public
through workshops and the PIs will train students of many levels (graduate
students, undergraduates and high school students). Students, including minority
and underrepresented students, will participate in fieldwork and disseminate
information broadly via social media. This project will increase public
awareness of the need to conserve endemic island biodiversity, including these
plant-insect interactions that are important to horticulture and agriculture.