* 1354894
* Collaborative Research: Life history, kinship and the evolution of alternative female reproductive strategies
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2014,02/28/2018
* Bruce Lyon, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 02/28/2018
* USD 117,647.00

Females in a wide variety of animals pursue a remarkable reproductive behavior -
they lay eggs in the nests of other individuals in the population and thereby
parasitize the parental care of those females. Despite its widespread occurrence
in birds (> 200 species), the factors that promote this behavior remain poorly
understood. The recent discovery that parasites and their hosts may be
genetically related also raises the intriguing possibility that kinship plays
some role, blurring the distinction between evolutionary parasitism and
cooperation. This project undertakes one of the most comprehensive analyses of
this breeding system ever done, focusing on the wood duck (Aix sponsa), a
species of management concern, as a model system. The study employs population-
wide DNA genotyping, detailed observational and experimental field studies, and
RFID (radio frequency identification) technology to follow all nesting behaviors
and social interactions among all breeding females. These data enable
comprehensive tests of numerous but rarely tested hypotheses for parasitic
reproductive behavior. The novel application of RFID tagging, where all
individuals will be tagged and all nestboxes installed with readers, represents
the first population-wide use of a technology that could revolutionize studies
of animal social systems and demography in the wild. The project provides a
continuing undergraduate training program, which will engage 20-30 student
interns each year in their first research experience. A collaborative
partnership has also been formed with the California Waterfowl Association to
provide hands-on education for K-12 school groups through the "Wood Duck
Wonders" and "Youth Leadership" programs. These programs will bring urban school
groups to the study site to participate directly in scientific research. Over
50% of the students in these programs are Title 1 low-income status. This
project offers a huge potential to engage young people who have fewer
opportunities to learn about science, the natural world and their own potential.