* 1354750
* Collaborative Research: The Ecological Drill Hypothesis: Biotic Control on Carbonate Dissolution in a Low Relief Patterned Landscape
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2014,04/30/2018
* Brad Murray, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 04/30/2018
* USD 229,913.00

Biological processes play an important but under-appreciated role in shaping the
land. Indeed, in some places, plants and animals are the most important factors
controlling variation in topography and thus patterns of habitats and hydrology
on the land surface. This work explores the role of biology in shaping the land
surface in Big Cypress National Preserve (BICY), a complex and beautiful mosaic
of cypress wetlands, pine uplands and deep water sloughs in southwest Florida.
BICY is a karst landscape, where limestone bedrock is present at the land
surface. While the landscape is almost perfectly flat, small wetland depressions
carved into the limestone rock are crucially important for storing water and
thus providing habitat for a wide array of plants and animals. The origin of
these wetland depressions is unknown. This research will determine if these
depressions, and their remarkably regular spacing on the landscape, are created
by biological processes that naturally occur in wetlands that accelerate the
rate at which limestone dissolves. This creates the tantalizing possibility that
the organisms populating these wetlands are slowly creating their own habitat by
initiating and expanding topographic depressions. The research team consists of
scientists across a variety of disciplines, including hydrologists, geologists,
biologists and modelers, creating the type of collaborative integration required
to answer these types of research questions. Combining satellite and airborne
data with detailed field measurements will allow the team to address how and how
fast these depressions form, what that means for regional water flow and water
quality, and how the topography and resulting patterns of habitats on the land
surface were created.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work contributes to an
understanding of how ecological and geological processes work together to shape
the land surface. The central idea that patterns on the earth's surface arise
spontaneously from interactions between plants and animals, on one hand, and
rocks and water on the other, is a reminder of the strong and sometimes
surprising links that exist in ecosystems. In this case, wetland ecosystems are
thought to change the shape of the land over thousands of years by dissolving
rock. This type of insight will contribute to understanding the origins of this
landscape, which supports a remarkable array of organisms and habitats. It will
also improve understanding of hydrologic characteristics, and the impact of
water movements on the greater South Florida system, including important
elements of the Everglades. Moreover, this work will help predict how ecosystem
and biological processes may change as this very low altitude landscape is
altered by sea-level rise. Finally, the impacts of this work extend beyond south
Florida because the project will contribute to an understanding of how karst
landscapes form (20% of the earth's land surface) and how small geographically-
isolated wetlands interact with their surroundings, a topic relevant to federal
wetland protections. A partnership with scientists within the National Park
Service has been established to help communicate the results of the work, and
the researchers will lead tours that allow the public to appreciate the
subtleties of this captivating landscape. The student participants will be
exposed to a wide variety of disciplines and approaches, which is integral to
training to address the complex questions and challenges society faces.