* 1354818
* TUES: The Impact of the National Science Foundation on Undergraduate Education - Symposia Highlighting Curricular Innovations.
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2014,12/31/2019
* Cindy Burkhardt, Radford University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Higgins
* 12/31/2019
* USD 42,272.00

In order to provide NSF-supported innovators in undergraduate STEM curriculum
development with an opportunities to disseminate their materials and outcomes,
principal investigators (PIs) of projects organize and convene symposia at the
Annual National Meeting of the American Chemical Society (ACS) in the Spring of
2015, 2016, and 2017 and at three regional ACS meetings or at the Biennial
Conference on Chemical Education during those same years. At the symposia
attendees are informed about a variety of NSF programs that promote
undergraduate education. The NSF has a tradition of supporting this symposium
and surveys have shown that in the past they have been well-attended. During
these meetings prospective PIs and practitioners are empowered to ask questions
and have awardees address their concerns in-person. Evidence suggests that these
interactions are responsible for propagating evidence-based curricular changes
at other institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At the National Meetings, the
symposia are comprised of two half-day sessions. In the first session, the
audience will hear from PIs who have been successfully funded from a variety of
NSF programs that focus on STEM undergraduate education. The second session
focuses on a theme that has emerging national impact and significance and for
which an evidence base is growing. Topics include (a) virtual laboratories, (b)
online instruction, (c) research-based upper-level chemistry laboratories, (d)
integration of advanced instrumentation into the curriculum, (e) non-traditional
topics relating to chemistry across the curriculum, and others. Symposia at ACS
regional meetings and the BCCE also involve the dissemination of project results
as well as information about NSF Programs. These abbreviated half-day sessions
serve to provide information to faculty who might find the expense of attending
a national meeting to be a challenge. Evaluation of each meeting is expected to
reveal that attendees plan to adapt curricular innovations, have a better
understanding of current evidence-based educational techniques, and have greater
awareness of NSF funding opportunities.