* 1354760
* Do neuropeptides shape alternative mating tactics and reproductive success through effects on memory?
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2019
* Alexander Ophir, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 07/31/2019
* USD 630,000.00

A clear understanding of the neural mechanisms that govern how memory influences
reproductive decisions will reveal much about the basic neurobiology that shapes
decision-making. Mating and reproductive decisions are among the most important
choices an individual will face. To this end, an individual must take stock of
the current state of the social context in which it finds itself. This includes
knowing with whom and where mating opportunities are to be found. Unfortunately,
the influence of social and spatial memory on how individuals in a population
tend to mate (e.g., with one or multiple partners, or a mating system) is often
ignored. Moreover, we know virtually nothing about the ways the brain modulates
these decisions or how memory and mate choice decisions are related. This
project will use prairie voles to investigate how expression of two
neuroendocrine systems known to be important in social / spatial memory and
monogamous reproductive decision making, namely, oxytocin and vasopressin,
modulate complex social behavior to shape reproductive choices.

The project will study reproductive choices in the prairie vole, a species that
can switch between monogamous and non-monogamous mating tactics, with the aims
to determine (1) whether or not mating decisions in natural conditions and
laboratory performance in memory tests relate to each other, and (2) how
oxytocin or vasopressin in the hippocampus and the retrosplenial cortex, regions
implicated in spatial and social cognition, shape these behaviors. The working
hypothesis is that nonapeptide neuromodulation governs socio-spatial memory,
which in turn, predisposes animals to succeed at either a monogamous or a non-
monogamous mating tactic. This hypothesis will be tested using a combination of
natural living conditions, behavioral assays to assess social and spatial
cognition, radio-tracking to monitor extent of home range and social
interactions, DNA sampling to assess mating tactic, radiography to measure
oxytocin and vasopressin 1A receptor density, and intra-hippocampal or
-retrosplenial delivery of slow-release receptor antisense oligonucleotides to
knock down oxytocin and vasopressin 1A receptors in these brain structures. In
the process of completing this project, students at all levels will be trained
with a broad range of skills that will prepare them to begin competitive careers
in biomedical research, medicine, or higher education and academics. The PI will
also continue his strong record of promoting research experiences and
professional development in students from underrepresented groups. It is
essential to understand the influences on behavior under simulated and natural
contexts if we are to know how complex behaviors are produced.