* 1354567
* Collaborative Research: RUI: Molecular mechanisms and physiological triggers underlying neuromodulator plasticity in a lobster pattern generator
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* Patsy Dickinson, Bowdoin College
* Standard Grant
* Sridhar Raghavachari
* 07/31/2018
* USD 430,000.00

The overarching goal of this project is to understand the processes that
underlie variability in behavior. Specifically, the project will focus on
variability in the responses of neuronal networks generating the activity that
controls rhythmic movements to one hormone. This project will utilize the
lobster cardiac neuromuscular system, a simple model for understanding this
phenomenon. In this system, some hearts respond to the hormone allatostatin-C
with increased contraction force, while others respond by decreasing contraction
force. The project is multi-disciplinary, using physiological, molecular and
biochemical approaches. Experiments will include recording changes in activity
of the lobster heart when exposed to the hormone, using molecular biological
techniques to determine the genes that contribute to the differential responses
to the hormone in different animals, and analyzing proteins within the heart to
determine how they differ among animals that respond differently to the hormone.
This project is a collaboration between researchers at Bowdoin College
(Brunswick, Maine) and the University of Hawaii at Manoa (Honolulu). It will
train undergraduates, including underrepresented minority students, at both
institutions in a wide variety of chemical, molecular and physiological
techniques. It will provide interdisciplinary training and will introduce
undergraduates to the importance of examining scientific questions from multiple
perspectives. The molecular components of the project will also provide
resources that can be used by other scientists to address additional issues in
lobster biology, including the origin and physiological consequences of shell
disease.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To determine the mechanisms and triggers that
underlie the variability in the responses of neuronal networks to modulators,
this project will examine a simple pattern generator, the lobster cardiac
ganglion. This project will combine transcriptomics and physiology to look for
differences in gene expression that correlate with differential responses to the
peptide hormone, allatostatin-C. At the same time, the project will ask whether
these differences may be triggered by changes related to the molt cycle. The
project, which will use Illumina sequencing, will assemble de novo
transcriptomes from lobster tissues. These transcriptomes will provide
references onto which RNA-Seq data from lobsters that respond differentially to
allatostatin-C in physiological experiments will be mapped to determine changes
in gene expression. The investigation will target specific genes and will use a
genome-wide assessment to look for additional changes. The project will also use
mass spectrometry to ask whether specific proteins show different post-
translational modifications in lobster hearts that respond differentially to the
neuropeptide.