* 1354985
* LEGACY EFFECTS AND FEEDBACKS IN THE INTERACTION BETWEEN AN INVASIVE SHRUB AND A DOMINANT NATIVE TREE
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2019
* Karen Haubensak, Northern Arizona University
* Continuing Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 05/31/2019
* USD 717,798.00

Vast effort and resources are spent to control invasive plants. It is typically
assumed that once these resources are spent and the invader is successfully
removed, the impact of that species on the community is also eliminated.
However, invasive species may change the environment in ways that persist long
after the species itself is gone. This is called a legacy effect. This project
will examine the legacy of a highly successful invasive shrub in the Pacific
Northwest, Scotch broom (Cytisus scoparius), that invades forest clearcuts and
inhibits forest regeneration efforts. Scotch broom leaves a complicated legacy
after its removal, primarily due to its ability to fix nitrogen: plant material
entering the soil contains both nitrogen and toxic defense compounds. This
legacy of complex soil chemistry changes can then directly impact the survival
and growth of Douglas-fir (Pseudotsuga menziesii), the dominant native tree that
is economically important in this region. Further, this legacy could indirectly
impact Douglas-fir by changing the soil biota closely associated with both
growth and disease of Douglas-fir trees. This project will take an integrated,
field-based approach to simultaneously quantify the Scotch broom legacy and its
interactive effects on soil biota and Douglas-fir. The project will focus on
beneficial soil organisms, called mycorrhizal fungi, which are suppressed in
Scotch broom-invaded soils. The project will also examine how the suppression of
these beneficial fungi may inadvertently increase soil-borne tree diseases, the
spread of which could further thwart Douglas-fir restoration. Most importantly,
this project will examine these dynamics in the context of time, asking: After
invasion, do soil chemistry and soil biota experience rapid shifts or do changes
accumulate slowly over time? How reversible are these changes? If soil-borne
fungi have long-lived spores and can disperse long distances, do these traits
help decrease the amount of time an invader's legacy persists, and thus
contribute to the recovery of ecosystems? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has
important implications for improving forestry practices in the Pacific
Northwest, where Scotch broom invasion causes major economic losses in the
forestry industry. The results will enhance the restoration potential of
Douglas-fir, a species that provides products from paper to Christmas trees and
is the focus of an economically and culturally important industry. The project
integrates research with education and training of undergraduates, graduate
students and post-doctoral researchers. Additionally, the project has a strong
outreach component involving foresters and land managers in the Pacific
Northwest. The principal investigators will organize annual meetings with
private and public stakeholders to share information in a collaborative
environment, fostering discussions about what efforts have been made, what has
worked and what has not.