* 1354842
* Collaborative Research: BCSP: BIOMAPS: The Hydrodynamics of Predator Sensing and Escape in Zebrafish
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Matthew McHenry, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 07/31/2019
* USD 446,556.00

Predation is a fundamental interaction between organisms that shapes community
structure and has a direct effect on fitness. This award will support studies on
the sensory and motor systems that determine a prey fish's survival. This will
be achieved through experimentation and mathematical models of sensory cues and
the 'fast start' escape maneuver of prey. The proposed research will (1) reveal
the dynamics that govern the sensory and motor systems of prey fish, (2)
establish zebrafish as a model for predator-prey interactions, and (3) enhance
integration of computational and experimental approaches in organismal
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will focus on larval zebrafish (Danio
rerio) in three lines of investigation. The flow stimuli that trigger and direct
the fast start will be studied experimentally by replicating a predator's
approach with a robotic predator. Analysis of how propulsion directs a fast-
start escape maneuver will be achieved by measuring the escape responses of
larvae in 3D and computationally modeling the hydrodynamics of propulsion. The
efficacy of flow sensing and fast start responses will be addressed by recording
the three-dimensional motion of predators and prey as they interact and by
modeling the sensory and motor systems of the prey under these conditions. In
addition to data from experiments, the investigators will advance the
quantitative tools of organismal biologists by (1) developing an on-line course
in biological computer programming in Matlab, (2) training graduate students in
computational modeling, (3) participating in programs that recruit minority
undergraduate researchers, and (4) developing analytical tools for the analysis
and modeling of animal motion. Results from the studies will be published in
peer-reviewed journals and shared through on-line data repositories (e.g.,
http://datadryad.org/).