* 1354814
* Social Context, Life History, and the Biology of Human Development
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2014,12/31/2017
* Beverly Strassmann, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 12/31/2017
* USD 198,891.00

The processes of growth and development are critical to understanding human
biological diversity, and as ongoing research is documenting, this must be
investigated in a biocultural framework that incorporates variation in social
context. This study will contribute to the understanding of human biology by
elucidating the developmental mechanisms that underlie variation in the life-
history parameters of three components of what is termed "age at maturity:" age
at puberty, menarche, and first birth. These mechanisms will be examined in the
context of the social environment for the children in the study, filling
critical gaps in our understanding of how different social contexts might
accelerate or delay important developmental milestones. The understanding of the
biological mechanisms involved in development has direct implications for public
health; early development is a risk factor for teenage pregnancy, breast cancer,
and obesity. In the United States, it is increasingly common for girls to reach
menarche at eight years of age, and these early maturers may be at risk for a
variety of adverse health outcomes that are costly--not only to individuals, but
also to society at large.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Prior research has explored the
role of adverse social environments, such as families with absent fathers, on
age at maturity, or the effects of early childhood obesity and body mass index
on development. This study innovates by simultaneously testing for an effect of
social context on development while controlling for body size and growth, and
testing for an effect of body size and growth while controlling for social
context. The research design has the advantage of being prospective and
longitudinal, with measurement of the growth and development of over 1200 boys
and girls from infancy to adulthood. These subjects are part of an ongoing,
prospective cohort study of the Dogon people of Mali. By focusing on this study
population, not only does a wealth of critical data become available, but the
potential for understanding basic biological mechanisms at the level of the
human species is greatly enhanced. Investigating developmental processes in a
population not impacted by confounding factors, such as ready access to high-
quality health care, facilitates detection of evolved biological mechanisms and
key aspects of the balancing of biological investments (i.e., what are termed
life-history trade-offs). A better understanding of these life history trade-
offs is vital to understanding age at maturity; thus, the study will increase
scientific knowledge of human biology, not just for the Dogon specifically, but
for Homo sapiens in general. In so doing, the project will offer critical
insights into adolescence, the important life stage in which an individual
transitions from childhood to adulthood.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; A U.S. graduate
student and a Malian university student will be mentored by the primary
investigator, collaborating on data analysis and manuscript preparation so as to
promote the education of the next generation of scientists. U.S. undergraduate
students also will contribute to the positive societal impact of the study
through the collaborative design of local infrastructure development at the
research site, while advancing their knowledge and training in civil
engineering. To foster collaboration with other researchers and to promote
public education in the U.S. and Mali, a bilingual website will be created. The
results should advance the science of human development in a wide array of
academic disciplines, including anthropology, psychology, biology, demography,
and public health.