* 1354549
* Regulation of extreme anoxia tolerance via microRNAs in embryos of the annual killifish Austrofundulus limnaeus
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2014,10/31/2019
* Jason Podrabsky, Portland State University
* Continuing Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 10/31/2019
* USD 809,191.00

Embryos of the annual killifish Austrofundulus limnaeus can survive for months
in the complete absence of oxygen (anoxia). This is especially amazing
considering that the embryos are composed primarily of brain and heart tissues,
tissues that in mammals are known to rely exclusively on the presence of oxygen
to support their metabolism. The unparalleled tolerance of anoxia exhibited by
embryos of A. limnaeus makes it an excellent model for these studies. While a
great deal is understood concerning the physiology of metabolic dormancy, the
master regulators of metabolic depression and factors that increase tolerance of
environmental stress during dormancy have to date eluded discovery. The work
outlined in this proposal uses modern DNA sequencing techniques to address the
following questions of fundamental importance to biology: (1) how are cellular
processes reversibly arrested during metabolic depression (2) how can the
mitochondrial genome control nuclear gene expression. Preliminary evidence
suggests that small regulatory RNA molecules (srRNAs), RNAs less than 25
nucleotides long that do not encode for proteins, may play a critical role in
regulating the cellular processes that support tolerance to anoxia in this
species. Further, it appears that a number of srRNAs are encoded in the
mitochondrial genome and have the potential to regulate the expression of
nuclear-encoded genes. In fact, these srRNAs may be responsible for
orchestrating the changes in metabolism and cell proliferation associated with
the ability to enter into a reversible state of dormancy that is required to
survive without oxygen. Next-generation DNA sequencing on the Illumina platform
will be used to profile and identify nearly all large (protein coding messenger
RNAs) and srRNAs that are actively expressed in embryos during normal
development and in response to anoxia. This technique will be applied to embryos
that differ substantially in their tolerance of anoxia, and will also be used to
identify srRNAs resident within mitochondria isolated from embryos under
normoxic and anoxic conditions. The subcellular localization of srRNAs encoded
by the mitochondrial genome during normoxia and anoxia will be described.
Bioinformatics analysis will be used to identify putative large RNA targets for
regulation by small mitochondrial RNAs. The ability of these mitochondrial
srRNAs to confer tolerance of anoxia will be tested in vivo by blocking their
action and then screening for changes in tolerance to anoxia. This work has the
potential to fundamentally redefine the role of the mitochondrial genome in
regulating the basic cellular stress response. The concept that mitochondrially-
derived small RNAs can control nuclear gene expression could transform our
understanding of basic eukaryotic cell biology. Never before has a direct
mechanism for mitochondrial control of nuclear gene expression been outlined,
despite many instances associated with diseases where mutations in the
mitochondrial genome are known to be associated with changes in nuclear gene
expression.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this work are manifold.
First, it will contribute to the training of a skilled work force that can apply
modern tools of biology and bioinformatics to interesting nonmodel systems. The
ability to apply the power of modern molecular and genomic-scale techniques to
questions of fundamental importance to biology and capitalize on the amazing
diversity of organismal form and function is going to transform our
understanding of biology. Second, this work has the potential to lead to novel
therapies for the treatment of heart attack and stroke in humans and other
mammals. Third, A. limnaeus embryos provide an excellent model for ecological
and evolutionary developmental biology labs. The PI will continue to develop
undergraduate teaching lab projects using these embryos to illustrate the
importance of environmental variation on developmental outcomes. These labs and
their results will be made available to the general public via the internet.
Finally, The PI will continue to participate in outreach educational efforts
with the American Killifish Association, a group of several thousand members
that are interested in killifish biology and conservation across the globe.