* 1354787
* RUI: ARE THE EFFECTS OF SIZE-STRUCTURE ON TROPHIC CASCADES  MEDIATED BY DEMOGRAPHIC FEEDBACKS?
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2014,06/30/2020
* Howard Whiteman, Murray State University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 06/30/2020
* USD 517,284.00

In this project, the investigators will address how size-structure (i.e.,
variance in the body size distribution) of predators alters effects of the
predators on prey assemblages and prey resources. They will further explore how
interactions among size classes (e.g., cannibalism and competition) influence
the development of size structure. Salamanders are the predators in the study.
This project will provide exceptional opportunities for undergraduate students
to learn the scientific method through the development and execution of
independent research projects. It will significantly build research capacity
among three undergraduate institutions in Kentucky, one of which is a minority-
serving institution. Students will gain first-hand experience in designing and
implementing experiments, in analyzing and managing data, and in communicating
science to diverse public audiences. Each of these institutions lacks
independent resources and programs to engage students in research. This project
serves the Nation's interests by providing resources needed to train students in
complex problem solving through rigorous experimental
design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous research suggests that size structure of
top predators can significantly influence trophic interactions, and may explain
observed variation in the strength of trophic cascades, yet few empirical
studies have focused on these questions. This project will combine experiments
and field studies to test hypotheses regarding the interaction of predator size
structure, density, and cannibalism, the resulting community dynamics, and the
demographic feedback mechanisms thought to generate variation in size structure.
Predators that vary in size can exhibit both consumptive effects, through
cannibalism, and non-consumptive effects on the survival of their offspring.
They also influence the abundance of other predators and competitors. When taken
together, these diverse effects could modify entire food webs, ultimately
altering the size structure of future predator populations and thus future
trophic cascades. Undergraduate students will work in teams to test the diverse
mechanisms proposed to generate variation in size structure using a series of
mesocosm experiments and field studies. Experiments and field observations will
quantify the impact of predator size structure on trophic cascades and determine
how demographic feedbacks affect annual variation in predator size structure.
Results will provide new insight into how the loss or recovery of top predators
can affect ecosystems, with implications for conservation and management.
Students will participate in science education activities to engage
undergraduate non-science majors and K-12 students and contribute to an
interactive learning module to extend the impacts of this project to students
and citizens throughout the nation and globe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
is supported by NSF's Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive Research.