* 1354932
* Identification of mechanisms for motor pattern selection during multimodal sensory integration.
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* Wolfgang Stein, Board of Trustees of Illinois State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sridhar Raghavachari
* 07/31/2018
* USD 510,000.00

Central pattern generators are networks or individual nerve cells in animals and
humans that govern vital functions of the body, including breathing, swallowing
and chewing. Their activity is robust, but switches between different states
when body or environmental conditions change. Such switches can be achieved by
control neurons that release neuromodulators - chemical substances that
dramatically alter network behavior. Control neurons collect information from
all senses, but their conjoint activity and how their activity leads to
appropriate behavioral responses is unknown. This proposal asks how sensory
information is encoded by these nerve cells and how appropriate behavioral
responses are selected. The hypothesis that appropriate behavioral responses are
encoded in the population activity of control neurons will be tested in the
stomatogastric nervous system of crabs, a powerful model system with unique
access to neurons. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will use a combination
of high-end optical imaging and intracellular electrophysiology to measure and
manipulate most control neurons while they select the appropriate behaviors
during sensory stimulation. Expected results are that the encoding of sensory
stimuli differs between different sensory inputs and that these differences are
necessary and sufficient to cause switches in behavior. The proposed research
provides comprehensive training for students at different stages of their
careers (undergraduate, graduate and postdoc) and teaches a variety of
established and recently developed scientific techniques. It will open new lines
of research in systems where the investigation of control networks is not
feasible due to the sheer number of neurons. Revealing the mechanisms of
behavioral selection is crucial to our understanding of nervous system function
and, ultimately, a prerequisite for the treatment of sensory disorders such as
autism and learning disabilities. This project will also instruct engineers
about ways of decision making without dedicated pathways and may thus lead to
new and efficient neural networks in machines and robots.