* 1354935
* NF-kappaB in Cnidarian Development
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2021
* Thomas Gilmore, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Klein
* 07/31/2021
* USD 895,000.00

The conserved NF-&#954;B transcription factor signal transduction pathway
controls innate immune responses in a variety of organisms, but also controls
developmental cell and tissue fates in certain invertebrate and vertebrate
systems. NF-&#954;B carries out its biological effects by controlling the
expression of genes that program developmental fate. This research will
investigate how NF-&#954;B functions in basal marine animals. The results of the
proposed research will lead to a better understanding of the evolutionary
underpinnings of a key molecular pathway (NF-&#954;B) that is used by a variety
of organisms for immunity, development and stress responses. It will also
provide an understanding of how such signaling pathways can evolve and adapt to
direct novel biological outcomes through development or in response to
environmental changes. The planned studies will have four major broader impacts
for society. First, the award will support interdisciplinary training in cell
and molecular biology, evolutionary biology, genomics, computational biology,
and developmental biology to students at the PhD, Masters and undergraduate
levels, including students from groups underrepresented in science. Such
training will enhance the scientific competence of the STEM field workforce.
Results form the project will augment heavily utilized Internet databases that
serve a broad research community. The investigators will also develop additional
transcriptomic and genomic resources that will be valuable for other researchers
studying invertebrate animal. Finally, data from these studies will contribute
to ongoing marine conservation and management efforts by identifying molecular
mechanisms underlying basal marine organism development and adaptation. Such
information may better enable scientists to assess biological effects of
environmental threats impacting indicator species in key coastal habitats, such
as estuaries inhabited by the studied model organism, the sea anemone
Nematostella vectensis.

This award supports interdisciplinary research involving an invertebrate model
organism, the sea anemone Nematostella vectensis (Nv), in comparative
developmental and molecular studies. The research will provide insights into the
function of the NF-&#954;B signaling pathway in cnidarian development and the
biological significance of a functional polymorphism in NF-&#954;B that exists
in wild populations of Nv. Four major experimental aims will be accomplished.
(1) To elucidate upstream NF-&#954;B signaling pathways, additional signaling
proteins will be characterized in Nv using molecular, cellular, and whole animal
assays. For example, the tissue and developmental expression patterns of
I&#954;B Kinase and Toll-like Receptor proteins will be determined using
immunohistochemistry. (2) The derived role of NF-&#954;B in the development of a
phylum-specific cell type, the cnidocyte, will be investigated using combined
molecular and biological approaches. (3) Target genes of NF-&#954;B that play
roles in developmental cell fate or other physiological processes will be
computationally predicted and experimentally validated. (4) The functional and
biological consequences of polymorphisms in the NF-&#954;B protein of Nv will be
determined using a protein DNA binding-site microarray technology, as well as
biological analyses. Results from the studies will be made available through
peer-reviewed scientific publications, presentations at meetings, and through
relevant WWW-sites, including: StellaBase (stellabase.org); The Nematostella Web
Resource (nematostella.org); and NF-&#954;B Transcription Factors (www.nf-
kb.org).