* 1354638
* Collaborative Research:  Urban Adaptation and its Role in the Success of Biological Invasion in Anolis Lizards
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2014,11/30/2015
* Daniel Warner, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 11/30/2015
* USD 262,426.00

Urban areas are expanding rapidly around the globe, resulting in drastic changes
to the environment compared to natural landscapes: buildings and parking lots
replace natural vegetation in cities. The urban environment, which encompasses a
major portion of the US, directly affects the ecology and evolution of species,
but little research has been conducted to understand the intensity and scope of
these effects. Another critical dimension of global change is biological
invasions, which threaten biodiversity worldwide. This project connects two
important dimensions of global change to test a novel hypothesis that urban
adaptation may increase the success of biological invasions, which often have
dramatic ecological and economic effects on the invaded habitats. This award
will also support the STEM training of a postdoctoral researcher and numerous
graduate and undergraduate students. Curriculum materials will be developed for
K-12 education and outreach efforts will target the urban areas where this
research will be conducted and where the research team members live.

The way organisms interact with their environment is expected to drive intense
natural selection on their morphology and behavior. This work will study the
crested anole lizard, which is native to Puerto Rico but established via human-
mediated introductions in several places outside its natural range. This
research will use field and laboratory studies to first test the hypothesis that
a widespread lizard species is adapted behaviorally, morphologically, and
physiologically to urbanization. Second, the study will test if adaptation
occurs at multiple life history stages, including embryos and juveniles. Lastly,
the study will investigate a novel idea in invasion biology that adaptation to
urban environments may predispose populations to become successful invaders of
other urban areas, using molecular data to identify source populations. Detailed
portions of the research will estimate thermal tolerance and examine behavioral
thermoregulation in different habitats, use SNPs to identify the source
population of the invaders, and examine habitat influence on development in the
field. This research will help to establish whether or not adaptation to urban
areas can facilitate the process of biological invasion, and will likely lead to
conclusions that can be generalized across other urban tolerant species and
biological invasions.