* 1354264
* OPUS: Predicting species' responses to environmental change
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2017
* Richard Gomulkiewicz, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 05/31/2017
* USD 150,001.00

Individuals of a species can respond to changes in their environment by making
adjustments in, for example, their development, metabolism, appearance, or
behavior. Individuals of mobile species can also move to other locations with
more suitable surroundings. Populations of the same species can respond to the
same environmental changes by growing or shrinking in abundance, or by evolving
adaptively if individuals vary genetically. It is important to consider all
these possibilities simultaneously when trying to understand how species have
responded to historical environmental changes and to forecast their potential
responses to future changes. The objective of this project is to develop a
mathematically-based theoretical framework combining all these biological
processes that could be used along with data from field and laboratory studies
to deduce past reactions and predict future responses of species to changed
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will result in a guidebook with
an associated freely-available package of computer programming scripts that
empirical researchers can use to design efficient and effective experimental or
observational studies about how species respond to environmental change. These
data and models will, in turn, provide wildlife managers, policy makers, and
conservation biologists with process-based quantitative tools to forecast
responses of species of interest to anticipated environmental changes. In
addition, a new graduate course will be developed based on the material in the
proposed book. The creation of illustrative examples for the guidebook based on
an extensive marmot dataset will contribute to graduate training and foster new
collaborations with researchers in the United States and
abroad.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is being made jointly by three programs:
1) Evolutionary Processes in the Division of Environmental Biology (BIO
Directorate), 2) Population and Community Ecology in the Division of
Environmental Biology (BIO Directorate), and 3) Mathematical Biology in the
Division of Mathematical Sciences (MPS Directorate).