* 1354381
* Networking Strategies used by Bats to Improve Social Sonar
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2019
* Michael Smotherman, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Mabry
* 07/31/2019
* USD 660,000.00

The biosonar behavior of echolocating bats provides an example of how natural
and artificial active sensing systems may be optimized to meet rapidly changing
social and environmental conditions. Bats and artificial sonar, radar and
communication systems all face a similar suite of problems arising from mutual
interference. Explaining how bats minimize interfering with one other's sonar
while flying in dense swarms or within noisy crowded roosts may help improve a
wide range of artificial sensing and wireless communications systems. Bats are
highly social and their exceptional resilience to jamming by conspecifics far
exceeds the strategies currently employed in artificial systems. This proposal
will investigate how groups of bats manage this by applying recent advances in
computer networking to sonar/radar theory. The experiments outlined will
characterize the behavioral strategies used by bats to improve their signaling
efficiency when echolocating in groups of different sizes and across tasks of
varying navigational demands. Computer simulations will be used to identify
optimum algorithm parameters and explore how these behavioral strategies
manifest across a wider range biosonar conditions. By deciphering the behavioral
algorithms by which bats can cooperatively share the same acoustic space this
proposal may lead to better and more efficient strategies for optimizing
artificial communications network usage to support an increasingly information-
based economy. This proposal will also offer unique exposure, training and
educational opportunities for STEM students interested in exploring biological
systems as a source of inspiration for artificial systems. In partnership with
local science teachers, this proposal creates an inquiry-based dual language
(Spanish/English) teaching website that will offer access for 5th/6th grade
science classes to remotely interact with live animals.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Interference problems arise in artificial systems such as
sonar and radar, wireless communications and computer network when many users
attempt to transmit simultaneously over a single shared channel. Wireless
communications networks partially mitigate this by employing protocols
constraining user transmission rates during periods of high channel traffic to
minimize interference rates between users. This proposal tests the hypothesis
that echolocating bats adapt their sonar pulse emission rates to optimize sonar
performance in social situations following protocols similar and applicable to
international standards in wireless communications systems. The proposal uses a
combination of behavioral studies with bats in the lab and computer simulations
to decode the bat's retransmission delay algorithm. First, trained bats are
flown alone and in small groups of 2-5 through a sensor maze to quantify the
bats' navigational performance and measure whether they systematically change
pulse emission rates when performing the same task in a social context.
Secondly, bats will be flown through the maze in the presence of artificial
acoustic stimuli mimicking the sounds of other bats passing through the maze to
test whether bats can realize a net improvement in sonar performance by
decreasing their own pulse emission rates proportional to population density,
counterintuitively reaping a net increase in information flow by emitting fewer
pulses. Computational models of the behavioral algorithm will be developed to
simulate the behavior, establish optimal parameters and precisely quantify its
benefits to sonar performance in social contexts. The bat's sonar algorithms
will be made available through scientific journals and Matlab-based biosonar
simulation tools developed for the project will be made freely available via
multiple sources on the Internet.