* 1354414
* LTREB Renewal: Woody seedling dynamics, climate, and species coexistence in a wet tropical forest
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2014,02/28/2022
* Corine Vriesendorp, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kari Segraves
* 02/28/2022
* USD 450,000.00

Understanding the factors that govern the abundance and number of tree species
in species-diverse wet tropical forests remains a major challenge in ecology.
Complicating this challenge is the knowledge that tropical forests are expected
to change as they become warmer and as rainfall patterns change. This long-term
study of tropical forest biodiversity tackles this challenge by focusing on the
important phases of a tree's life, including seed and seedling production by
mature trees, the growth and survival of those seedlings, and the growth and
survival of mature trees. The project extends a 13-year record of seedling and
mature tree surveys in five forest stands in Costa Rica, with the goal of
developing models of critical aspects of forest regeneration - seedling
production, dispersal, growth, and survival - in response to light, soil
nutrients, rainfall, and temperature. Tree life cycles are typically long, some
species reproduce only once every 12 or more years, and many trees live for
hundreds of years. The longer-term data collected as part of this study are
therefore essential to capture a greater part of the tree life cycle and to span
variation in weather conditions. The data and models resulting from the study
will identify major mechanisms of species co-existence, helping to explain the
unusually high diversity in tropical forests.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Improved
understanding of the factors that govern the abundance of tree species will aid
in predicting forest responses to environmental changes, which is critical to
timber production, wildlife habitat, and forest carbon storage. Results will
also improve predictions of how some of the most diverse communities on the
plant respond to warmer temperatures, reduced rainfall and increasing deposition
of chemical pollutants. The project will educate and train students, make
valuable long-term data publicly available, and promote science education of the
general public through activities at Science Festivals and a website.