* 1354434
* Dissection of subcellular sites of NLR function during immune signaling
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2014,04/30/2019
* Savithramma Dinesh-Kumar, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Brad Day
* 04/30/2019
* USD 763,962.00

Resistance proteins (R-proteins) are key players in a plant's defensive
repertoire against pathogenic microbes. R-proteins act as sentinels that
recognize incursion by a pathogen and initiate responses to limit the extent of
infection. Although we understand in some detail the nature of the initial
recognition event, little is known about how R-proteins signal to the plant that
defenses need to be deployed. This project follows the intriguing observation
that at least some R-proteins, once activated by a pathogen, interact with other
proteins to stimulate enhanced expression of genes required to mount an
effective immune response. The research to be carried out seeks to enhance our
understanding of the molecular mechanisms that mediate these events. The results
are likely to contribute new strategies for developing crop varieties that are
resistant to economically significant plant diseases. The project will provide
training for a postdoctoral researcher and a graduate student. Undergraduate
students from under-represented minorities and economically disadvantaged
students from the Biology Undergraduate Scholars Program (BUSP) will be trained.
The project will also teach and train a high school student from Young Scholar
Program (YSP) at UC Davis. The project will organize a science field trip for
5th grade students from an Elementary School to UC Davis.

In plants and animals, the Nucleotide-binding domain and Leucine-rich Repeat
(NLR) class of intracellular immune receptors function in defense against
pathogens. Despite extensive research, post-pathogen recognition events leading
to NLR activation and induction of defense signaling remain elusive. The
investigators recent results indicate that the plant NLR N associates with the
SPL6 protein in the nucleus to activate successful immune response against
Tobacco Mosaic Virus (TMV). SPL6 is also required for NLR RPS4-mediated defense
against Pseudomonas syringae bacteria expressing AvrRps4 effector. Therefore,
SPL6 appears to be a conserved nuclear component that acts as a bridge between
an activated NLR and induction of defense genes. In this project, the
investigators will use a combination of genetic, molecular, biochemical,
genomics, proteomics, and cell biology based approaches to understand the
subcellular dynamics of NLRs during immune signaling. Precise function of SPL6
during immune signaling will be determined by identification and
characterization of direct target genes that are regulated by SPL6. Also SPL6
interacting proteins will be identified and characterized. Results from the
project will advance the field of immunity by providing mechanistic insights
into NLRs function especially with respect to their spatial distribution and
dynamics during defense. Knowledge gained will improve our understanding of
plant immunity, help harness it to aid in the development of pathogen resistant
crops and promote food security.