* 1354626
* EAGER: Big Data Consulting Services and Training Center
* CSE,OAC
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Thiab Taha, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Robert Chadduck
* 08/31/2016
* USD 34,966.00

Abstract

This Project will support the establishment of a Big Data Consulting Services
and Training Center at the University of Georgia (UGA). The goal of this center
is to provide faculty and students with basic consultation and training services
in order to help them more efficiently meet their data collection, processing,
storage, access, sharing, curation, and publications needs. The project proposes
to focus on three areas: 1) the use of high performance computing; 2) data
management; and 3) cross-disciplinary coordination. Many of the elements are
already in place at UGA to support data intensive research. For example, the
Georgia Advanced Computing Resource Center (GACRC) and the CUDA Teaching Center
already offer resources and some training on the use of high performance
computing; the UGA Libraries offer services to help researchers write data
management plans; and there are a variety of campus-wide and national resources
that researchers can use for their data generation, analysis, and management
needs. However, currently there is no clearinghouse or coordinating organization
to which any researcher on campus can turn into in order to best incorporate
data-intensive approaches into their research. To meet these needs, the project
plans to: Form a campus-wide committee comprised of faculty, administrators,
information technology (IT) staff, librarians, and students. Survey the campus
in order to get a better understanding of data management needs. Visit with
individuals who are working with data that are large, long-term, and/or
structurally complex to learn about their needs in more detail and identify the
campus and national resources that are available for big data users. The project
will then develop a set of web resources that can serve as both a central
resource for the campus and a starting point for further efforts to enhance
UGA's cyberinfrastructure capabilities. Finally, the project will continue to
conduct the popular university-wide "big data" events under the auspices of the
center to aid in communicating, coordinating, and disseminating activity around
data-intensive research.