* 1354213
* Collaborative Research: RUI: Evaluating Form-Function-Fitness Relationships in Polyphenic Bluegill
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2014,03/31/2020
* David Ellerby, La Sierra University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 03/31/2020
* USD 162,660.00

Locomotion and feeding are essential behaviors for the survival and reproductive
fitness of most animals. However, little is understood about why some
individuals within a population outperform others and are better suited to their
habitat. Populations of bluegill sunfish often diverge into two different body
forms based on their habitat: a deeper-bodied shallow water form or a
streamlined deep water form. This variation creates an ideal system for
investigating the relationships between form, function and adaptation to
habitat. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will integrate studies of behavior
in the field, external and internal morphology and muscle physiology, energy
metabolism, swimming performance, feeding mechanics and fitness measurements in
order to quantify variation in swimming and feeding performance within a single
population of bluegill from pelagic and littoral habitats. Results from this
research will provide unprecedented insight into the complex interrelationships
of body form, swimming and feeding performance and fitness in fish. Moreover,
this research will provide an experimental and analytical framework that could
be applied to any animal system. This proposal is a collaborative effort among
three liberal arts institutions, therefore an important component of the project
will be the mentoring of a postdoctoral researcher and the training of
undergraduates, a high proportion of whom will continue their education in
graduate or professional schools, increasing the participation of
underrepresented groups in the sciences. The research will be implemented in an
outreach program aimed to introduce basic concepts of biomechanics and
physiology to underrepresented K-12 students at neighboring schools.