* 1354668
* WORKSHOP: Effective Development in Fragile States; University of California, San Diego, June 2015
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Eli Berman, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2016
* USD 49,998.00

Researchers involved in the Empirical Studies of Conflict Project are engaging
in intellectual arbitrage, applying methods with a long history of succes in
analyzing non-violent social and political interactions to environments
suffering violent interactions. A variety of theoretic models are used to
generate predictions, which are then tested in a variety of ways. With regards
to theoretical perspecitves, the researchers encompass those who use game
theory, agent base modelling, sociological, and psychological approaches. With
regards to methodological approaches, the researchers use econometric approaches
using observational data, randomized-controlled trials, including lab and field
experiments, and indepth case studies. By interacting with scholars from a
variety of backgrounds as well as policy-makers, these researchers are able to
push the frontier of their respective fields and challenge common "wisdom" in
this area. For example, they were able to show that modest, targeted aid
projects in Irag were more effective in reducing violence than larger programs.
Likewise, they have shown that poor individuals in certain countries tend to be
more negative towards non-state groups than their middle-class peers. This
workshop will allow for continued innovations in this
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop will addresses issues that are central
to national policies on terrorism, insurgency, political instability, and
international development. By addressing both the causes of these factors as
well as examining the success or failure of current policies, the researchers
will provide key input to policy-makeers who spend billions of tax dollars on
aid interventions, military assistance, and military
interventions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent advances in substate conflict
demonstrate the value of applying advanced theoretical and empirical methods of
political economy to this area of study. During the two-day workshop economists
and political scientists who possess these skills will review preliminary
findings, discuss methodological challenges, and share best practices. In
addition, these junior and senior scholars will interact with promising graduate
students as well experts from the U.S. military, USAID, World Bank, NGO's, and
the tech-industry. This interdisciplinary, cross-boundary meeting will spark
collaborative projects, bridge different research methods, expose students to
new research, train emerging scholars, and expose practioners to research-based
techniques. This will allow researchers and others to provide policy-makers with
prescriptions in dealing with conflict in fragile states.