* 1354289
* Collaborative Research: A Functional Perspective on Adaptive Radiation: Explaining Differences in the Adaptive Radiations of Mainland and Island Anolis Lizards
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2014,08/31/2018
* Thomas Roberts, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Emily Carrington
* 08/31/2018
* USD 346,254.00

Adaptive radiation, in which a clade diversifies from an ancestral form to
produce descendants adapted to utilize a wide variety of ecological niches, has
become a topic of great recent interest. The evolutionary radiation of Anolis
lizards in the Caribbean has become a textbook case study of adaptive radiation,
demonstrating that independent radiations can converge on very similar adaptive
traits. This project expands this work to ask why in some cases evolutionary
diversification yields very different results. On each island in the Greater
Antilles, evolutionary radiation has occurred, producing species specialized to
use different parts of the habitat (e.g., twigs, grass, canopy). Amazingly,
evolution has occurred independently on each island, producing the same set of
habitat specialists. Detailed analysis has indicated that strong relationships
exist among species between anatomy and habitat use. Long-legged species occur
on broad surfaces, for example, and more arboreal species have better developed
toepads. Functional studies have explained these relationships by determining
the relationship between morphology and functional performance capabilities, on
one hand, and between performance abilities and habitat use and behavior, on the
other. Anolis has also radiated widely in mainland Central and South America.
Although less studied, these lizards have clearly evolved in different ways.
Mainland anoles are as diverse among themselves as are island anoles, but the
mainland species differ anatomically from the islands species. Most strikingly,
the relationship between anatomy and habitat use differs fundamentally between
mainland and island anoles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs will investigate
whether differences in the anatomy~ecology relationship result because the
relationship between functional capabilities and ecology differ or because the
relationship between anatomy and functional capabilities differs (or both). In
addition, the PIs will seek explanations for the variation in
anatomy~performance relationships between island and mainland lizards, focusing
on the physiological properties of muscles. Jointly the data collected to
address these goals will enable the PIs to address the question of why mainland
anoles have radiated in fundamentally different ways than island anoles.
Undergraduate students, including women and individuals from underrepresented
groups, a postdoctoral fellow and foreign collaborators will receive unique
interdisciplinary training. The PIs will work with the Harvard Museum of Natural
History to develop an exhibit on Anolis as a model system for understanding how
evolution works.