* 1354791
* SG: ARTS: Toward a monographic treatment of Calyceraceae: fieldwork, phylogeny, and character evolution
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2020
* Raul Pozner, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Ingram
* 05/31/2020
* USD 146,851.00

The foundation of comparative biology rests on the investigation of organismal
similarities and differences that are generated through evolutionary processes.
One important application of the comparative method in the study of biodiversity
is the comparison of sister lineages, groups which are each other's closest
relative, that have undergone very different evolutionary histories. By
comparing the fates of these lineages, scientists are able to understand why
some are successful and others are not. A prominent example is the sunflower
family, the Asteraceae, and its less well-known sister family, the Calyceraceae.
The Asteraceae has been one of the most successful plant families with over
20,000 species spread throughout the world, including many economically
important plants, such as sunflowers, daises, lettuce, artichokes and
dandelions. The evolution of the Calyceraceae on the other hand has resulted in
only 56 species, all found in southern South America. Despite the large number
of species, Asteraceae researchers are developing an understanding of the
family?s evolutionary trajectory and traits, however little is known about the
Calyceraceae. This research project will develop an understanding of what the
common ancestor of these two families was like. This will allow a careful
analysis of which changes allowed the Asteraceae to succeed in generating great
diversity, including developing economically important traits, and which
inhibited Calyceraceae diversification. This project will foster interactions
among scientists, graduate, and undergraduate students in two countries, thus
enhancing international collaboration and cultural awareness.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Field work will be undertaken in collaboration with
researchers in Argentina to collect the 56 species of the Calyceraceae. This
material will be used to generate a molecular phylogeny and a morphological
trait matrix. Comparative DNA sequencing of both chloroplast and nuclear genes
will be undertaken to infer phylogenetic relationships in the family.
Additionally a morphological trait matrix, of important flower and fruit
characteristics, will be generated and analyzed in conjunction with the
phylogeny to study the evolution of character states in the Calyceraceae. This
data on the Calyceraceae will complement the knowledge already available for the
Asteraceae allowing for addressing powerful comparative biology questions. What
are the phylogenetic relationships among all species of Calyceraceae? What are
the ancestral floral and fruit character traits states in Calyceraceae and how
do these relate to those in the Asteraceae? The final products of the research
include bilingual taxonomic revision, including dichotomous and polyclave keys,
which will be made available in both print and electronic versions. To increase
participation by underrepresented groups, students will be recruited via Brigham
Young University's Multicultural Student Center. Guest presentations and lab
exercises covering state-core competencies will be developed with two area high
school instructors. A rotating display will also be developed, using age-
appropriate materials, for the BYU Life Science Museum, which is heavily visited
by K-12 students.