* 1354358
* Genetic Influences on Parental Care and Parent-Offspring Interactions
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Allen Moore, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 08/31/2018
* USD 635,000.00

Understanding the mechanism that regulated social behavior has implications
across biology and from basic research to health related concerns. In mammals
there is larger body of study on the critical role of the peptide oxytocin in
the formation of social recognition and bonds. Here the researchers proposes to
examine the insect equivalent, inotocin, to determine if it plays the same role
in stimulate parenting and parent-offspring interactions in the subsocial
beetle, Nicrophorus vespilloides. This insect has elaborate parental care,
including direct regurgitation of food to begging babies, by both males and
females. The genome of this beetle has recently been sequenced, and this
provides the tools to identify genes that are predicted to play a role in social
tolerance, parenting, and pair bonds. The proposed research tests three ideas:
1) genetic pathways can be predicted; 2) sex differences in parenting reflect
turning on and off of different genes in the two sexes; 3) the same genes
influence social interactions in both parents and their offspring. This research
will lead to a greater understanding of the genetics underpinning difference in
parenting and how genetics influences social interactions. Developing insect
systems to understand genetic influences on social behavior can help identify of
genetic problems may lead to asocial behavior, and provide a way to test
possible solutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research makes use of candidate
gene screens, transcriptomics, and pharmacological manipulations to examine the
extent to which genetic influences on social behavior can be and are common
across species. A second goal is to examine how sex differences in parenting
arise. Finally, if time and resources allow, the extent that social exchanges,
such as parent-offspring interactions, involve pleiotropy will be examined.
Genes are predicted based on known functions in pathways that are predicted to
have been coopted behaviors involved in the evolution of parental care. For
example, parenting is predicted to involve a change in mating, aggression and
feeding and so genes with known functions in these pathways should also be
involved in parenting. This further suggests that genes involved in parenting
will be taxonomically independent. Gene expression patterns will be examined in
neural tissue from individuals that are not yet parenting, actively parenting
beetles, and those that have completed parenting. Patterns of expression will be
evaluated with qRT-PCR. Confirmation of the function of genes with significant
changes in expression will involve either pharmacological manipulations or RNAi.
Sex differences in parenting have been identified with transcrioptomic studies,
and these will be verified using qRT-PCR. Gene expression in larvae that are
begging and receiving parenting will be examined to test the hypothesis that the
same genes involved in parenting are involved in soliciting parenting. In
addition to testing these hypotheses, this research provides novel genetic
resources for the research community: It also identifies genetic influences on
social interactions in a novel context, examining the generality of function of
genes influencing social interactions. Finally, this research facilitates
comparisons between organisms with increasingly complex parental care and social
behavior. In terms of broader impacts, the research will focus on developing
human resources of both undergraduate and postgraduate researchers, and develop
international collaborations involving students at all stages.