* 1354156
* OPUS:  Serpentine Perspectives on the Evolution of Predator-prey Relationships
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2017
* Harry Greene, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 06/30/2017
* USD 148,085.00

Snakes represent a major vertebrate radiation, with more than 3,400 species
occupying diverse habitats on all major non-polar landmasses. Unusual feeding
adaptations that allow these animals to consume over 100% of their body weight
in a single meal have been critical in generating snake biodiversity. Snakes can
rapidly increase the size of their digestive tracts and hearts, and have evolved
injectable venoms that immobilize and digest their prey, however we lack
detailed analyses of diet for even many widespread, common species. This project
will gather and synthesize ~7500 diet records on 66 species in eight major
lineages, and then analyze seasonal, size-related, and geographic variation in
each species' diet. Statistical comparisons will then be used to infer
evolutionary and ecological diet patterns among species, as well as to explore
potential biomedical and conservation implications. The analysis will lead to a
synthesis in a scholarly volume, Predator-prey Relationships: a Serpentine
Perspective, to be submitted to a university press. The data will be made
available to researchers and the general public to stimulate further research on
the evolutionary ecology of snakes and predator-prey relationships.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The organization and synthesis of these data will create
valuable resources for the research community and will have the potential to
expand scientific knowledge of predator-prey relationships over space and time.
Both the published synthesis and the data will serve as benchmarks against which
snake diets can be understood in the context of global climate change, shifts in
species ranges, and planning management regimes. The book and archived data will
be of interest not only to evolutionary ecologists and conservationists, but
also to zookeepers, herpetoculturists, and interested lay naturalists. This
project will contribute to the training of two undergraduates and will include
public outreach presentations by the investigator.