* 1354754
* SG: Evolutionary lag and the effects of clonal structure
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2014,03/31/2019
* Maria Orive, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 03/31/2019
* USD 149,022.00

In rapidly changing environments, organisms must constantly evolve to maintain
the ability to survive and reproduce. Rapid environmental change may happen in
many ways, such as the emergence of new pathogens and diseases, invasion by
competing species, and shifts in temperature or other climatic conditions.
Evolution, however, happens much more slowly because genetic mutations are rare
and it takes many generations for favorable mutations to become common. This
time delay results in a phenomenon called evolutionary lag, which is the
difference between a population's ability to survive and reproduce currently and
its ability to do so once favorable mutations have become common. This research
will examine whether evolutionary lag is influenced by an organism's life
history, i.e., how the organism lives and reproduces. The mathematical and
computer simulation models developed by this research will generate testable
hypotheses about how life history affects evolutionary lag. Models like those
created in this project are crucial for understanding and predicting patterns of
evolution and extinction under changing conditions. This understanding can then
be used to guide and prioritize conservation efforts. The project is also
important because increased mathematical literacy and a better understanding of
the linkages between the biological sciences, mathematics, and statistics have
been identified as key concerns for both graduate and undergraduate education.
Students participating in this work will benefit from a research experience that
closely integrates evolutionary biology and mathematics. Recruitment will focus
on the involvement of traditionally underrepresented groups and will utilize
existing university infrastructure for increasing diversity in scientific
training. As part of the outreach efforts of this research, a short video
presentation on the interface of biology and mathematics will be developed.