* 1354187
* Collaborative Research: Fat metabolism and oxidative stress in migratory birds
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Scott McWilliams, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 08/31/2019
* USD 466,743.00

A fundamental aspect of organism-environment interactions is understanding how
different physiological and biochemical processes are integrated across
different levels of biological organization (molecular, cellular and whole-
organism) to support an organism's performance in its natural environment.
Migratory birds are excellent model systems for investigating such integrative
questions because migratory birds are impressive endurance athletes that use
primarily fats to fuel their flights, and diet strongly influences fatty acid
composition of stored fat that in turn affects whole-animal energetics during
exercise. Reliance on fatty acid oxidation to fuel high-intensity endurance
exercise in birds is remarkable in part because it increases oxidative stress
which must be dealt with by the bird's antioxidant defense system. In fact,
human health requires a ready supply of dietary antioxidants to combat the free
radicals produced as part of normal metabolism, and much contemporary medical
research is focused on understanding how dietary antioxidants promote human
health. The primary goals of the two proposed research projects are to
experimentally determine how certain essential fatty acids stimulate fat
metabolism in exercising birds, how the antioxidant defense system of birds
responds to the increased oxidative stress associated with exercise, and how
this interaction between fat metabolism and antioxidant defenses depends on
changes in seasonal demands during fall and spring migration.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research builds on the successful
collaborative research and teaching programs at a primarily undergraduate
(Sacred Heart University) and R1 research (University of Rhode Island)
institution. The proposed research will allow URI graduate students to learn
fatty acid analysis at SHU, and SHU undergraduates will help URI researchers
with field work, captive bird studies, and laboratory analyses for measuring
plasma metabolites as indicators of health in wild birds. The two PIs will
continue their tradition of training undergraduate and graduate students by
utilizing URI's enhancing diversity initiatives and SHU's collaborative with the
inner-city Bridgeport (CT) public school system. The proposed research will also
strengthen established collaborations with biologists in southern New England
working for NGOs such as The Nature Conservancy, Audubon, and local land trusts
as well as international collaborations (jointly supported by NSF International
Science and Engineering (ISE) Section) with colleagues at the Advance Facility
for Avian Research, University of Western Ontario, and Max Plank Institute for
Ornithology, Germany. Currently, there is much public interest in dietary
antioxidants and how they promote human health. Migratory birds offer an
interesting model system for studying the role of dietary antioxidants and fats
on fat metabolism during exercise because birds have relatively low rates of
free radical production in spite of higher metabolic rates and much higher
maximum longevity than mammals of similar body size. In addition, patterns of
bird migration have been implicated in the dispersal of disease (e.g. avian flu)
and migratory bird populations are declining due to the loss of suitable habitat
for stopover sites during their migration. The PIs longstanding collaborative
field studies in southern New England guarantees the results will continue to be
used for land conservation and management efforts.