* 1354357
* Long Term Studies of Climate Impacts: Sustaining Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services in Tropical Stream Ecosystems, Puerto Rico
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2014,02/28/2018
* Alan Covich, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 02/28/2018
* USD 126,808.00

This project will examine how natural species assemblages are affected by
climatic change, especially in those ecosystems where temperatures are already
exceptionally warm and where precipitation varies greatly. In sub-tropical
stream ecosystems, such climatic change may lead to major shifts in natural
ecological communities and processes. These shifts can influence distributions
of important freshwater stream insects that break down organic matter and filter
out the bacteria and other suspended particulates. These insect species are
critically important in maintaining clear water for recreational uses and
municipal water supplies. Grounded in 25 years of studies in the Luquillo
Experiment Forest in Puerto Rico, the proposed research will identify the main
factors that affect spatial and temporal distributions of key stream species and
their effects on processing organic matter in streams at different elevations
within large drainage networks. The analysis will identify specific network
locations and geomorphic features where particular species are most likely to be
vulnerable (e.g., shallow depth, high temperatures, low dissolved oxygen, and
lack of flow).

The project will benefit the public, policy makers, and water managers by
providing an in-depth understanding of the effects of extreme variability of
water flows on stream dynamics that influence water quality and locations of
vulnerability. The project will also provide interdisciplinary learning
experiences for students, especially Puerto Ricans, who will participate in
developing the online learning modules. These interdisciplinary learning modules
will illustrate concepts of climate-driven changes on biodiversity and the
economic values of key species in sustaining reliable, high-quality clean water
for multiple uses.