* 1354788
* RUI: Collaborative Proposal: Biting hard with soft feeding apparatuses
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Theodore Uyeno, Valdosta State University
* Continuing Grant
* Emily Carrington
* 08/31/2018
* USD 420,079.00

Many fish feed by using their jaws to scissor away pieces of flesh and often
generate movements with their rigid body skeletons to remove the piece. The
poorly understood hagfish can also effectively accomplish this task despite
lacking jaws or even a spine. Hagfish rely on complex arrangements of soft
muscle and connective tissues to coordinate forceful and dynamic movements of 1)
a unique toothplate that can shear off large chunks of food, and 2) flexible
bodies with loose skins that can be tied into knots. Body knots are pressed
against the surface of the carcass so that hagfish can gain leverage to support
toothplate function. This study attempts to describe principles of function
associated with generation of force and precision movements using soft tissue
mechanisms. In addition, this research will provide training for four
undergraduates and one Master of Science student and initiate national and
international collaborations. The PIs and their students will work with three
local public aquaria to develop exhibits that showcase unique hagfish
biomechanics and behaviors. Finally, hagfish body models and simulations may
result in the development of practical applications, such as safety ropes with
dynamic knotting capabilities and bio-inspiration for deformable material
mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project encompasses a three-part analysis.
First, the biomechanical analysis of toothplate movement will begin with a
morphological analysis based on dissections and two- &amp; three-dimensional
X-ray imaging. Resulting postulates of how forces are produced and transmitted
will be tested using analyses of high-speed video and muscle activity recordings
during feeding bouts. Second, the morphology and material properties of the
loose hagfish skin are likely very important to body knot manipulations. Skin
morphology will be described using histological reconstructions and material
properties will be measured using biaxial tensile tests. These data may then be
used as input into a simplified model of the hagfish body, based on a flexible
rope model of a sheath/core design, upon which to simulate knot formation and
slippage. Third, in order to assess the contribution of body knotting behavior
to hagfish 'bite' strength, a custom underwater force platform, to which food
will be tethered, will record the magnitude and direction of shearing and body
knot reaction forces. Results from the studies will be disseminated through
publication in peer-reviewed journals and at scientific meetings.