* 1354350
* A Neurocomputational investigation of developmental visual recognition disorders
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2014,05/31/2017
* David Plaut, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Uri Hasson
* 05/31/2017
* USD 466,804.00

One outstanding question in the visual sciences is how different types of visual
stimuli are recognized and processed. Humans rely heavily on vision and much of
the cerebral cortex in involved with processing visual information. This project
examines how adults recognize two classes of visual objects, faces and words,
which on the surface seem rather different but may actually share some of the
same underlying processes. The work also explores what goes wrong in individuals
who have greater than typical difficulties with recognizing faces or words,
arising from developmental or congenital problems. To address this, the
investigators will explore both the behavioral skills and the brain systems
involved in visual recognition of faces and words, in normally skilled
individuals and in who have difficulty with face recognition or with word
recognition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is highly significant for a
number of reasons. First, the research has the potential to contribute to our
broad understanding of the brain and the processes that permit normal face and
word recognition. Second, new techniques, software and analytical methods for
measuring the brain and behavioral processes will be developed, and these new
methods will be made available to other scientists and can be applied to
studying other cognitive abilities, as well. Third, the studies will provide a
better understanding of the processes that are affected when someone has
difficulty learning to read or to recognize faces and thus may point to improved
techniques for the diagnosis and remediation of such developmental deficits.
Fourth, the project offers the opportunity for students to be trained in the
field of cognitive neuroscience and to develop skills that will allow them to
become independent scientific investigators in future. Finally, the
investigators will use the research to teach middle school students about the
brain and infuse them with an interest in scientific discovery from an early
age.