* 1354329
* EAGER: CISSDA: A Unified Cyberinfrastructure Framework for Scalable Spatiotemporal Data Analytics
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Roy Campbell, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 08/31/2016
* USD 300,000.00

Massive spatiotemporal datasets are often collected using global positioning
systems (GPS) and other location-aware devices. Spatiotemporal data mining and
analysis have become increasingly important as continued growth in geographic
information science and technology enables scientific investigations and
decision-making support in a plethora of fields. Big data and extensive
computational capabilities are needed to mine and analyze the massive quantities
of complex spatiotemporal data collected across multiple scales and used for
diverse applications. However, conventional methods and tools for spatiotemporal
data mining and analysis are developed primarily using sequential computing, and
cannot adequately handle this increasing data intensity, complexity, and
diversity of applications. Only by seamlessly harnessing heterogeneous and
advanced computing and information infrastructure - cyberinfrastructure - can
large and complex spatiotemporal data be efficiently analyzed on a wide
scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project creates a unified cyberinfrastructure
framework by adapting and integrating heterogeneous modalities of computing and
information infrastructure (e.g., cloud, high-performance computing, and high-
throughput computing) for scalable spatiotemporal data analytics. The framework
encompasses two types of novel and complementary capabilities: 1) a suite of
methods and algorithms for scalable spatiotemporal data analytics through
synthesis of data mining, information network analysis, and parallel and cloud
computing; and 2) a geographic information system (GIS) based on advanced
cyberinfrastructure (i.e., cyberGIS) to facilitate the use of the methods and
algorithms by a large number of users. These novel capabilities help overcome
many current limitations in geographic and social science research involving
huge amount of spatiotemporal data, and bring forth useful insights for
formulating new policies. The framework is designed to gain new fundamental
understanding about individual activity patterns and spaces in the domain of
environmental health through scalable analysis of massive space-time trajectory
data that depict the movement of individuals over space and time. By the
ubiquitous use of spatiotemporal data, the project will lead to both
transformative and broad impacts on almost all disciplines that employ
geospatial technologies for scientific problem solving and decision-making
support.