* 1354063
* The Impacts of Dispersal and Genetic Diversity on the Stability of Environmentally Forced Metacommunities
* BIO,DEB
* 01/15/2014,12/31/2018
* Christopher Steiner, Wayne State University
* Continuing Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 12/31/2018
* USD 639,214.00

Environmental change produced by human activities is widely recognized as having
major negative effects on our planet's biodiversity. Two of the resulting
scientific challenges are to determine how reductions in biodiversity influence
the health of ecosystems, and how biodiversity can be maintained. Genetic
variation found within populations of species is a critical component of
biodiversity and is essential for population adaptation and persistence in the
face of changing environmental conditions. Little is known about the effects of
this variation on natural communities and ecosystems. This project combines
outdoor experiments in freshwater ponds with mathematical models to identify
these effects. The investigator will determine if genetic diversity among
individuals can stabilize natural communities, allowing them to persist in the
face environmental change, and if the transport of individuals among communities
can maintain genetic diversity and thus promote this stabilizing
effect.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide research opportunities in
aquatic ecology for undergraduate and graduate students at Wayne State
University. With a minority enrollment of 37%, Wayne State University has the
most diverse university student body in Michigan. This diversity increases the
investigator's opportunities to involve under-represented groups in hands-on
research experiences. This project will also provide support for graduate
students who will carry out experiments during summers, supervise undergraduate
research projects, and have the opportunity to develop their own independent
research projects. The research focuses on freshwater ponds, and these habitats
provide diverse ecosystem services to society. Results will inform land managers
and conservation biologists who strive to maintain these habitats in a healthy
state.