* 1354123
* EAGER: An Efficient and Effective Distributed Information System
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2016
* Haiying (Helen) Shen, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2016
* USD 300,000.00

The tremendous growth of information in the data-intensive world and a new wave
of big data are creating a promising future for global ultra-large-scale data
sharing, where widely-scattered massive data will be pooled and shared globally.
A distributed data intensive information system is a critical component for
realizing this future. The system will allow users to efficiently and
effectively search similar data. However, the unprecedented amount of data,
along with the large-scale environment and autonomous nature of participants
pose high efficiency and effectiveness challenges to the development of such a
system. This research will provide collaborative research opportunities for
faculty, graduate and undergraduate students, as well as K-12 students in South
Carolina.

A growing need persists for developing an efficient and effective information
searching system, and this challenge represents one of the more formidable
hurdles facing data-intensive computing. This proposal is aimed at addressing
this need through the development of a distributed information system supporting
efficient and effective data searching. This system achieves both high
efficiency and effectiveness. Efficiency means the speed and overhead of sorting
and searching date, while effectiveness means the ability to find all matching
data in the system with fewer false positives and false negatives. This system
translates data items to IDs, maps the data items to nodes in a distributed
system and enables the similarity searching in a distributed manner. First,
previous data translation methods relying on a multi-dimensional space to hash a
data item to one index achieve high efficiency but suffer from low effectiveness
due to the curse of dimensionality in data dimension reduction. Previous exact
mapping methods that hash each keyword of a data item for data search are highly
effective but inefficient. By eliminating the need of a multi-dimensional space,
this system is both highly efficient and effective. Second, unlike some previous
systems relying on a centralized or hierarchical structure for data searching,
this system builds a distributed hash table (DHT) structure, which provides
highly efficient data searching in a distributed manner. Unlike most traditional
DHT-based data sharing which provides only exact matching services, this system
offers similarity searching.