* 1354775
* Collaborative Research: Evolutionary lability and adaptive plasticity in physiological and molecular mechanisms of behavior
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2021
* Kimberly Hughes, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 03/31/2021
* USD 306,594.00

Genes shape how sensitive individuals are to environmental conditions during
development, and this environmental sensitivity influences the behaviors
produced in adulthood. This project seeks to understand how genes and
developmental conditions together influence the brain, and how that alters
social behaviors. The planned research takes advantage of extensive information
on genetic and environmental influences on behavior of guppies, small fish that
have evolved numerous behavioral responses to predators. Guppies that experience
high and low levels of predation in the wild will be raised in laboratory
conditions with and without predator exposure during development. Genetic and
molecular experiments will link the patterns of gene expression in different
brain regions to neural activity patterns and the resulting social behaviors.
Results will demonstrate the extent to which similar behavioral traits
(increased sociality in fish from high-predation sites and in fish exposed to
predators) rely on the same gene expression changes and brain activity patterns,
or whether similar behaviors may emerge from a variety of neural mechanisms.
These findings will also reveal how sensitivity to environmental conditions
shapes evolution of behavior. Developing this novel experimental approach will
provide a model for other researchers seeking to understand the impacts of gene
expression differences on behavior. The PIs will incorporate this research into
undergraduate courses and will train graduate students via annual workshops on
analysis of gene expression data. The simplicity and availability of guppies
also make them amenable to enriching K-12 curricula in evolution and behavior,
through development of a guppy module for for the Understanding Evolution
resources for teaching evolution (http://evolution.berkeley.edu/). This project
will allow the Colorado State University researchers to extend an ongoing
program in which lab personnel work with middle school classes to design and
implement behavioral experiments using guppies to reach a larger group of
students.