* 1354675
* Improved Bayesian phylogenetic inference based on approximate conditional independence
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Bret Larget, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 07/31/2017
* USD 279,808.00

The proposed research will use a new mathematical method, together with DNA
sequence data, to develop software for determining genealogical relationships
(phylogeny) among species of organisms. This will be done with greater accuracy
and speed than has been possible in the past. This work is important because
phylogenies have many valuable applications. In addition to their central
importance in studying the history of life on Earth, phylogenies are used by
scientists who study viruses that affect human health, such as HIV and
influenza, by scientists who want to predict how species will react to a
changing climate, and even by scientists analyzing forensic evidence in court
cases. This research intends to improve a broad class of computational tools
that many scientists use when they study evolutionary history and
mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Among the most accurate statistical methods for
reconstructing evolutionary relationships are likelihood-based methods which
model the random process by which DNA sequences evolve over time. These methods,
however, are highly computationally intensive, especially when there are both
large numbers of species and long DNA sequences, as is now common. The proposed
research includes the formation of a team to design, implement, test, and
distribute novel algorithms and software for the purpose of transforming the
standard current approaches to Bayesian phylogenetic inference. The current
state of the art for Bayesian phylogenetic inference involves the use of Markov
chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods to sample phylogenetic trees from a posterior
distribution that describes evolutionary histories of related species informed
by DNA sequences measured in living individuals. By design, MCMC produces
dependent samples where each tree sampled in sequence is likely to be very
similar, or even exactly the same, as the previous sampled tree. Extremely large
samples are needed to obtain samples representative of the full posterior
distribution, and the computational burden becomes prohibitive. This research
will exploit a recent discovery of a new method to estimate with high accuracy
the posterior probabilities of trees on the basis of conditional clade
distributions rather than simple sample frequencies. A consequence of this
result is the possibility of obtaining truly independent samples of phylogenetic
trees from a distribution that approximates the true distribution closely, and
to obtain correct inference from the desired posterior distribution via
importance sampling. The objectives are to fully develop and test this sampling
approach with efficient algorithms that will be shared with the public and to
implement the approach in new free and open source software.