* 1354172
* LTREB: Social, Environmental, and Evolutionary Dynamics of Replicated Hybrid Zones in Swordtails (Teleostei: Xiphophorus) of Mexico's Sierra Madre Oriental
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2020
* Gil Rosenthal, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 03/31/2020
* USD 447,948.00

The study of natural hybridization - the exchange of genetic information between
species - is fundamental to further understanding how genes function within
organisms and within the environment. Hybrids - crosses between different
species - can also be used to identify specific genes associated with traits of
interest and how these genes interact with environmental variation, ultimately
shedding light on the genetic basis of disease and adaptation to environmental
change. This project studies changes in behavioral decisions, communication
signals, heat and cold tolerance, and population structure over 10 years in
natural and experimental populations of swordtail fish, a longstanding model in
genetics, physiology, and behavior. The two parent species are found at high and
low elevations, hybrids at intermediate elevations. Experimental populations
will seed first-generation hybrids along an elevation gradient. The predicted
response at the high elevation site is that genes associated with cold tolerance
will spread along with the communication signals and behavioral biases of the
high-elevation species, and vice-versa at the low elevation site. The study will
identify novel genes involved with decision-making, communication, and
temperature tolerance, which may lead to applications in medicine and
agriculture. Further, the data will address the extent to which specific,
identifiable parts of the genome are responsible for adaptation to various
environments. Collection and analysis of data will be accomplished with a
structured summer mentorship program between undergraduate students and local
K-12 students. Because of the long-term nature of the study, K-12 trainees will
have the opportunity to become mentors themselves later in the project.