* 1354159
* Olfactory processing and learning of complex scents in insects
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* Jeffrey Riffell, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Sridhar Raghavachari
* 07/31/2018
* USD 640,000.00

For all animals, the ability to process biologically important odors - often
mixtures of tens to hundreds of volatile chemicals - has a fundamental
consequence for essential behaviors. Additionally, deficits in olfactory
function are indicators of early onset of many neurodegenerative diseases that
affect learning and memory. Despite the acceptance of the importance of odor
mixtures for behavior, there are important gaps in identifying the mechanisms of
olfactory processing in the brain (e.g., in the antennal lobe [AL] of insects),
and how downstream areas of the brain further process that odor information
during learning. This project will use an interdisciplinary approach that
combines novel chemical analytical and electrophysiological techniques with
simultaneous electrophysiological recordings from behaving animals (Manduca
sexta moths) to understand how odors are processed and identify how this
information is decoded during learning.

Olfactory cues play fundamental roles in mediating insect behavior. This project
will: (1) characterize the scent composition of diverse flower species
pollinated by moths and identify key odorants in the scents that drive
glomerular responses and elicit behavior; (2) determine the coding mechanism(s)
by which the scents from these diverse flower species, which can differ in their
profiles, activate the same glomerular circuit(s) to elicit behavior; and (3)
use simultaneous multi-channel recording in the AL and mushroom body (the site
of learning and memory) while the moth learns association between an odor and a
reward to identify how mixture information is decoded and how appetitive
learning modulates odor representation. The project will thus advance
understanding of olfactory control of behavior of pests like moths and can
contribute to the eventual control of insect vectors of human disease, like
mosquitoes. Furthermore, the project will also introduce students to
interdisciplinary research, as well as broadly communicate the importance of
animal behavior to the public. Members of the public will be involved in the
project through a citizen science project. Finally, the project includes the
training of undergraduates, graduate students and postdoctoral associates and
helps prepare them for independent scientific careers.