* 1354806
* Collaborative Research: Gene Diversity of the VHS Fish Virus: Evolution of Cellular Immune Response and Pathogenesis
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2019
* Carol Stepien, University of Toledo
* Continuing Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 05/31/2019
* USD 549,999.00

Viral Hemorrhagic Septicemia virus (VHSv) is one of the world's most important
finfish diseases, impacting both sport fishing and commercial fishing ventures
around the globe. VHSv emerged only recently in the Great Lakes, and little is
known about how it arrived and why it periodically leads to large scale fish
die-offs. The proposed project will examine how VHSv's evolution in the Great
Lake region has contributed to its ability to cause disease, and should aid
informed predictions about future outbreaks. Thus, the investigations will
integrate studies on VHSv evolution with identification of the means by which
the virus disrupts immune systems of infected fish, leading to sickness or
death. These results should help to identify how specific genetic changes in the
virus can lead to either enhanced or reduced impact on infected fish, and thus
will provide critical data for understanding the connection between viral
genetic changes (i.e., viral evolution) and the host's response. Results will
contribute towards more effective prevention, prediction, and control of VHSv,
aiding national and international management efforts. Although the work will
focus on the spread of VHSv within the Great Lakes region, the studies will have
application to other viruses (fish and otherwise). The PIs will design an
attractive mobile display for museum exhibits and broader distribution at
conferences and public meetings to assist in disseminating the information
beyond the scientific community, and will train both graduate and undergraduate
students as part of this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Each of the aims of the
project addresses a specific question about the spread of this disease in the
Great Lakes region. Evolutionary diversification patterns and rates of VHSv
genes will be evaluated using each protein gene (nv, N, M, L, and P) in strains
and substrains, using new and existing samples. Results will determine how these
are related to viral selection in new outbreak taxa and areas, and whether and
how strains become endemic or epidemic. Cellular and host responses will be
assessed to determine how mutations within viral genes that repress fish innate
immune responses affect function by comparing VHSv M and P (and other) gene
functions among VHSv strains. The project leaders will use reverse genetics to
assess the role of M, P and L in modulating innate immune responses and viral
pathogenicity. Taken together these results will be valuable in the present
understanding of a new emerging and challenging infectious disease.