* 1354297
* Innovations in Electroacoustics and Computing: Print Disablity and as a Model for Technology Innovation and Transfer
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2014,04/30/2017
* Mara Mills, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 04/30/2017
* USD 239,138.00

Through archival research and interviews with innovators, the PI will produce a
history of electronic reading technologies for blind and print-disabled people,
and their co-evolution with mainstream reading practices. Beyond the
introduction of new formats such as audiobooks and electronic books, print
access efforts in the twentieth century gave rise to numerous technical
innovations that transferred to other branches of electroacoustics and
computing. Innovations in long-playing records,pitch-shifting with magnetic
tape, scanning, optical character recognition (OCR), and synthetic speech
ultimately retooled reading for both humans and machines. The project will
contribute to the history of computing through attention to the overlooked
topics of optical character recognition (OCR) as a mode of data input, and
pattern-matching as a technique for artificial intelligence.

Based on these historical examples, this communications scholar develops new
tools for understanding and stimulating innovative technology design and
transfer. The work will contribute to the subfield of disability and STS, will
train two disabled students, and will help destigmatize the category of
assistive technology by tracing the ways these devices intervene into media
policy, are repurposed for broad use, or in fact are marketed to multiple
audiences. In addition to a monograph, the project will result in a website that
will preserve and make publicly-available examples from several historical
reading formats (e.g. Talking Books, text-to-tone, and text-to-speech systems).
The website will model best practices of electronic accessibility.