* 1354522
* Selection and generation of limb movements by a combination of multifunctional and specialized spinal interneurons
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2014,09/30/2021
* David Maxwell, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Sridhar Raghavachari
* 09/30/2021
* USD 680,000.00

This project will address how nervous systems are organized to produce the right
movement at the right time. It will focus on networks of nerve cells in the
spinal cord since understanding these components is a prerequisite to
understanding complex movements in animals and helping patients with spinal cord
injuries. It will also train a broad range of undergraduates and graduate
students to perform experiments. Finally, the award will also support hands-on
activities for schoolchildren to spark their interest in science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent studies suggest that the spinal cord uses a
combination of behaviorally specialized and multifunctional nerve cells
(interneurons) to generate movements, but how it does so for limb movements is
unknown. This project will study how specialized and multifunctional spinal
interneurons contribute to producing two kinds of leg movements, swimming and
scratching. The turtle is the only animal for which this is now feasible and is
ideal for such studies because turtles, being diving animals, have evolved
unusual resistance to low-oxygen conditions such as occur during many
physiological experiments. The project will investigate the roles of one
previously identified class of behaviorally specialized interneurons, scratch-
specialized neurons, and one previously identified class of multifunctional
interneurons, transverse interneurons. The project will determine whether each
of these two classes of interneurons is excitatory or inhibitory, based on the
neurotransmitter it uses, and whether it makes synaptic connections directly
with motor neurons, using a combination of intracellular electrophysiology in
vivo, dye injection, and immunocytochemistry. The results of this study will
reveal aspects of the organization of the spinal cord networks of neurons that
generate different kinds of limb movements. The conclusions are likely to be
broadly applicable to vertebrates, including humans, because the spinal cord is
an evolutionarily conserved structure.