* 1354898
* Octopus Neural Systems
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Clifton Ragsdale, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Evan Balaban
* 07/31/2018
* USD 630,000.00

Octopuses, with their endlessly flexible arms, their vertebrate-like eyes, and
their sophisticated behaviors are a source of ongoing fascination to scientist
and public alike. Octopus brains are large, with many lobes, and from a distance
look much more like the brain of an insect or crab than that of a fish or
mammal. How the connections of the octopus brain are organized is unknown, so
researchers can only begin to guess how octopuses control their arms or learn
how to see. The research aim of this project is to study octopus brain circuitry
with the tools of modern molecular cell biology in order to understand how the
largest invertebrate brains are organized. The broader impacts of this research
include the participation of high school and College students in octopus
research each summer and the training of graduate students in comparative
neuroscience. Research findings will be incorporated into an evolutionary
neurobiology teaching module that will be offered in two introductory courses on
the fundamentals of neuroscience at the University of Chicago, Marine Biological
Laboratory. The Ragsdale laboratory engages directly in public outreach on
octopus brain biology, behaviors and evolution. The forums for this outreach
include laboratory tours for local high school students, internet video
presentations, and feature stories on Science blog sites.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A modern investigation of the neural bases of cephalopod
behavior depends on neuroanatomical and genomic databases, ideally ones for a
model organism. The Ragsdale laboratory has identified a candidate model
cephalopod, Octopus bimaculoides. This project will describe the systems
neuroanatomy of O. bimaculoides, including its molecular organization with
transcriptome-­based gene expression analysis. The proposed experiments focus on
two systems best understood from lesion and stimulation studies: the axial nerve
cords of the arms (Aim 1) and the learning and memory lobes (LMLs) of the
supraesophageal brain (Aim 2). Aim 1 will ask how the sensory-­motor circuits of
the arms are organized. Aim 2 will study the systems architecture of the LMLs.
In many taxa, learning and memory organs feature orthogonal arrays of neuronal
processes that form longitudinal zones. Such organization has been found in
insect mushroom bodies and the vertebrate cerebellum. Findings with the Golgi
method suggest that octopus LMLs also have orthogonally organized connections,
but to date, no zonal organization has been reported. Aim 2 of this project will
use techniques of modern neuroscience to determine how the octopus LML is
organized.