* 1354913
* Regulation of SCN Glial Plasticity
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Martha Gillette, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 07/31/2019
* USD 620,000.00

Brain plasticity, the adaptability of the nervous system in response to
experience, is a modulatory process leading to long-lasting structural and
functional changes. Plasticity has been thought to characterize neurons
primarily. Preliminary data suggest that glia, cells thought to provide
nutritive support for neurons, undergo a new, potentially fundamental form of
plasticity: diurnal and light-stimulated morphological dynamics in the central
circadian clock, the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN). This concept is novel and
has not been effectively explored. Knowledge of the patterns and regulators of
SCN glial plasticity over the daily cycle will contribute significant new
insights on glial cellular dynamics in the brain, an emergent property of an
understudied area. Goals of educational and outreach components are to develop
and validate effective cross-disciplinary instructional modules involving
neuroscience, imaging, and three-dimensional analytic techniques. Emphasis will
be on engaging women and groups underrepresented in neuroscience research.
Outcomes will include a series of educational materials, presentations, and
publications for use with K-12 educators and students and the general public
aimed at increasing interest and awareness of recent research findings. This
will enhance scientific literacy.

The scientific issues will be addressed using confocal microscopy coupled with
computer-based analysis of glial structural complexity and spatial organization
in the rat SCN. This study will advance understanding of diurnal modulation of
glial plasticity in two ways: 1) providing an unbiased, high-resolution three-
dimensional assessment of diurnal patterns of SCN glial plasticity, and 2)
generating new insights on signals that alter glial structure and thereby
dynamic cell-cell relationships. Assessment of efficacy of the educational and
outreach components will be made in partnership with Prof. Lizanne DeStefano,
Director of the Illinois STEM Education Initiative and an expert in design and
evaluation of innovative STEM education programs. They will employ a robust
goal-based evaluation to validate, document, and disseminate this model through
publication and presentation.