* 1354268
* Collaborative Research: Multilocus phylogenetics and species delimitation using sequence-capture and next-gen sequencing and its application in Adansonia (Malvaceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Jonathan Wendel, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Ingram
* 08/31/2019
* USD 303,083.00

Species are the basic units of taxonomy, playing an important role in scientific
communication and environmental policy. While the theoretical understanding of
the species concept has advanced greatly, methodologies for the objective
delimitation of species remain inefficient. This study by researchers at the
University of Wisconsin - Madison and Iowa State University will develop new
computational tools to make species delimitation more efficient. Their research
will also address a central question in biology: What is a species? This study
will use the genus Adansonia (the baobabs) as a testing ground for these
methods. Baobabs are iconic trees of great cultural, ecological, and economic
importance in Madagascar, continental Africa, and northwestern Australia, and
are also a microcosm for many of the challenges that arise in species
delimitation. The work will train undergraduate researchers, K-12 teachers,
graduate students, and a postdoctoral associate at the interface of taxonomy,
genomics, and computational statistics and provide several opportunities to
establish international collaboration. Together, this research will provide new
insights into Adansonia systematics and provide a new framework to facilitate
species delimitation in diverse groups.

Species delimitation encompasses diverse methods that use genetic, morphological
and other trait data to guide taxonomic grouping (placing organisms in
hierarchically nested taxa) and ranking (deciding where taxa sit relative to the
transition from tree-like relationships at higher levels to reticulate
genealogies within populations). Species delimitation remains challenging in
many groups due to polyploidy, introgression, and/or species with complex
geographic patterns of morphological variation. However, opportunities for
progress are offered by recent advances in high throughput sequencing
technologies that facilitate rapid acquisition of multilocus DNA sequence data,
and by new analytical methods for species level taxonomic problems. Using
baobabs as a model, this study will develop a rapid and efficient experimental
protocol using sequence capture technology and next-generation sequencing that
will allow the application of different species delimitation methods. In
addition to deploying existing analytical methods, the researchers will extend
the Bayesian Phylogenetics and Phylogeography (BPP) method to formally
incorporate morphology and geography. Further, they will add capability to the
software program BUCKy for identifying cases where the data imply hybridization
or introgression that could be applied in diverse groups of organisms.