* 1354930
* RUI: DIVERSIFICATION AND RADIATION OF THE SPLITFINS (TELEOSTOMI: GOODEIDAE)
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Kyle Piller, Southeastern Louisiana University
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 08/31/2019
* USD 607,800.00

The Cyprinodontiformes, commonly known as splitfins, are a diverse order of
teleost fishes consisting of 10 families, and more than 800 globally distributed
species. The group includes killifishes, guppies, and swordtails, and is well
known among aquarium hobbyists, toxicologists, and as a model organism in cancer
research. Goodeids are an imperiled group of freshwater fishes that occur in
Mexico and the Southwestern United States and consist of two main lines of
diversification; a depauperate group of egg laying species, and a speciose group
that bear live offspring. Many groups in the order, including the viviparous
(live birthing) species, are understudied from an ecological and evolutionary
perspective.The evolutionary relationships of groups within the order are
unclear and the relationships of the species and genera within the Goodeidae
family have not been adequately studied. The lack of a robust family tree has
impeded both basic and applied research on the splitfins. Resolving the
evolutionary relationships within the Cyprinodontiformes, as well as within the
Goodeidae species, will advance our understanding of life-history evolution,
morphological diversification, taxonomy, and conservation. The researchers will
write a handbook for aquarists and conservation biologists containing
recommendations for maintenance and breeding guidelines for maintaining genetic
and phenotypic diversity of goodeids in captivity. The researchers will work
with the Goodeid Working Group to update the Goodeidae conservation status and
trends information as well as contribute to aquarist-oriented publications and
conventions to promote appropriate captive Goodeidae rearing. These efforts will
enhance conservation efforts of these fishes which are critical to resource
managers especially considering the ongoing environmental changes in the areas
occupied by the Goodeidae.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This integrative
project will involve multiple graduate and undergraduate students, international
and United States collaborators, and citizen scientists. Specimens will be
collected in the United States and Latin America and the vouchered tissue
samples, which are important for future studies, will be deposited in research
collections in the United States and Mexico. Citizen scientists will provide
pedigreed larval specimens of all species of Goodeidae. These are historically
difficult to obtain and will be used for scanning electron microscopic
examination of trophotaeniae, a poorly understudied larval taxonomic character
that is critical to the unusual live births in this group. This study will
result in the construction of phylogenetic trees for the Cyprinodontiformes and
the Goodeidae based on traditional (10 loci, and &gt;7,000bp sequence data) and
next generation sequencing approaches (anchored phylogenomics), offering the
most comprehensive tests of previous phylogenetic hypotheses for these groups.
The incorporation of geometric morphometric and trophotaenial data, fossil
calibrations, and phylogenetic comparative methods will allow for a better
understanding of the timing of diversification and the factors that have played
a role in radiation of this interesting group of fishes. Finally, the research
will assess changes in Goodeidae abundance and distribution, based on museum
records and field sampling.