* 1354490
* RUI:  Analysis of the Implementation and Effectiveness of Three Strikes Sentencing Reforms
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2014,09/30/2020
* Elsa Chen, Santa Clara University
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 09/30/2020
* USD 184,979.00

In 2012, California voters approved a ballot measure that modified the state's
"Three Strikes and You're Out" law such that nonviolent and nonserious new
felonies no longer trigger 25-to-life sentences, and certain third-strike
inmates may petition to be resentenced as second-strikers and receive shortened
sentences or early release. This study will examine how court officials are
implementing these changes, how contextual and individual factors influence
resentencing outcomes, and the effectiveness of these changes at reducing prison
populations and sentencing disparities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Semi-structured
interviews with public defenders, prosecutors, and judges will examine how the
reforms are being implemented in eight counties. Inmate data from the California
Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation (CDCR) will be analyzed to
determine risks associated with resentencing, how characteristics of inmates and
the counties in which they were sentenced influence the chances of successful
petitions for resentencing, and whether these changes have reduced disparities
in sentencing outcomes. This study will contribute to research on policy
implementation, prosecutorial and judicial discretion, sources of disparities in
sentencing outcomes, and prisoner reintegration, thus furthering research within
criminology, legal studies, and public policy. Findings will be disseminated
through conference presentations and scholarly journal articles as well as
online.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The large numbers of persons incarcerated as a
result of Three Strikes and related policies, the geographic and racial
disparities associated with these policies, and the effects on communities due
to mass incarceration and reentry all suggest that findings of this study will
have broad public and policy interest. Results and recommendations will be
shared with criminal justice practitioners and policymakers. Better
understanding of the effects of policy reforms can help policy makers make good
decisions with regard to public safety, while making effective and efficient use
of taxpayer dollars. The project will also provide training and mentoring to
undergraduate students and enhance the research and teaching environment at
Santa Clara University.