* 1354351
* Eight Societies Travel Grants for Graduate Students, Independent Scholars, &amp; Recent PhDs
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2017
* Robert Malone, History of Science Society
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 05/31/2017
* USD 207,616.00

Project Overview&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal requests funds to enable
eight professional societies in history, philosophy, and social studies of
science and technology to provide travel grants to graduate students,
independent scholars, and junior scholars between 2014 and 2016. The grants
would enable these scholars to participate in some of these professional
meetings, those that are pertinent to their professional development. Their
participation would facilitate the dissemination of their research results and
provide opportunities to engage in professional
networking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Such
professionalization is crucial on several fronts. Younger scholars will be
teaching at major research universities, liberal arts colleges, and community
colleges; they are also engaged in curating museum exhibits, working at research
institutes, overseeing library collections, and helping with government
programs. Independent scholars need to maintain contact with their professional
societies to promote intellectual and practical stimulation as they continue to
work in museums, research institutes, libraries, and government agencies.
Finally, recent PhDs face severe cuts in departmental travel funds; travel
grants will facilitate the maintenance of their career trajectories. Assisting
these groups serves to enhance the STEM workforce, which in turn serves to
advance NSF's core mission by improving science literacy and by enhancing the
scientific process. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The cooperation that this grant will require will
serve to maintain relationships across the eight societies, which represent
divergent fields. It also facilitates international interactions enabling
scholars to travel overseas as they share their research and develop networks.
This exchange enhances the intellectual quality of the meetings, while fostering
diverse viewpoints and interpretations of science. As the US sees its share of
college enrollees in the world dwindle, it is all the more important that these
eight societies, all of them with an international membership with the lion's
share of its members in the US, share ideas and questions about science and its
influence on society.