* 1354250
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: A Comparative Study of Community Engagement with Renewable Electricity Technology
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2014,02/28/2015
* Jennifer Fuller, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 02/28/2015
* USD 14,883.00

Project Overview&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This doctoral dissertation research
project explores changing ideas about energy as global production shifts from
fossil fuels to renewable sources. The co-PI (that is, the doctoral dissertation
researcher) will examine the processes by which governments, NGOs, energy
industries, and the media seek to influence the public imagination with regards
to community values and their relations with local renewable energy projects.
The research focus is on the differing conceptions of community and renewable
energy as presented through promotional material about four specific community
solar projects. The projects are located in Treviso, Italy, and Flagstaff,
Arizona, two cities where solar power systems are becoming increasingly common.
The co-PI will analyze how these ideas are produced, circulated, and received
using mixed qualitative methods including semi-structured interviews with key
individuals in the energy industry, non-governmental organizations, and in
government; material analysis of pertinent images, texts, and objects; and
engagement with community focus groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite the pervasiveness of energy production and
distribution, the underlying processes often remains invisible to consumers.
This research engages those directly involved in educating publics about
community renewable energy initiatives. It studies the ideas about renewable
energy (in this case, solar-generated electricity) that infiltrate everyday life
through advertisements, informational campaigns, policy mechanisms, the
availability of energy technologies, and in daily conversations. Researching
this unique space is crucial for understanding how publics, policy actors, NGOs,
industry, and media interact to create a shared public understanding about
social and technological change. The project will push the field forward by
giving public uptake and reception the full attention it deserves through
engagement with citizens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this study will be disseminated not
only through academic journals (like Energy Policy, Environment and Planning,
and Public Culture), but also through popular media outlets such as the
Community Power Report, to which the co-PI is a contributor. The research will
also engage in outreach efforts to Italian and Arizonan youth including those
with populations underrepresented in STEM fields. Finally, this dissertation
research advances the STEM career of a female, first generation college student,
the co-PI.