* 1354676
* Collaborative Research:RCN:UrBioNet: A global network of urban  biodiversity research and practice
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2021
* Myla Aronson, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 05/31/2021
* USD 213,375.00

Over half of the world's human population lives in cities, making the human
experience of nature increasingly defined within urban areas. In order to
understand how cities can support both humans and biodiversity, greater
collaboration is needed among scientists, urban planners, and design
professionals. This project will create a research coordination network to bring
together these disciplines to study the factors affecting biodiversity in cities
(UrBioNet). The network will facilitate engagement of scientists globally and
develop databases and materials focusing on the plants and animals of cities
that are relevant to local residents, urban planners, and managers. This project
will expand existing global databases of plants and birds in cities and develop
new databases of bats, fish, and insect pollinators of cities and their
surrounding regions. The network will focus on the compilation and monitoring of
urban biota in areas of high regional biodiversity, such as tropical cities and
cities within biodiversity hotspots. Three scientific working groups will use
information collected in this network to answer questions regarding the
ecological relationships of different species to urbanization, with
consideration of cultural and social aspects, and develop recommendations for
monitoring urban ecosystems. Key activities in support of the network include:
network-wide meetings; workshops; and the development of an online graduate
course on urban biodiversity. UrBioNet will further serve the scientific
community by supporting the development of global, regional, and local databases
to test hypotheses on the patterns of species based on the physical, climatic,
and social features of cities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Outcomes from this project
will enhance our understanding of the ecology of cities and provide useful
information to planners and managers for the monitoring and preservation of
biodiversity in urban regions. By targeting activities in regions with less data
availability, UrBioNet will enhance knowledge transfer among regions with
different degrees of investment in urban ecological research and monitoring. The
network will develop monitoring protocols that will standardize data collection
methods and be economically feasible to implement. Planners, managers, and
practitioners will be active participants in the network. Online courses will be
developed for graduate students at 13 universities (including two historically
black universities) in the U.S., and UrBioNet will involve undergraduate
students through campus-based biodiversity monitoring projects led by network
participants at up to 21 universities in the U.S., Europe, Africa, Asia, and
South America.