* 1354920
* Collaborative Research: Rhizosphere priming and C-N dynamics in grassland ecosystems in transition
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2018
* Gail Wilson, Oklahoma State University
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 03/31/2018
* USD 121,259.00

Rhizosphere priming, the focus of this study, is the process by which living
roots affect the potential for soils to store and release carbon and nitrogen.
On a global basis, soils store twice as much carbon as is in the atmosphere and
regulate the nitrogen supply to maintain plant productivity while preventing
excess nitrogen losses. Laboratory studies indicate that rhizosphere priming is
likely a key control on soil CO2 emissions and the release of nitrogen from
organic matter. However, the control of rhizosphere priming on soil carbon and
nitrogen transformations in real ecosystems has been difficult to study and is
not well understood. This is important because many environmental changes could
alter rhizosphere priming, with potentially large consequences for carbon
storage and nitrogen cycling. By measuring carbon and nitrogen isotope tracers
in plants and soils, this study will follow the fate of different carbon and
nitrogen sources and separate their contributions the functioning of the soil in
grasslands of the central United States. This study also uses plants with
different kinds of root characteristics to figure out the different influences
plants can have on rhizosphere priming. Over three years, this study will
address two main questions: (1) What is the magnitude of rhizosphere priming on
the breakdown of organic matter under realistic soil conditions? and (2) How do
different plant and soil characteristics affect priming across seasons, types of
plants and different soils? This project is that start of a comprehensive effort
to decipher and ground truth the important roles of of roots in actual grassland
ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this project will help us
understand how changes in plants and environmental conditions affect air quality
and the loss of nitrogen from soils. It will train nine undergraduate students,
three graduate students, and a post-doctoral scientist. Recruitment of
participants will focus on underrepresented groups and build on existing
programs in California, Kansas and Oklahoma to increase the diversity of the
project participants. Results will be incorporated into undergraduate and
graduate courses in the three states and project data will be made available on
a web site. This project will also help to enhance public education and
awareness and to inform the general public of the importance of roots in
providing essential services from our grasslands. Finally, the location and
visibility of the experiment at the Konza Prairie Long-Term Ecological Research
site in Kansas offers unique opportunities for public education, including
development of modules for the schoolyard programs and other outreach
activities.