* 1354426
* Collaborative Research: Testing the effects of phylogenetic diversity on restoration outcomes in tallgrass prairie
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2014,04/30/2016
* Eric Lonsdorf, Chicago Horticultural Society
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 04/30/2016
* USD 326,238.00

A team of scientists from the Chicago Botanic Garden, The Morton Arboretum, and
partner institutions will conduct research at the intersection of evolutionary
biology and ecological restoration -- the repair of damaged and degraded
habitats. Their research investigates the practical implications of a
fundamental finding of evolutionary biology: plant species that are less closely
related to each other tend to be more distinct in their traits and in the
ecological roles they perform. This is important, as groups of plants that
encompass greater trait diversity better support key goals of conservation and
land management, such as carbon storage and support of wildlife. This project
will test whether selecting an unusually diverse (evolutionarily unrelated) set
of plant species to use in prairie restoration is a good rule-of-thumb for
achieving better outcomes in restoration of degraded ecosystems. In addition,
the project will contribute to scientific engagement of high school and college
students and the training of early career scientists. Outreach to the public
will be performed through the lead institutions? broad networks of members and
visitors.

A key challenge for restoration science is to guide the development of diverse,
resilient systems that provide the full suite of services associated with
natural communities. Incorporating phylogenetic diversity into restoration is an
underexplored, potentially powerful tool to help meet this challenge. This
project will address questions important to both basic and applied ecology
through observational and experimental approaches that test the influence of
phylogenetic diversity on restoration outcomes in prairie ecosystems. Decision
analysis will be used to determine how restoration managers can incorporate
phylogenetic considerations into multi-objective restoration efforts. Results
will be translated into practical tools for restoration, including web-based
tools for guiding species-selection decisions.