* 1354259
* Understanding the evolutionary transition between annual and perennial life history strategies
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Jannice Friedman, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 06/30/2018
* USD 475,900.00

This research will address one of the most fundamental questions faced by all
organisms: when is the best time to reproduce to maximize the survival and
success of their offspring. In plants, there are two broad categories of
reproductive strategies; annuals that reproduce once and die, and perennials
that reproduce repeatedly and cycle through vegetative and reproductive phases.
This research will utilize a model plant system, Mimulus guttatus, commonly
known as Monkeyflower, native to the west coast of the United States to
investigate the ecological and genetic mechanisms underlying flowering time
differences in annuals and perennial plant species. The focus on the role of
environmental cues, including daylength and temperature, in the transition to
flowering is particularly pertinent. This is because climate change is altering
temperature patterns and moisture levels that are going to challenge many plant
species ability to persist under these new environmental
regimes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will benefit the scientific community
by the development of genomic resources that will enhance our general
understanding of what forces influence transitions between reproducing once and
dying versus reproducing multiple times prior to senescence. The integrative
nature of this proposed research means that students and postdoctoral fellows
will receive cross-disciplinary training, and the research also provides
training opportunities for high school and undergraduate students. Additionally
the public will benefit through collaborations with the popular Milton J.
Rubenstein Museum of Science &amp; Technology by providing mentoring to the
staff and public workshops to serve the city of Syracuse's middle and high
school students.