* 1354545
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Making Sustainability Through Life Cycle Assessment of U.S. Renewable Energy Projects
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2015
* Alastair Iles, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 03/31/2015
* USD 10,000.00

Project Overview

This award supports doctoral dissertation research focuses on the politics of
deciding what sustainability means in renewable energy systems, particularly
solar and wind energy. It aims to understand how assumptions about the
environmental and societal benefits of solar and wind energy are built into
sustainability best practices and policies. The PI will provide a broad
conceptual analysis of "sustainability engineering" in the US that aims to
understand its epistemological and political roots. He will also develop two
case studies of solar and wind project development in California?s West Antelope
Valley, to understand the politics of Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) in renewable
technologies.

Intellectual Merit

The project will build on insights from Environmental Science and Technology
Studies and on Engineering Studies. It will map the connections between
professional identity-formation and conceptualization of sustainability as they
reflect a spectrum of normative worldviews that increasingly challenge American
engineering. It will explore the politics of how and why LCAs have become more
dominant in defining sustainability, and it will explore the potential for
different views of LCA to be advanced by communities, regulators, activists-
engineers, and NGOs. Finally, it prompts reflection on the broader question: Who
is a green engineer?

Broader Impacts

The results of this study will be disseminated broadly through publications in
leading STS, engineering, and energy policy journals and through presentations
in multi and interdisciplinary conferences. Through reports and publications,
the data generated by this study will be made available in a timely manner to
STS, engineering and policy researchers. The PI plans to partner with federal,
state, and local agencies to analyze his results in formats useful to policy
makers. Based on these results, he will create an interdisciplinary, internet-
run project, aimed at improving the comprehension of sustainability from an
engineering perspective.