* 1354407
* Collaborative Research: Friendly competition - infusing ecology and evolution at the frontiers of the dilution effect in disease ecology
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2018
* Zoi Rapti, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 05/31/2018
* USD 355,559.00

Outbreaks of disease continue to increase in wild populations, and understanding
this increase has become a major environmental challenge. A popular explanation
is that loss of biodiversity, and particularly of species that are resistant to
disease, encourages disease epidemics. Thus, enhancement and preservation of
species diversity might reduce disease and associated negative effects on host
populations. This project combines new mathematical models with experiments to
challenge this explanation in a food web/community context, using Daphnia (an
aquatic invertebrate) and a fungal pathogen, to explore how the dilution effect
of multiple pathogen hosts plays itself out in the face of ecological
(interspecific competition) and evolutionary dynamics. The PI's propose that key
traits determining transmission also affect interactions with other community
members, exploitative competitors and their shared prey in this case, which may
alter the details of host-pathogen dynamics, particularly the dilution effect.
Models and experiments together will determine whether competition among hosts
also influences the spread of disease, whether nutritional value of the food for
which hosts compete influences susceptibility to disease, and whether rapid
adaptation of hosts to disease can counteract the loss of biodiversity,
potentially reducing disease outbreaks. An interdisciplinary team of researchers
will tackle these issues using common freshwater organisms that are infected by
a virulent pathogen. The Daphnia-fungus system is ideal for asking elegant
theoretical questions, and the proposed ambitious experiments will generate
empirical data to test the theory.

This multi-disciplinary project will produce new insights into a provocative
option for disease control. This project will also enhance training
opportunities for students and postdoctoral researchers, with particular focus
on members of underrepresented groups and undergraduates working with
mathematics and biology. Additionally, the investigators will work through non-
governmental organizations, high schools, a children's museum, and a program for
middle school girls to disseminate results and train future scientists with
hands-on projects.