* 1354438
* RUI: Analysis of Mutants Identified in Screens for Suppressors or Enhancers of a Red Light Hypersensitive E3 Ubiquitin-Ligase Mutant
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2019
* Derek Gingerich, University of Wisconsin-Eau Claire
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Klein
* 05/31/2019
* USD 214,510.00

The ability to perceive and respond to light is vital to plant growth and
development. Previous work by the Principal Investigator (PI) has identified and
characterized two genes (LRB1 and LRB2) in the model flowering plant Arabidopsis
thaliana that regulate responses to red wavelength light. Mutant plants with
disruptions of these two genes are, among other things, more shade tolerant. The
PI has used these mutants as a basis for novel genetic screens intended to
identify additional genes that have roles in light perception and response. This
project will use a variety of standard molecular, genetic, and biochemical
approaches to study these genes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By identifying and
characterizing genes which had not been previously implicated in light
responses, this project will provide new insights into the mechanisms by which
plants respond to their light environment. Shade responses are important in
agriculture, as shading can reduce agronomic performance by increasing lodging
(falling over), decreasing yield, and reducing plant defenses to pathogens and
pests, therefore the information obtained in this project may help guide future
work on light responses in crop plants. Also, the majority of work in this
project will be conducted by undergraduate students at the University of
Wisconsin-Eau Claire (a four-year public comprehensive university),
significantly enhancing their education and making them more competitive and
better prepared as they enter graduate/professional school or the workforce.