* 1354612
* Circadain clock hierarchy and cognition
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2014,01/31/2020
* Karl Obrietan, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 01/31/2020
* USD 600,000.00

Deep within the brain resides a set of neurons that have inherent time-keeping
capacity. The electrical firing properties of this cell population (referred to
as the suprachiasmatic nucleus, or SCN) generates a 24 hour oscillation
(referred to as a circadian rhythm) that functions as a timing cue to ancillary
neuronal oscillator populations found throughout the rest of the brain. This
circadian timing circuit has remarkable power over the nervous system. For
example, key functions of the nervous system, such as the sleep/wake cycle, and
complex cognitive processes (e.g., learning, memory and critical thinking
skills) are modulated by this circadian rhythm. Further, the disruption of this
circadian timekeeping system has profound effects on mood, cognitive capacity
and sleep. Notably, the disruption of circadian timing can result from
alterations in one's work schedule (often seen in night shift workers), or from
a number of acquired and congenital disorders of the brain (e.g., depression,
Alzheimer's disease and Huntington's disease). In fact, the disruption of
circadian timing in individuals with Alzheimer's disease is considered to be one
of the most pressing issues for health care workers. This rich series of
observations raises questions about the functional relationship between the SCN
and ancillary neuronal oscillator populations, and, relatedly, about the
underlying neuronal circuits that modulate cognitive capacity over the circadian
cycle. In this application, the researchers propose to employ a wide array of
innovative interdisciplinary approaches to determine the functional significance
and mechanistic underpinnings by which circadian clock timing in brain circuits
modulate complex cognitive processes, such as learning and memory. The research
will also provide an opportunity for direct student involvement in research and
the data from the study will be used to generate an interactive website for
outreach to the public and included in the Brain Awareness Program that presents
research findings to elementary and middle schools.

Within the central nervous system, rhythmicity is not restricted to the SCN, but
rather, is found in a diversity of brain regions. In line with this, forebrain
structures, including the cortex and hippocampus, express all of the molecular
components required to drive clock timing. Here, the researchers propose to
systematically test the contribution of forebrain clocks to the circadian
regulation of learning and memory. This application is predicated on the
hypothesis that the SCN clock works in a coordinated manner with ancillary
hippocampal/forebrain oscillators to regulate cognitive capacity as a function
of the time of day. To test this idea, the researchers propose to use an
innovative set of transgenic animal models that will allow them to resolve clock
timing at a single cell level, and thus, create a systems and cellular level
blueprint of hippocampal timing (Objectives 1 and 2). This aim will allow the
researchers to identify the cycling cell types (e.g., glutamatergic excitatory
neurons, GABAergic inhibitory neurons, astrocytes and microglia) and to assess
the phase relationship of discrete oscillator populations. Addressing these
questions is key to the understanding of the tightly intertwined relationship
between circadian timing and cognition. In Objectives 3 and 4, the researchers
will use conditional knockout technology to disrupt forebrain circadian timing
and assess the effects on learning and memory. Importantly, with this approach,
SCN timing will be intact, and thus, the scientists will be able to specifically
test the contribution of forebrain oscillators to learning and memory. These
data sets will provide new insights into the complex processes by which the
clock shapes cognition, and in turn provide a foundation for further
experimental approaches designed to reveal clock functionality in a broad range
of physiological and psychological processes.