* 1354563
* SG: Distinguishing between core and transient species: new insights into the determinants of species richness
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2014,02/28/2018
* Ethan White, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 02/28/2018
* USD 154,843.00

Understanding how and why biodiversity varies across the globe is a long-
standing focus of ecology and is a fundamental concern of many conservation
efforts. However, simply counting the number of species in an area may not give
an accurate representation of biodiversity because many of the species observed
in an area do not occur there regularly. By analyzing data collected over the
past forty years by volunteer birders at almost 500 locations across North
America, it was found that most bird species fall into one of two categories:
core species that are observed almost every year at a site, and transient
species that are observed only rarely. The number of core bird species was most
strongly related to local climate and vegetation, whereas the number of
transient bird species was greatest in regions with a diversity of habitats,
independent of climate. This project will assess the generality of this
distinction between core and transient species, and the importance of that
distinction for understanding patterns in species diversity across a broad range
of taxonomic groups and ecosystems including birds, mammals, butterflies,
plants, fish, plankton, and intertidal invertebrates.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results from this research will have implications for both
basic and applied understanding of the determinants of biodiversity, and for how
ecological communities will respond to climate and land use change. Research
training and career mentoring will be provided for one graduate student. In
conjunction with the University of North Carolina's Center for Mathematics and
Science Education and the Pre-College Program, public outreach activities will
be developed that engage middle school students, including a large proportion
from underrepresented groups. The Pre-College Program is an inquiry-based
program of enrichment and encouragement in science and mathematics for women and
minorities underrepresented in scientific and mathematical careers. One product
of this outreach will be an interpretive display exhibited at the North Carolina
Botanical Garden. The researchers will also provide structured workshops to
improve the computational and data management skills of scientists of all
levels.