* 1354094
* New Twists in CDPK Regulation: dual-specificity kinases and a role for calmodulin
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Raymond Zielinski, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 06/30/2018
* USD 535,316.00

Plant calcium-dependent protein kinases (CPKs or CDPKs) are a large family of
plant protein kinases that act as calcium sensors to regulate a range of
processes involved in regulation of growth, stomatal aperture, hormone
signaling, and immune/stress signaling. Hence, a solid understanding of the
mechanisms that regulate these protein kinases is of fundamental importance. The
aim of this project is to further elucidate two recently discovered novel
properties of CDPKs, tyrosine autophosphorylation and calmodulin (CaM)-binding,
to better understand how these factors regulate CDPK activity and plant
function. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goals of the project are to
understand how posttranslational modifications of specific CDPKs modulates their
function, and to define the role these modifications play in regulating plant
growth, development and responses to environmental stimuli. The approach will
involve generating and measuring the activities of phosphosite CDPK mutants,
determining their effect on CaM-binding, and using the directed mutants to
complement CDPK null mutants to determine their effect on plant phenotype. The
project will center around two broad objectives to characterize the occurrence
and regulatory role of: 1) autophosphorylation of CDPKs on Ser, Thr and Tyr
residues, and 2) CaM binding to CDPKs. Studies will involve recombinant proteins
(and site-directed mutants) in vitro that will guide transgenic approaches to
examine function in planta. The results of the proposed studies may
fundamentally alter two paradigms of CDPK regulation. In addition to providing
traditional student training, the project will also include summer programs that
provide opportunities for recruiting underrepresented groups and involve
students in lab activities. In addition, the new Professional Science Master's
Program in Plant Biology/Biotechnology will engage students who are training for
positions outside of academic research with a non-thesis research project.
Finally, all biological materials derived from the project will be made
available to the research community.