* 1354191
* Collaborative Research: Collective intelligence and social brain evolution in ants
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2020
* Wulfila Gronenberg, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 07/31/2020
* USD 530,000.00

Due to its extraordinary complexity, research on non-human animals will be
necessary to efficiently explore the design of the human brain. A central
problem in understanding the origin of the human brain concerns the role of
social life and the demands it places on the brain to generate adaptive
behavior. As humans evolved complex societies, it is thought that the brain
increased in volume to enable advanced cognition. Social insects are outstanding
models to examine brain evolution in light of social complexity. This research
project employs ants as an ideal model system to analyze the relationship
between sociality and brain evolution because different species form colonies
that vary in size and the degree of complexity. This research will also help us
understand how exceptionally small brains are able to process complex social
information. The project will analyze differences in the size and organization
of worker brains, and their metabolic costs to determine if complex social life
has increased the efficiency of energy use in the brain. The project will train
graduate and undergraduate who will become skilled in designing scientific
studies and will acquire techniques that enable brains to be imaged. Students
will also learn data analysis, and scientific writing and publication. The
researchers will develop a curriculum to enrich the education of K-12 students
by introducing them to the study of behavior and neuroscience. The researchers
will recruit diverse participants from the Laboratory Schools of the University
of Chicago to encourage minority students to become activity engaged in science.
The project will broadly support science outreach in the Chicago STEM Pipeline,
Arizona Assurance, Brain Awareness, and Boston Upward Bound programs to address
the critical national need to improve science education and train the next
generation of scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To determine how social
complexity has influenced brain evolution, the researchers will quantify
neuronal metabolic requirements, neuropil investment and scaling, behavioral
plasticity, and synaptic organization in brain regions considered key to
cognitive function. Pairs of species representative of major ant subfamilies
that accentuate variability in social complexity will form the sample groups.
The researchers will: 1) quantify energetic requirements of functionally
specialized neuropil using cytochrome oxidase staining to assess ATP use; 2)
determine if brain development is experience-dependent; 3) quantify synaptic
complexes associated with cognition; and 4) couple behavioral performance with
neural and metabolic metrics. The researchers will determine neuron number and
size and variation in peripheral sensory structures, and examine brain
compartment scaling patterns. Controlling for phylogeny, analyses infer how
independent evolutionary events associated with collective intelligence shaped
brain evolution. All original images will be freely available upon publication,
in the absence of copyright issues. Organismal data (specimen and colony
collection data, phenotypic data, etc.) will be maintained in individual labs,
and will be made freely available upon request. Voucher specimens will be
deposited in the ant collection of the Field Museum.