* 1354423
* Collaborative Research: Conservation and Diversification of Regulatory Pathways Controlling Stem Cell Proliferation
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/2014,02/28/2017
* Christopher Dupont, J. Craig Venter Institute, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Steven Klein
* 02/28/2017
* USD 200,000.00

Stem cells undergo self-renewal to produce more stem cells, as well as producing
daughters that go on to produce multiple specialized cell types. In plants,
cells of the shoot apical meristem (SAM) act as stem cells, giving rise to more
stem cells as well as specialized cell types contributing to the leaves,
branches and fruit. This study investigates the basis for thorn development in
Citrus as a means to understand how the termination of stem cell proliferation
is controlled. Thorns arise from SAM cells that fail to self-renew, and instead
terminally differentiate, providing a unique opportunity to explore how SAM cell
proliferation is controlled. Citrus is an excellent study system to explore this
question as many Citrus species possess thorns, and multiple genetic and genomic
tools exist for work with Citrus. In this study, candidate genes from Citrus
that have been implicated in regulating stem cell proliferation will be examined
for their roles in thorn development using expression analyses and employing
newly developed transgenic approaches. In a complementary set of experiments,
key genes involved in the arrest of stem cell proliferation will be identified
via genome-wide comparisons of the transcriptomes of thorned vs. thornless
Citrus species. These analyses will begin to define the processes important for
stem cell arrest, as well as elucidating conserved and novel mechanisms of stem
cell maintenance and differentiation. Citrus plant growth, fruit yield and
harvest costs are all affected by thorniness, and so understanding how to
manipulate thorn production will greatly impact the economics of this valuable
fruit crop. A postdoctoral associate, a graduate student and three
undergraduates will receive training as a part of this project.
In&lt;br/&gt;addition, a display of Citrus biology will be mounted at the Marsh
Botanical Gardens, New&lt;br/&gt;Haven, CT, aimed at promoting public awareness
and understanding of science.