* 1354831
* RUI: Collaborative Research: Timing and Molecular Origins of Recently Evolved Chiton Shell-Eyes: Phylogenomics of Chitonina
* BIO,DEB
* 04/15/2014,03/31/2018
* Todd Oakley, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 03/31/2018
* USD 350,000.00

Chitons (Mollusca: Polyplacophora) are ecologically important marine
invertebrate animals common on rocky shores. They typically have eight
overlapping shell plates supplied with numerous sensory organs, which in certain
lineages are further developed into tiny image-forming shell-eyes. Chiton shell-
eyes are the only eyes known to focus light using lenses made of the calcium
carbonate - mineral aragonite. This study will establish how many times, when,
where, and how shell-eyes evolved in chitons, employing phylogenetic analyses
from DNA for most living chiton species, plus fossils. Chitons are well suited
for investigating the origin and evolution of eyes because there is considerable
variation in shell-eye morphology that permits comparative studies, behavioral
and molecular experiments are feasible, and chiton shell-eyes evolved recently
compared to the eyes of other animals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant will
benefit society because chitons have unique traits including not only mineral-
based lenses but also magnetite-coated teeth used for feeding and a robust and
flexible form of natural armor that are of interest to the field of
biologically-inspired design. Better understanding of chiton relationships will
help researchers use comparative methods to study these traits and others. The
grant will help develop a diverse, globally competitive STEM workforce by
funding the training of undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral researchers and
fostering collaboration between research- and teaching-oriented universities.