* 1354015
* IDBR TYPE A: Development of a Line Confocal Bessel Beam Platform for High-speed High-Volume 3D Imaging In Vivo
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2016
* Katsushi Arisaka, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Sanford
* 04/30/2016
* USD 642,364.00

This NSF IDBR award is made to Prof. Katsushi Arisaka and collaborators at the
University of California, Los Angeles, to develop a Bessel beam line confocal
microscope. The goal of this project is to develop a system enabling the
recording of three-dimensional cell structure in vivo, in real-time, with
exceptional penetrating depth, and with minimal damage to the targeted sample.
The proposed system will advance scientific understanding by facilitating
cellular observation and systems level biologic analysis. Significantly, this
system will enable the unprecedented high-speed recording of cell dynamics at
super-resolution, in a temporal range permitting observation of developmental
phenomena.

The broader impact is a cost-effective, easily configurable and user-friendly 3D
imaging system for use by scientists towards the in vivo structural
characterization of dynamic biological samples over a timespan of days. This
collaboration will generate an available and reproducible microscope that
significantly advances obtainable information concerning embryo development,
dynamic neural network function, cellular differentiation and regulation, while
enabling high-volume 3D cell imaging. This project directly integrates
educational and research goals through incorporation of microscope development
into a novel, interdisciplinary laboratory course developed by Dr. Arisaka at
UCLA. Thus, development and construction of the system will serve as an
educational platform directly fostering student learning. Moreover, the system
will be housed in the Advanced Light Microscope Facility at the California
NanoSystems Institute (CNSI), resulting in widespread availability to the
extended scientific community.

This award is being made jointly by two Programs- (1) Instrument Development for
Biological Research, in the Division of Biological Infrastructure (Biological
Sciences Directorate), and (2) Biomedical Engineering, in the Division of
Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental and Transport Systems (Engineering
Directorate).