* 1354181
* Carbon dioxide, pH and bicarbonate sensing in sharks
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Martin Tresguerres, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 08/31/2018
* USD 548,000.00

All organisms must be able to sense and regulate the levels of acidity (low pH)
and alkalinity (high pH) in their internal fluids. However, the mechanisms by
which organisms sense acidity and alkalinity are not well understood. Sharks
undergo pronounced variations in blood pH as part of their normal physiology,
and therefore are excellent models to study mechanisms for pH sensing and
regulation. This project will use biochemical, molecular, cell biology, and
physiological tools to determine how sharks sense changes in pH and to
characterize downstream regulatory processes. This information will help us
understand and predict how organisms respond to environmental and metabolic
stress. Because this project will focus on cellular pathways that are shared
with other organisms, the results will also be applicable to a broad array of
additional subject areas. Additionally, some of the information will be
incorporated into undergraduate and graduate physiology courses taught at UCSD.
This project will train one postdoctoral researcher and one minority graduate
student in biological research, as well as several undergraduate students. To
reach the general public, this project will establish a partnership with Birch
Aquarium at Scripps to build awareness of shark biology, ecology and
conservation issues through an innovative interpretive internship program for
high school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will focus in the
bicarbonate-sensing enzyme soluble adenylyl cyclase (sAC), and in putative pH-
sensing G-protein coupled receptors associated with transmembrane adenylyl
cyclases (GPCR/tmAC). Using a combination of experimental techniques over the
entire complexity spectrum from molecules to cells to live sharks, the proposed
research will: 1) identify pharmacological inhibitors selective for sAC and
tmACs, for their use in cell and whole-organism experiments in this project as
well as by other researchers; 2) characterize the mechanisms of sAC and
GPCR/tmAC stimulation in shark cells in response to internal and external carbon
dioxide, pH and bicarbonate stimuli; and 3) explore the presence of sAC in the
cell nucleus and its role in regulating gene expression, using a combination of
experiments with isolated nuclei, cells and organs, and transcriptomic and
proteomic analyses on tissue samples from starved. This project will
characterize reagents and generate testable hypothesis for future physiological
and interdisciplinary studies. Results will be disseminated through journals,
conferences, and public databases such as NCBI.