* 1354956
* Mechanisms of Fluid Feeding in Insects, from Nanoscale to Organism
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Matthew Lehnert, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Emily Carrington
* 06/30/2018
* USD 626,863.00

Fluid-feeding insects are among the most abundant organisms on Earth. Their
success can be attributed in part to their tubular mouthparts, engineered by
natural selection to acquire a remarkable variety of fluids, such as blood and
nectar. These feeding devices - proboscises - must take up fluids while
remaining free of sticky residues and debris that might impede fluid uptake; in
other words, they must be capable of self-cleaning. The fundamental organization
of the proboscis consists of a slender tube with a surface of minute valleys and
ridges that form canals connected by pores to a central food canal. The research
focuses on the hypothesis that fluid feeding can be explained by a single model
based on unifying principles of capillarity and wetting. To examine this primary
hypothesis, two major insect groups, butterflies and flies, will be used to
study the structure and function of the proboscis. The study is organized around
three objectives: (1) to explain the role of wettability of the proboscis as the
first step in acquiring fluid, (2) to elucidate the mechanisms of fluid uptake
as the second step in fluid acquisition, and (3) to explain how the availability
of fluid, whether in pools or films, determines the means of uptake. The project
offers a new framework for explaining biological phenomena, such as dietary
choices and the diversification of insect life. It also provides a platform for
transferring Nature-inspired principles of fluid uptake and transport to the
development of new engineering devices, such as flexible microfluidic probes.
The research program emphasizes cross-disciplinary interaction between
biologists and physical scientists and translation into interdisciplinary
education of students, from high school onward. Outreach to students, including
those in under-represented groups, by providing research opportunities and by
hosting science teachers to develop teaching modules emphasizing the relation of
physical principles to aspects of Nature, such as butterfly feeding and
pollination. Research results will be incorporated into courses at two
universities and will be disseminated through paper and electronic publications,
professional and public presentations, and student-developed web sites and
blogs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed study launches from preliminary work by
the investigators, which indicates that fluid feeding by insects can be captured
under a single model based on unifying principles of capillarity and wetting
(hydrophilicity and hydrophobicity), which heretofore have been poorly explored.
Tools and principles will be used to provide a quantitative, comparative
analysis of the (1) micro-architecture of the mouthparts (e.g., scanning
electron microscopy, X-ray tomography), (2) role and function of micro-
architecture in acquiring and transporting fluids into and through the
mouthparts (e.g., X-ray phase-contrast imaging, fluorescent and dark-field
optical microscopy, and mathematical image analysis), (3) materials wetting and
fluid flow through different conduits (physical and mathematical modeling
augmented by full characterization of fluid properties such as food rheology,
surface tension, and contact angles), and (4) hydrophilic-hydrophobic properties
of the mouthparts (e.g., confocal microscopy, fluorescent imaging, Atomic force
microscopy).