* 1354809
* Investigating protein methylation in neural crest development
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Laura Gammill, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Klein
* 07/31/2019
* USD 675,000.00

Once an egg is fertilized, that single cell must divide repeatedly to generate
the trillions of cells that make up our bodies. In adults, most cells have
specialized jobs to do. However, cells in early embryos have many options
available to them. As developmental biologists, the Gammill lab studies how
embryonic cells decide what their roles will be, as well as how cells with
different jobs come together to create properly structured organs in their
correct locations. In considering these questions, there is a particularly
fascinating type of cell that appears as the brain and spinal cord form. These
cells, called neural crest cells, are striking because they do not stay in the
central nervous system where they are born. Instead, neural crest cells crawl
away to other parts of the embryo and become many important structures,
including bones in our face, part of our heart, pigment in our skin, as well as
nerves that regulate digestion. Because neural crest cells make so many diverse
parts of us, when these cells don't form correctly, a number of common birth
defects can result. It is crucial to understand normal neural crest development
so that we can identify ways that the food we eat, chemicals in our environment,
and our family's medical history disrupt these normal processes. Moreover,
neural crest cells provide a great example to learn how cells move and decide
who they are. Specifically, this project studies how the addition of a molecular
switch called 'methylation' on neural crest proteins (the machines that carry
out cell function) regulates neural crest cell behavior and identity in early
embryos. This project promotes training of numerous junior scientists, enhances
the teaching curricula of the principal investigator, and engages the community
to advance STEM learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this
project is to understand how protein methylation regulates neural crest
development, building on the Gammill lab's prior NSF-supported research that
identified the histone H3 lysine 36 (H3K36) dimethylase NSD3 as the first neural
crest-essential protein methyltransferase. To attain this objective, the
research will: 1) reveal the relationship between H3K36me2 and gene expression,
and the role of H3K36me2 in a key developmental cell fate decision, by comparing
NSD3-dependent H3K36me2 and expressed genes in the neural crest genome-wide
using ChIPseq and RNAseq as the neural crest developmental program is activated;
2) define the function of the neural crest-expressed H3K36 trimethylase SETD2
using chick transient genetics and molecular embryology, enabling future
experiments to examine the interplay of H3K36me2 and me3 in the spatiotemporal
regulation of neural crest gene expression and further increase understanding of
H3K36 methylation in a developmental context; 3) investigate the mechanism by
which non-histone protein methylation regulates neural crest migration by
identifying and characterizing non-histone protein substrates of NSD3 using
protein arrays, mass spectrometry, and chick transient genetic analysis. This
project will give important new insight into neural crest development and
fundamental mechanisms of cell migration, and establish post-translational
methylation of non-histone proteins as a novel influence during development.
Furthermore, this project will have broader impacts by training a postdoctoral
fellow, a graduate student, and at least four undergraduates, disseminating
research findings in publications and talks, and incorporating research progress
into teaching as well as through numerous community outreach activities.