* 1354732
* RCN: Drought-Net: A global network to assess terrestrial ecosystem sensitivity to drought
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2014,04/30/2021
* Melinda Smith, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 04/30/2021
* USD 499,992.00

All ecosystems on earth will be impacted to some extent by climate change, and
more frequent and severe droughts are forecast for many regions. Terrestrial
ecosystems are known to vary dramatically in their responses to drought, and
understanding why there are such big differences is very important for
predicting the impacts of drought in a region or across North America. To
effectively forecast how terrestrial ecosystems such as deserts, grasslands, and
forests will respond to drought, ecologists must first study how each system
responds to drought of a given severity, and then improve existing models by
incorporating the factors that cause the large variation that has been seen in
response to drought in past studies. Traditional site-based research by a single
investigator working at a given site cannot provide this knowledge, as different
methods are used in different studies. Coordinated experimental networks, with
identical protocols and comparable measurements, are ideally suited for
comparative studies at regional to global scales. This project will establish
the Drought-Net Research Coordination Network to advance understanding of the
determinants of terrestrial ecosystem responses to drought by bringing together
an international group of scientists to conduct three complementary research
coordination activities: 1) planning and coordinating new research using
standardized measurements to leverage the value of existing drought experiments
across the globe, 2) finalizing the design and facilitating the establishment of
a new international network of coordinated drought experiments, and 3) training
highly motivated graduate students to conduct synthetic and network-level
research through Distributed Graduate Seminars focused on drought. Merging data
from these activities will be an important activity conducted by Drought-Net
participants in all career stages, particularly graduate students and
postdoctoral researchers.

Drought has social, human health, and economic impacts for people in the United
States and around the world. Because climate change may increase the frequency
or severity of drought, understanding the effects that droughts have on the
sustainability of forests and grasslands is becoming an urgent issue. Drought-
Net will focus on establishing international collaborations among researchers
who study these challenges. The Distributed Graduate Seminars will train the
next generation of global change scientists in collaborative synthetic and
network-level research, with emphasis on increasing the involvement of
underrepresented groups and geographic regions. Open calls for participation in
network events and network-related products (datasets, newsletters, papers,
reports, etc.) will be posted on the Drought-Net website, to encourage access by
the broader scientific community and the general public. Finally, Drought-Net
will partner with the "Ask-A-Biologist" program at Arizona State University to
create articles and companion activities centered around drought impacts on
terrestrial ecosystems. With its large Web footprint of 1.5 million visitors per
year and links to science educators, broader impacts will be extended into the
area of K-12 and life-long learners.