* 1354564
* (B7N) - A Low Impact, High Efficiency Transformation Marker System
* BIO,IOS
* 11/01/2013,10/31/2016
* Luca Comai, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Anne W. Sylvester
* 10/31/2016
* USD 299,823.00

Selection is an important tool for genetic analysis and plant transformation.
The most widely used selection approach involves resistance to antibiotics such
as kanamycin or to herbicides such as BASTA. Although quite effective, these
selection tools present problems involving toxicity as well as low regulatory
and public acceptability. This EAGER project proposes to develop a new
selectable marker system for crop plants based on the alteration of cellular
properties within the apical meristems. The system will be based on
complementing through transgenes non-essential deficiencies in selected
developmental mutants. The system will provide multiple advantages including
lower cytotoxicity, easier application of targeted modifications, reduced risk
of marker escape, and improved consumer acceptance and regulatory compliance.
Aim 1 will use a characterized Arabidopsis regulatory pathway to demonstrate
basic feasibility. Aim 2 will identify and complement mutations in new genes in
Arabidopsis, tomato and rice to test their suitability for this system. The
final aim 3 will explore the use of forward screens for identifying suitable
mutations among plant exhibiting specific phenotypes. The project expects to
demonstrate the application of this novel system in the Arabidopsis model system
and then extend its use to at least one crop species.

Since the original reports of plant transformation nearly 30 years ago, the
search for selectable markers that would overcome the drawbacks of
antibiotic/herbicide resistance has been intense. This marker system has the
potential to revolutionize the way plant scientists approach transformation for
basic research and for crop improvement. The research proposed here follows a
radically new approach and will use naturally existing plant genes; thus,
products generated by this method will more likely be accepted by consumers and
approved by regulatory agencies. If successful, the methods will be made
available on the laboratory's web site at
http://comailab.genomecenter.ucdavis.edu/index.php/ Data methods. Plant
materials will be deposited in TAIR or Tomato Genetic Resource Cooperative and
other appropriate public germplasm repository.