* 1354911
* Exploring Circadian Cycles in Intestinal Firmicutes
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Esther Angert, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 07/31/2019
* USD 700,000.00

Most life on Earth follows a daily routine guided by predictable environmental
cycles (light and dark, temperature changes etc.). Some aspects of the routine
are controlled by external cues while some are maintained using circadian
rhythms. These internal, self-sustained clocks with a periodicity of about 24
hours allow microbes, animals and plants to anticipate and prepare for daily
fluctuations. Recently, self-regulated clocks composed of one or a few proteins
have been discovered, suggesting that genes for a robust clock can be readily
acquired. Thus far, true bacterial clockworks have been characterized only in
phototrophs (that harvest energy from sunlight), but other bacteria would likely
benefit from an internal clock. Specifically gut microbes, with a clock that
allows them to anticipate changes in host activities, would have an advantage
over bacteria without a clock. Shift workers often suffer intestinal discomfort
and weight gain. Gut microbes out of sync with their human host may be
contributing to these unwanted physiological changes. Uncovering a gut microbe
circadian clock would inform targeted remedies to combat undesirable
physiological changes that accompany our modern
lifestyles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To date, the complexity of gut microbial
communities and lack of any readout for daily processes have hampered the
ability to observe regular functions in most gut microbes. To circumvent these
issues, wild surgeonfish and their intestinal bacteria will be used as a natural
model system to describe daily metabolic and developmental cycles. One group of
Firmicutes, Epulopiscium spp. and related epulos, are naturally occurring,
abundant intestinal symbionts that produce conspicuous internal offspring once
every 24 hours in a predictable process. This provides a meter of everyday
physiological changes in natural symbiont populations. Daily physicochemical
changes in the intestinal ecosystem will be characterized to uncover regular
fluctuations that may be used for entrainment. Symbiont oscillations will be
determined by analyses of their temporal transcriptome and the cyclical redox
cycle of a widely distributed clock protein. The project provides training
opportunities for postdoctoral, graduate and undergraduate researchers. An
undergraduate Reciprocal Exchange Program will be developed to build a
cooperative learning group that will contribute to the research project while
building networks and skills for advanced training. Native Pacific Islanders and
other groups that are underrepresented in the sciences will be specifically
recruited for these opportunities. Project results will uncover fundamental
modes by which gut symbionts coordinate their activities with those of their
host.