* 1354721
* Characterization of the circadian clock in Nannochloropsis oceanica
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/2014,12/31/2018
* Eva Farre, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 12/31/2018
* USD 655,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Circadian clocks are molecular oscillators with a period of
about 24-h. Land plants use the interaction between their circadian clock and
light signals to predict daily and seasonal changes. However, little is known on
how light quality and the circadian clock reveal time, seasonal, and depth
information in the marine ecosystem. The goal of this project is to study the
circadian clock of the marine microalga Nannochloropsis oceanica. N. oceanica is
currently used as a source of omega-3-fatty acids and due to its high lipid
content is being investigated as a potential source of biofuel. N. oceanica
belongs to the Stramenopiles a very diverse group of secondary endosymbionts
that includes diatoms and plant pathogens such as Phytophtora. Although
circadian clocks have been studied in animals, plants, fungi and bacteria,
nothing is currently known about the molecular mechanisms regulating the
circadian rhythms of Stramenopiles. As part of this project the PI's laboratory
will start to identify the molecular components of the circadian clock and
characterize the interaction between light signals and circadian rhythms in N.
oceanica. These studies will advance our knowledge on the evolution of circadian
oscillators, and provide a molecular framework to understand the role of
circadian rhythms in phytoplankton physiology. In addition of training graduate
students, the PI will provide laboratory research experience for undergraduate
students planning to become secondary school teachers. These students will also
have the opportunity to develop their own laboratory-teaching units.