* 1354557
* Defining the Roles of Microbial Taxa in Soil Nitrogen Turnover
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2017
* Jennifer Pett-Ridge, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 06/30/2017
* USD 200,000.00

Soil microorganisms, especially bacteria and fungi, are essential players in
organic matter decomposition. Their activities both release and sequester plant-
available nutrients, such as nitrogen. Although thousands of different species
of bacteria and fungi participate in nitrogen cycling, little is known about
which species most actively participate or their preferences for different forms
of nitrogen. This research will use a new, state-of-the-art method to identify
microbial species that use different forms of nitrogen and how this changes
across a range of natural and managed soils. The information gained by this
research has the potential to deepen our understanding of how microorganisms
process nitrogen in soils, which has implications for our ability to forecast
plant and ecosystem responses to environmental change. For example, if different
types of fungi and bacteria process nitrogen in the same way, then current
models of nitrogen cycling are robust to changes in species composition;
however, if there is specialization, then models would be substantially improved
by incorporating these differences. Ultimately, this information will lead to
better understanding of how nitrogen is cycled and has the potential for
improving how nitrogen is managed to sustain the productivity of terrestrial
ecosystems.

The researchers will couple a new, high-sensitivity stable isotope probing
method (Chip-SIP), with the well-established method of 15N isotope pool dilution
used to measure gross N cycling rates in soil. Chip-SIP uses NanoSIMS isotopic
imaging to quantitatively measure incorporation of 15N substrates into microbial
rRNA hybridized to a phylogenetic microarray. The objective is to identify the
dominant microbial taxa assimilating organic and inorganic forms of N in soils
with histories of high and low N inputs. Soils from three sites with a 30-year+
history of high and low N inputs will be used to answer two questions: 1) Which
microbial taxa dominate the assimilation of organic N vs. inorganic N sources,
and does it depend on N input history? 2) How does the ratio of NH4+
assimilation/nitrification relate to the types and diversity of dominant taxa,
and is this relationship influenced by N input history? To address these
questions, N assimilation will be determined by adding tracer levels (low
concentrations, high enrichments) of 15N-labeled substrates, and using the rate
of isotope dilution to calculate gross N process rates, and Chip-SIP to identify
microorganisms actively assimilating N. The data generated will provide insights
into microbial structure-function relationships for key biogeochemical processes
in the soil N cycle, which are integral to productivity and sustainability of
natural and managed terrestrial ecosystems. This novel application of Chip-SIP
combined with isotope pool dilution in soils will identify the dominant
microbial taxa assimilating organic vs. inorganic N under conditions of low and
high N inputs. By correlating these taxa with process rates, and measuring how N
processing rates and active taxa change when the activities of different
functional groups are suppressed, this research will provide insights into the
nature of their interactions and establish if N inputs affect competitive and
facilitative behaviors in N cycle processes. Finally, incorporation of taxa-
specific N assimilation parameters into N cycle models holds promise for
improvement of their predictive capability.