* 1354734
* Effects of environmental clines and herbivory for plant functional traits and response to climate change
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2020
* Kailen Mooney, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 07/31/2020
* USD 590,447.00

Over generations, wild species can adapt to their physical environment and
evolve, for example, features that enable them to better survive drought.
Species can also adapt in response to other species. For instance, being eaten
by insects can select for the production of defensive chemicals in plants. This
project will study how these two types of drivers of evolution, the physical and
the biotic, can work in concert to direct evolution and to shape local
adaptation within a species. Research will focus on how the availability of
water and the presence of plant-eating insects have caused different populations
of a widespread woody plant to evolve different abilities to withstand drought
and damage. Results will improve basic scientific understanding of how multiple,
natural forces can change organisms through evolution. The work will also
advance practical understanding of how multiple aspects of global change, such
as climate change and introduction of species into new habitats by humans, are
likely to change the species with which people live. To help communicate this
understanding to the public, the project will develop educational curricula for
K-12 youth. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers will study the woody shrub
Artemisia californica along 700 km (6o latitude) of the central and southern
coast of California, a region in which precipitation variability is projected to
increase. Genotypes from 20 source populations will be established in common
gardens throughout the range of the species and subjected to ambient and reduced
herbivory and to ambient and increased intra-annual variability in
precipitation. The measurement of plant traits from these gardens will be
complemented with measurements of herbivore tolerance, defense and resistance
traits from a parallel field study. Population source sites will be
characterized with respect to both the abiotic and biotic environment. By
measuring patterns of natural selection on plant traits under current and
manipulated environments, this study will document current patterns of local
adaptation and forecast future evolutionary response to projected climate
change.