* 1354231
* Validating contrasting terrestrial climate-sensitive Pliocene deposits through high resolution modeling of paleo-environments in the Transantarctic Mountains
* GEO,OPP
* 07/08/2013,05/31/2014
* Douglas Kowalewski, Worcester State University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Kurz
* 05/31/2014
* USD 29,728.00

Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;Neogene sediment records recovered by ANDRILL
suggest multiple events of open water conditions and elevated sea surface
temperatures at times when terrestrial data from the McMurdo Dry Valleys
indicate hyper arid, cold, desert conditions. Interpretation of the ANDRILL data
suggests the West Antarctic Ice Sheet is highly sensitive to changes in Pliocene
sea surface temperatures and this conclusion has been supported by recent Global
Circulation Model results for the early to mid Pliocene. The PIs propose to
model paleo-ice configurations and warm orbits associated with a WAIS collapse
to assess potential climate change in East Antarctica. During such episodes of
polar warmth they propose to answer: What is the limit of ablation along the
East Antarctic Ice Sheet?; Are relict landforms in the Dry Valleys susceptible
to modification from increase in maximum summertime temperatures?; and Is there
sufficient increase in minimum wintertime temperatures to sustain a tundra
environment in the Dry Valleys? Integration of depositional records and model
outputs have the potential to test the performance of numerical models currently
under development as part of ANDRILL; reconcile inconsistencies between marine
and terrestrial paleoclimate records in high Southern Latitudes; and improve
understanding of Antarctic climate and ice volume sensitivity to forcing for
both the East Antarctic and West Antarctic Ice Sheets.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: &lt;br/&gt;Results from this study have
the potential to be used widely by the research community. Outreach to local
elementary schools from other funded efforts will continue and be extended to
homeschooled students. A Post Doc will be supported as part of this award.