* 1354962
* Neural Codes for Vocal Sequences
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2020
* Richard Mooney, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Evan Balaban
* 07/31/2020
* USD 850,000.00

Some of the most remarkable behaviors, including speech, musical, and athletic
performance, depend on the brain's ability to precisely represent and control
the timing and order of elementary movements. How the brain accomplishes this
feat is largely unknown. This project will identify how the brain encodes the
vocal elements and sequences used in learned vocal communication. To accomplish
this goal, state of the art high-resolution optical imaging and electrical
recording methods will be used to measure neural activity in animals as they
engage in vocal learning and communication. This project will determine how
populations of interconnected neurons that are necessary to vocal communication
encode vocal elements and sequences. Accomplishing this goal is essential to
understanding the neural basis of communication and also has other important
potential benefits, including the ability to diagnose and ultimately repair
brain pathologies that impair perception or movement, and to design machines
that emulate these processes. This project will advance our understanding of
neural mechanisms that enable the production and perception of complex,
sequential behaviors, train professional scientists at the doctoral and
postdoctoral levels, and enrich the science curriculum of high school students
both locally and nationally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this
project is that it will shed light into fundamental cellular processes by which
the brain encodes complex learned behaviors. This project's goal is to
understand how the brain encodes syllables and syllable sequences in birdsong, a
complex learned vocal behavior. The study will focus on how syllables are
represented by spatiotemporal patterns of activity in populations of
sensorimotor neurons important to vocal communication. Resolving this problem is
an essential step to understand the neural basis of vocal communication. This
project blends leading edge methods, including multiphoton calcium imaging of
neuronal population activity and intracellular recordings and genetic
manipulations in singing birds, to explore the synaptic, cellular, and circuit
mechanisms that encode learned vocalizations. Until now, it has been impractical
to interrogate how the brain encodes sensory and motor representations of such
complex behaviors with cellular and synaptic resolution.