* 1354287
* Informal Learning And Scholarship In Science And Society: A Multi-Disciplinary Workshop On Scientific Creativity And Societal Responsibility
* EDU,DRL
* 03/01/2014,02/29/2016
* Edward Finn, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Alphonse Desena
* 02/29/2016
* USD 49,997.00

This conference at Arizona State University is an early-stage activity inspired
by the upcoming 2016 - 2018 bicentennial of the conception, writing and
publication of Mary Shelley's "Frankenstein - or The Modern Prometheus." That
book, and the dozens of films produced subsequently, have provoked questions for
researchers and citizens that have endured for two centuries and are relevant
today. &lt;br/&gt;- How have we gone from a world in which Mary Shelley could
watch public demonstrations of voltaic power on dead animals to one in which the
dissection of animals in classrooms is frowned upon, but the creation of new
life forms via an international synthetic biology competition (iGEM) is
celebrated?&lt;br/&gt;- How do literary, artistic and other cultural portrayals
of science and engineering inspire and inflect STEM research?&lt;br/&gt;- What
steps do contemporary scientists and engineers need to take in order to proceed
with their innovative activity in a responsible fashion?&lt;br/&gt;- What role
do lay citizens have in making decisions about science and
technology?&lt;br/&gt;- How can we understand the broad relationship between
creativity and responsibility?&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The convening brings
together a USA and international group of educators in informal science
education and multi-disciplinary scholars who study various aspects of the
interactions of science, technology and society (STS). This team of natural and
social scientists, engineers, museum professionals (Museum of Science, Boston
(MOS); Science Museum of Minnesota (SMM)), artists and humanities scholars will
begin to formulate plans for producing exhibits, educational programs and
demonstrations, fiction and nonfiction writing contests, performances, and
curricula that explore science education, ethics and artistry. An overarching
goal is to establish a process that could create a national and global network
of collaborators to plan programs worldwide and establish new professional
collaborations of researchers beyond the bicentennial.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
workshop, a first step toward a possible larger initiative, could be significant
both for the public's engagement with contemporary issues of science and society
and for stimulating new inter-disciplinary research on such issues.