* 1354050
* RUI: Confirmation of the roles of fungal genes in plant stress tolerance
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Mustafa Morsy, University of West Alabama
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 06/30/2018
* USD 554,458.00

The 3-way symbiosis at the focus of this project is intriguing by virtue of the
host plants gaining tolerance to soil temperatures of up to 125°F, a temperature
at which most plants cannot grow. Plants survive this temperature due to their
association with a particular fungus infected with a specific virus. Virally
infected fungi living symbiotically with a host plant provide heat tolerance to
a wide range of crop plants including tomato, corn, and rice. In a field trial,
tomato plants harboring a fungal-viral symbiont showed improved growth and fruit
production at elevated temperatures compared to non-infected plants. With the US
economy losing more than $15 billion annually in crop production due to
environmental factors, it will be potentially helpful to understand the
mechanisms by which thermotolerance is induced in this virus-fugus-plant
symbiosis. Insights gained from the research are likely to help in the
development of methods to retain crop productivity in the face of high
temperature stress. The project will provide hands-on multidisciplinary research
training and educational opportunities for underrepresented minorities and
first-generation college students at the University of West Alabama, a
designated Minority Serving Institution. In addition, the project will include
an educational outreach program for underprivileged K-12 students and adults
through the Science Saturdays and Science Coffee Shop outreach programs,
respectively. Finally, the physiological and molecular roles of fungal
metabolites in stress tolerance will be of broad interest to the scientific
community.

In the geothermal soils of Yellowstone National Park, where temperatures can
reach 65°C, a 3-way mutualistic association has evolved among panic grass
(Dichanthelium lanuginosum) and a fungal endophyte (Curvularia protuberata)
bearing a mycovirus, Curvularia thermotolerance virus (CThTV), which allows the
3 organisms to cooperatively survive extreme temperatures. Metabolic analyses
showed significant changes during stress in our model system tomato (Solanum
lycopersicum) infected with C. protuberata. The data collected in those analyses
provide strong evidence that fungal trehalose and melanin are essential for the
heat-stress tolerance mechanisms conferred by the 3-way symbiosis. In addition,
CThTV contributes to thermotolerance via its interaction with a fungal
translationally controlled tumor protein (TCTP) and catalase/peroxidase (KatG),
which control fungal cell cycle and cellular redox, respectively. The hypotheses
of this research are that C. protuberata carrying CThTV confers thermotolerance
in plants via: 1) production of large quantities of trehalose, which is
transported into plant tissues and functions as a signalling or osmoprotectant
molecule to regulate plant biochemical processes during stress; 2) fungal
melanin, which likely alters fungal cell walls to control trehalose transport
into and accumulation in plant tissues during stress; and 3) CThTV, promotes
thermotolerance by interacting with fungal TCTP and KatG to control fungal cell
cycle and cellular redox during stress. In particular, the proposed research is
designed to test the involvement of fungal trehalose, melanin, TCTP, and KatG
genes in thermotolerant tomato associated with fungal-viral symbionts. The aims
of this study are to: 1) knock down the trehalose, melanin, TCTP, and KatG genes
in thermotolerant C. protuberata-carrying CThTV, thermotolerance will be
completely abolished in trehalose or melanin synthesis knock downs, and reduced
by knocking down TCTP or KatG expression; and 2) overexpress the same genes in
non-thermotolerant C. protuberata without CThTV, plants are expected to gain
thermotolerance characteristics in the case of trehalose and melanin
biosynthetic gene overexpression, and exhibit improved thermotolerance in the
case of TCTP and KatG overexpression.