* 1354149
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Not So Fast - Historical Biogeography of Freshwater Fishes in Central America and the Greater Antilles
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2014,04/30/2021
* Prosanta Chakrabarty, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 04/30/2021
* USD 531,373.00

The Central America/Greater Antilles region, including Puerto Rico, has one of
the most complex geological histories in the world, with extinct and current
landbridges, drifting island chains and many moving parts over the last 70
million years. With over 500 species of freshwater fishes,this region can inform
us about this complicated history because the fish are typically restricted to
freshwater habitats on those moving landmasses (i.e., they can only move among
areas that are physically connected). Thus, the history of freshwater fishes can
help reveal the complex history of the islands and landmasses that currently
make up the Central American landbridge and the Greater Antillean islands. This
project will help researchers better understand the impact of the separation of
the Caribbean Sea and the Pacific Ocean and the connection of North and South
America by what is now Central America and potentially by earlier landbridges.
Researchers will gain a better understanding of how unique historical events can
result in mass species diversification or mass extinction, and how the formation
of dispersal corridors can degrade biotic provincialism. Working with local
Caribbean and Latin American colleagues as well as student members of their own
labs, researchers will use this evolutionary, taxonomic and geographic knowledge
to determine the conservation status of these poorly understood and potentially
threatened lineages of fish species. The conservation status will be used by
local and national governments to prioritize conservation actions for added
societal benefit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this study, researchers will collect
specimens of the regions freshwater fishes in order to obtain DNA and
morphological specimens for museums. Phylogenetic relationships will be
estimated using a next-generation sequencing approach applied to several hundred
species. These analyses will include species tree estimation, divergence date
estimations and historical biogeographical analyses. This synthetic analysis
will determine the relationships and historical processes leading to present
patterns of diversity. The results will be distributed through scientific
publications, databases and Encyclopedia of Life species pages. Thousands of
museum specimens, next-generation genomic markers, and newly developed
phylogenetic and biogeographic programs will be made available as the products
of this work.