* 1354007
* Collaborative Research: Long-term changes in peatland C fluxes and the interactive roles of soil climate, vegetation, and redox supply in governing anaerobic microbial activity
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2021
* Merritt Turetsky, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 07/31/2021
* USD 146,444.00

Northern peatlands store a large proportion (&gt;30%) of the world's soil
carbon, and given their predominance at high latitudes are expected to
experience warming at twice the global rate. Warming of peatlands, therefore,
has high potential to create strong feedbacks to global climate if it causes
accelerated rates of decomposition that result in the release of this carbon to
the atmosphere. Our current view of carbon cycling in peatlands suggests that
the majority of decomposition occurs in the thin, oxygen-rich peat layer above
the water table. Once carbon is transferred to deeper, saturated peat layers,
decomposition rates of carbon are thought to be negligible due to cold
temperatures and low-oxygen conditions that inhibit decomposition. Peat soil
carbon below the water table can, however, be decomposed by microbes using a
variety of biochemical processes that don't rely on free oxygen, but are
energetically less efficient. These alternative metabolic pathways can result in
the production of methane (CH4), a trace gas with much higher greenhouse warming
potential than carbon dioxide (CO2). Thus, the position of the water table has
traditionally been used as a predictor of overall decomposition rates and
methane production in peatlands. However, preliminary results from an Alaskan
peatland water-table manipulation experiment (the Alaska Peatland Experiment, or
APEX) suggest that decomposition and resulting CO2 production may be higher in
deeper peat layers than previously thought. The goals of this research are to
investigate the factors driving decomposition of carbon in deep peat layers, and
to use this information to benefit society by improving future projections of
the impact of peatlands on global climate. This study will also provide valuable
opportunities for the training of undergraduate and graduate students, and to
educate school children on the drivers and impacts of climate change through
collaboration with the Schoolyard LTER program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the
past 8 years, research on APEX has examined the role of changing soil climate
and vegetation on peatland carbon cycling through monitoring changes in soil
moisture and temperature, plant composition and biomass, and ecosystem CO2 and
CH4 fluxes. The experiment includes a factorial design of water table treatments
(including lowering the water table to simulate drying, and raising the water
table to simulate flooding) and surface soil warming in an Alaskan fen. This
research has revealed gaps in our understanding of microbial decomposition
processes in peatlands, and provides the context for the hypotheses being tested
in this project. In particular, previous work suggests different plant
functional types interact with water table in determining aerobic and anaerobic
peat decomposition. In addition, variation in litter chemistry between plant
functional types is hypothesized to be a major driver of decomposition rates in
peatlands. Collectively, these factors suggest that changes in vegetation exert
significant control over anaerobic decomposition processes in peatlands, but to
date these effects have not been studied adequately, in part because it is
difficult methodologically to separate vegetation from hydrologic controls on
decomposition. New experiments being conducted in this project are designed to
provide mechanistic insights into a suite of factors, including the role of
vegetation, that control stabilization of peatland carbon.