* 1354624
* Collaborative Research: Interactive effects of temperature and nutrient supply on the structure and function of stream ecosystems
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Alexander Huryn, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 07/31/2019
* USD 466,224.00

A lot of scientific effort is now being focused on how plants and animals will
respond to a warming climate. This is critically important, but very difficult
because there are many other global changes occurring at the same time. For
example, humans have widely spread large amounts of nitrogen and phosphorus,
which are important fertilizers. But what effects excess nutrients that are
deposited mainly on land but then wash into aquatic ecosystems will have as the
world warms is not clear. So studies are needed that examine how multiple global
changes like these interact at the same time. The goal of this research project
is to explore how freshwater ecosystems respond to warming and nutrient
enrichment simultaneously. The research is important because nutrient enrichment
may drastically alter the effects of warming on streams and rivers and so the
results should be useful as society tries to adapt to warmer conditions. Results
will also inform ecological theory that attempts to use basic principles for
understanding how species and ecosystems may respond to global change. An
education program will be an integral part of this project and will include the
development of film documentaries, student podcasts, and the more traditional
training of undergraduate and graduate students, as well as research
technicians. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will be conducted in a
geothermally active region of southwestern Iceland, where streams exhibit a wide
range in ambient temperature without significant differences in background
chemistry that would otherwise influence results. The research team will use the
differences in natural temperature between streams to examine how nutrient
supply and temperature together influence the ecology of streams and rivers. The
first objective is to quantify effects of warming and nutrients on the origin
and fate of carbon and nitrogen (e.g., ecosystem productivity, nutrient uptake,
and nitrogen-fixation). The team will then combine ecosystem-scale nitrogen and
phosphorus additions with controlled streamside channel experiments to examine
how the influence of warming on the ecology of streams and rivers is affected by
nutrient supply, and whether short-term responses to warming differ from those
observed in natural ecosystems over longer periods. Responses of these
ecosystem-level processes should also shape how energy and materials flow
through food webs from algae to trout. The second objective is to quantify the
interactive effects of temperature and nutrients on the routes of energy and
materials through river and stream food webs. Food web responses to nutrients
between streams of varying temperatures will be tracked using a combination of
stable (i.e., non-radioactive) isotope tracer additions, secondary production
measurements, and flow food web analyses. This research will provide much needed
information about how two dominant global change drivers, warming and nutrient
enrichment, interact to influence biodiversity and ecosystem function in an
important freshwater habitat.