* 1354688
* Collaborative Proposal: The ecological genomic basis of parallel serpentine adaptation in Mimulus
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2018
* John Willis, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 05/31/2018
* USD 1,038,465.00

A major challenge in 21st century biology is to understand how organisms adapt
to complex and often unpredictable environments. Environmental heterogeneity
results in divergent selective pressures that are important for creating and
maintaining biological diversity; however, little is known about how organisms
respond to such spatially varying selection at the genetic level. This project
investigates the genetic basis of plant adaption to variation in soils.
Serpentine soils present particularly challenging environments for plants ? they
are deficient in several essential plant nutrients, notably calcium (Ca), and
contain toxic levels of magnesium (Mg) and heavy metals. However some species,
such as Mimulus guttatus, are able to grow both on and off of these harsh soils.
This research will characterize soil, climatic, and fitness traits related to
serpentine adaptation from populations of M. guttatus distributed on and off
serpentine soils from British Columbia to southern California, and investigate
whether serpentine tolerance in these widespread populations has evolved via the
same or different genetic and physiological mechanisms. Establishing the genetic
basis of plant adaptation to and the degree of parallelism across widespread
populations will contribute to a broader understanding of plant physiology,
ecology and evolution that will advance the ability to conserve and subsequently
to exploit genetic diversity to produce new crops and plant communities with
greater resilience to emerging changes in the environment, including salinity
and mineral nutrient stress. Serpentine tolerance in Mimulus provides an
integrative and accessible example of plant adaptation, so in addition to
mentoring of postdocs, graduate and undergraduate students, and underrepresented
minority high school students, the investigators will develop and test the
effectiveness of data generated by this work to demonstrate core concepts in
biology for undergraduates. This resource would be developed in part through a
new capstone undergraduate course at Duke University. The investigators will
also train a public school high school teacher and assist in the development,
teaching, assessment, and modification of teaching modules for introductory and
AP biology classes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The molecular genetic basis of
adaptation to serpentine soil will be investigated in M. guttatus , an
ecological genomic model species with a rapid generation time, high quality
annotated genome sequence, extensive genomic resources, and well developed
methods for stable transformation. Serpentine soils are usually lethal, but
hundreds of populations of M. guttatus have repeatedly adapted to these soils
across geographically and geologically distinct regions in western North
America, from British Columbia to southern California. The four aims in the
project will result in one of the most complete and detailed studies of how
plant species evolve in response to spatially varying selection and elucidate
the physiological, cellular, and molecular genetic mechanisms underlying
parallel adaptation. In Aim 1, reciprocal transplant experiments, ionomic
profiling, and detailed soil analysis will be conducted for 20 pairs of adjacent
serpentine and non-serpentine M. guttatus populations from five geographically
and geologically diverse regions. Aim 2 will utilize pooled population genomic
sequence data from each of the 40 populations to identify candidate genes and
SNPs underlying parallel serpentine adaptation, and evaluate whether individual
candidate genes and molecular pathways are shared across widespread serpentine
regions or have evolved in response to particular serpentine sites. In Aim 3,
new, highly efficient and cost-effective methods for QTL mapping combined with
physiological, ionomic, and soil transplant experiments, will be used to
identify the loci that are most important for local adaptation to serpentine
soils at each of the eight serpentine regions, determine whether QTLs are unique
or shared across regions, and for each major QTL evaluate the likely
physiological mechanisms involved in tolerance. Aim 4 involves using fine-scale
genetic mapping, positional cloning, and transgenic experimental approaches
combined with tests of physiological and biochemical function to identify the
most important genes involved in local adaptation to serpentine soils and
characterize their cellular and molecular mechanisms.