* 1354134
* The Effects of Racial Discrimination and Sleep Disturbance on Health and Academic Outcomes among Minority Youth
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2020
* Tiffany Yip, Fordham University
* Continuing Grant
* Peter Vishton
* 06/30/2020
* USD 775,689.00

Sleep is essential for health, daily functioning, and development. Yet, nearly
80% of 9th- and 97% of 12th-grade adolescents are chronically sleep-deprived.
The adverse effects of sleep disturbance are especially pronounced for
racial/ethnic minorities who consistently report poorer sleep hygiene. Hence,
sleep can be added to a long list of areas in which racial/ethnic minorities
suffer from disparities. Sleep disturbance may be a major cause of health and
academic disparities among racial/ethnic minority adolescents. Sleep
disturbance, health, and academic outcomes are also correlated with experiences
of racial/ethnic discrimination, particularly among African American and
Hispanic/Latino youth. This study explores whether sleep disturbance influences
the relationships among racial discrimination, health and academic outcomes in
this high-risk population. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Are youth with greater sleep
disturbance more likely to exhibit a negative impact of discrimination on health
and achievement? This 4-year study will follow adolescents through high school
to understand the ways that social and sleep-related factors influence the
associations among racial/ethnic discrimination, health and academic outcomes.
By collecting daily reports of discrimination, actigraphy (wristband monitor)
measures of sleep, tri-annual reports of health and academic outcomes, and an
index of school racial/ethnic diversity, the study investigates: (a) the effects
of racial/ethnic discrimination on health and academic outcomes, (b) if sleep
disturbance explains the link between racial discrimination and health and
academic outcomes, (c) whether having a positive racial/ethnic identity
influences how racial discrimination is related to sleep disturbance, and (d)
how school ethnic/racial diversity is related to health and academic outcomes.
Today, ethnic minorities already comprise 53% of Americans under age 18 and this
number is projected to grow. The fact that historically minority groups are
experiencing numerical majority status has the potential to redefine race
relations. This study explores whether sleep may help protect minority
adolescents against the negative effects of racial discrimination and stress.