* 1354452
* Regulation of floral growth and patterning in Arabidopsis thaliana
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2022
* Beth Krizek, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* J.D. Swanson
* 04/30/2022
* USD 819,742.00

Beth Krizek&lt;br/&gt;IOS-1354452&lt;br/&gt;Regulation of floral growth and
patterning in Arabidopsis thaliana&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Flowers initiate from
the shoot apical meristem, a dome-shaped structure at the top of a plant that
produces new organs throughout the plant's life. After outgrowth of a flower
primordium from the meristem, floral organ primordia appear in characteristic
positions within the flower and develop into one of four organ types: sepals,
petals, stamens or carpels. Little is known about the mechanisms that control
the positioning of floral organ initiation at particular locations within the
flower and the means by which floral organs grow and develop into their
characteristic forms. The experiments proposed here will investigate these
little-understood aspects of plant development by studying two proteins that
have partially overlapping functions in regulating gene expression within a
flower. This project will use molecular and genetic approaches to investigate
whether these proteins interact with each other and genomic approaches to
identify genes that are regulated by these proteins. These studies will provide
novel insights into pathways controlling the initiation and development of
floral organs. As flowers give rise to essential components of the human diet,
an understanding of how a flower is formed will contribute knowledge important
for agricultural improvements needed to feed a growing world population. The
collaborative nature of the project will provide interdisciplinary research
experiences for students and a postdoctoral fellow in plant development,
genomics and bioinformatics. The project will also provide a summer research
internship for a high school teacher who will use this experience to develop
inquiry-based learning modules.