* 1354636
* RNA 3D Structural Motifs As A New Constraint of Viral and Subviral RNA Evolution
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* David Bisaro, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 07/31/2019
* USD 820,000.00

This project addresses a fundamental biological question of basic and practical
importance: How does the genome of an infectious RNA virus evolve to infect a
host? The proposed activities will contribute new knowledge to answer this
question. In the long-term, such a knowledge base may enable development of new
methods for predicting the emergence of new infectious agents and for developing
new anti-viral therapeutics. A universal structural feature of viral and
subviral RNAs is the presence of many loops and bulges flanked by stems. These
are often described as unpaired regions without specific structural and
functional definitions. This project seeks to demonstrate that these regions in
fact display structural features and mediate key functions. These include viral
replication and systemic movement throughout the host. The project provides
interdisciplinary training for undergraduate/graduate students and postdocs.
Through collaboration with an inner-city high school, the project will also
greatly enhance secondary education by involving participation of high school
students from underrepresented groups including African American, African,
Hispanic/Latino and women.

Recent crystal structure studies on rRNAs and some other RNAs demonstrate that
the vast majority of loops/bulges are highly structured three-dimensional (3D)
motifs with well-defined geometry formed by non-Watson-Crick base pairs, and
that these motifs often mediate RNA-RNA, RNA-protein and RNA-small ligand
interactions. This project will test the hypothesis that 3D motifs in an
infectious RNA function as a critical constraint on the evolution of RNA
sequence variants. Towards this end Aim 1 will test whether Potato spindle tuber
viroid RNA 3D motifs mediate replication and systemic trafficking and constrain
the RNA sequence evolution. Aim 2 will test whether specific RNA motif-protein
interaction is a major mechanism for the 3D motif constraint. The new principles
and research tools developed from this project may significantly advance
research in a number of emerging frontiers of RNA-based gene regulation in
different organisms ranging from bacteria, to plants to humans. These include
(i) mechanism and evolution of recently discovered noncoding RNA-templated
transcription by DNA-dependent RNA polymerases to regulate gene expression, (ii)
structural basis of gene regulation by recently discovered cellular noncoding
circular RNAs, and (iii) mechanisms of RNA structure-mediated intercellular
trafficking of cellular RNAs to regulate gene expression at the organismal
level.