* 1354667
* Physiological and life history differences arising from variation in tracheal development and mitochondrial aging in an ecological model organism
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/2014,01/31/2018
* James Marden, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 01/31/2018
* USD 422,499.00

This study continues a transformation in molecular ecology: the ability to find
and study genetic variation affecting phenotypes that are the basis for fitness
differences in ecological model systems. Results from this study will connect
mechanistically genetic variation encoding a metabolic enzyme to a signaling
pathway, development, morphology, physiology and performance in nature, at the
level of individuals, populations and (via the research in other labs) a
metapopulation. The results are informative for this ecological model system and
for a broader understanding of fitness tradeoffs, maintenance of genetic
variation in populations by balancing selection, and aging. An insect model
system will be used to examine how genetic variation and physiological traits
interact with landscape features and population dynamics. New physiological
insight will also be obtained via determination of how the hypoxia inducible
factor signaling pathway controls both the development of the oxygen delivery
network (tracheae) and mitochondrial aging. This research will examine
experimentally how genetic variation in a gene encoding a central metabolic
enzyme (succinate dehydrogenase; Sdh) affects life history, differences in
tracheal network development and mitochondrial aging in an ecological context.
Complementary experiments employing available Sdh mutants in the model system
Drosophila will be used to test mechanistic relationships. The central thesis is
that differences in tracheal development affect fitness tradeoffs via effects on
flight metabolism, respiratory water loss, survival of summer drying of the
habitat, and the rate of aging of flight muscle mitochondria.

The PI and his students have helped labs in the U.S., Europe and Australia
perform their first transcriptome studies. The PI and his team are now scaling
up this effort by working with a consortium of more than 100 undergraduate
institutions to help them enhance undergraduate teaching and faculty training in
functional genomics. The personnel of this project will work with the Genome
Consortium for Active Teaching NextGen Sequencing Group (GCAT-SEEK), headed by
nearby Juniata College, to instruct undergraduates directly and, via workshops,
train interested faculty across the entire array of member institutions. These
workshops are tailored for undergraduate educators and students who are novices
with respect to NextGen technology and bioinformatics. The workshop training
will assist in all stages of experimental design through assessment, and provide
participants with active learning modules that are easy to integrate into
classes. The PI is also involved heavily in student training (including a number
of students who are under-represented minorities and women), and communicating
science with the general public.