* 1354745
* RUI Sound localization in free swimming fish: multimodal sensory integration
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2014,09/30/2020
* Allen Mensinger, University of Minnesota Duluth
* Standard Grant
* Sridhar Raghavachari
* 09/30/2020
* USD 340,000.00

The main goal for this investigation is determine how vertebrate sensory systems
are integrated to perform complex behavioral tasks. It will address how
multimodal (auditory, vestibular and mechanosensory) sensory input is processed.
The experiments will be performed in the oyster toadfish which possess the
identical sensory cells (hair cells) and vestibular system found in mammals,
assuring the results will have wide interest to vertebrate sensory
physiologists. The investigator will use a neural telemetry transmitter tag, to
record nerve impulses from free swimming fish which will transform the
experiments from the bench top into the environment and allow the correlation of
neural activity with normal behavior in a natural setting. The study will
address two long standing questions in neuroethology: how fish localize sound
underwater, and the effect of self generated movement on bimodal sensory
(auditory and vestibular or mechanosensory) organs. The award will support
training of undergraduate students from underrepresented groups at a research
undergraduate institution and a middle school science
teacher.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The experiments will delineate multi-modal sensory
guidance of a complex behavioral sequence to further our knowledge of the neural
mechanisms of sensory integration. Sound localization for fish plays important
roles in prey detection, predator avoidance, and intraspecific communication.
Although terrestrial animals use interaural time delays to localize sound, the
faster speed of sound underwater, combined with very short interaural distances
suggests that fish must utilize alternative mechanisms. The role of the
mechanosensory lateral line in detecting water movement has been established,
however, recent evidence suggest that it may serve an auditory role. The widely
spaced neuromasts are distributed throughout the head and trunk in different
orientations and could potentially assist in nearfield sound detection and
localization. The researchers will investigate acoustic sensitivity in the
lateral line in the toadfish to determine if it contributes to sound
localization. Toadfish are reliable neuroethological models for bioacoustic
studies as males will acoustically attract females to nesting sites. The broad
head of the oyster toadfish contains widely spaced and easily accessible
neuromasts and cranial nerves. The neural telemetry tag will allow examination
of multimodal sensory integration by simultaneously recording from both the
lateral line and otoliths during sound localization experiments in free swimming
fish. Phonotaxis experiments will determine if superficial and/or canal
neuromasts are necessary for sound localization. The study will provide clearer
understanding of the neural mechanisms regulating behavior and provide training
to underrepresented undergraduate students and K-12 teachers.