* 1354473
* LTREB Renewal: Evolutionary Ecology of Seabird Reproductive Life Histories
* BIO,DEB
* 02/15/2014,09/30/2020
* David Anderson, Wake Forest University
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 09/30/2020
* USD 450,000.00

This project continues a 30-year study of long-lived seabirds, focusing on the
causes and consequences of aging. On the Galapagos Islands, Nazca boobies live
into their mid-20s, much longer than similarly-sized mammals do, and the reasons
for this extended lifespan and the birds' performance in old age are of special
interest. Thousands of parent-offspring relationships are known through the
project's long history of placing permanent numbered leg bands on nestlings
whose parents are also identified by leg bands. Over the next five years, the
investigators will use these family relationships to estimate the genetic basis
of aging. By combining the complete reproductive life histories of thousands of
animals with social pedigrees spanning 5 generations and complete genetic
pedigrees, the research team will quantify the roles of reproductive history and
genotype in senescent decline. They will continue research on the effects of
early life experiences on adult behavior, including the only known analog of the
human "cycle of violence," connecting abuse when young to perpetration of abuse
later, in a natural population.

Results from this project provide the only demographic data available to the
governments of Ecuador and Peru, both signatories to the Agreement on the
Conservation of Albatrosses and Petrels; they are instrumental in the design of
policy on seabird biology in both countries. The research team has played a
pivotal role in collecting the ecological data needed for conserving endangered
and threatened albatross species, including Galapagos booby species. The current
project will continue to deliver these data. Plans are presented for outreach to
local high schools that directly addresses state education standards on
understanding how the environment, and the interaction of alleles, influences
the expression of genetic traits. Workshops will be conducted in two high
schools and timed to coincide with related classroom material. The lead
investigator will train approximately 12 Wake Forest University undergraduates
to conduct these workshops, bringing the undergraduates to the K-12 classroom
environment and career possibilities there. Over 500 high school students
benefit annually from these small-group workshops.