* 1354060
* Collaborative Research: The biology of lightning in tropical forests
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2017
* Gregory Asner, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 06/30/2017
* USD 100,620.00

Lightning is an exceptionally powerful natural phenomenon; its destructive
effects have been a source of fear and fascination for humans throughout
history. Scientists have a relatively good understanding of the physics of
lightning, but its ecological importance at the landscape scale - especially its
role as an agent of tree death - remain unclear. Measuring the effects of
lightning in tropical forests is important because lightning frequency is
expected to increase by as much as 50% over the next few decades as the climate
warms. Moreover, tropical forest structure is changing as lianas (woody vines)
become more abundant. This research will provide the foundation for
understanding how such changes will affect forest dynamics and ecosystem
processes such as carbon cycling in the tropical rainforests of Panama. The
field site in Panama is a popular tourist destination, thus the project provides
a unique opportunity for participants to interact regularly with the public.
Student training is an integral part of the project. Collaboration with the
Kentucky Science Center will result in the production of a Podcast highlighting
this research, and public discussions with project participants in a Science
Caf√© format. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ecologists consistently list lightning as a
source of tropical tree mortality, yet supporting data are remarkably scant.
This project will systematically quantify lightning effects on tropical trees
and lianas on a forest-wide scale in real time. The work will integrate
information from field ecology, physics, and plant electrophysiology to answer
three basic questions: What is the extent of lightning-caused tree mortality
across a lowland tropical forest landscape? Are some trees or tree species
especially susceptible to, or resistant to, the damaging effects of lightning?
Do lianas function as lightning rods, protecting their host trees against
lightning damage? Field work will be conducted in Panama at one of the best-
studied tropical forest sites in the world. The methodology includes the
installation of automated electronic sensors for monitoring strike events over
large expanses of forest canopy. This project will also deploy an experimental
lightning induction device - the Balloon Originating Lightning Trigger - to
experimentally manipulate strike events to trees and lianas on isolated islands.
Results of this work will fundamentally transform our understanding of tropical
forest dynamics by quantifying lightning effects across the landscape and
uncovering key interactions between lightning, lianas, and trees. In a practical
context, this project will also reveal potentially confounding effects of
communications towers and canopy cranes on tree mortality rates. This proposal
is co-funded by the Division of Environmental Biology and the Physics of Living
Systems program in the Physics Division.