* 1354572
* EAGER: US Ignite: A Cloud Enabled Virtual Reality Based Pedagogical Ecosystem for Green Energy and Environmental Engineering Education
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2016
* Kapil Dandekar, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* John Brassil
* 12/31/2016
* USD 270,584.00

This project will develop, implement, and evaluate a novel, scalable and
transferable virtual reality (VR) based pedagogical ecosystem that provides
learners with the relevant skill training to address existing skilled worker
shortage in the area of green energy and environmental engineering. This will
facilitate the growth of new jobs and training opportunities for entry-level
positions in this sector. Specifically, the ecosystem will use cloud services
such as the Amazon Web Services (AWS) for backend technology and 3-D gaming
engines such as Unity3d for front-end rendering to create immersive educational
modules that cover technical topics on green energy and environmental
engineering. The ecosystem will introduce and sustain inside and outside the
classroom: 1) a unique blend of cloud-based self-contained VR modules from STEM
areas of environmental engineering that feature student deliverables such as
virtual renewable energy installations (wind-farms, solar-farms, etc.) for
optimal energy generation, and virtual designs for energy automation systems
along with strategies to operate them at optimal capacity 2) a cloud-based
technological framework to deliver VR educational modules, and 3) a play-based
learning pedagogical model Play-Curricular activity-Reflection and Discussion
(PCaRD) that assess the application of students? independent thought processes,
along with design and operational skills in creating these deliverables.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The creation of a VR-based pedagogical ecosystem in the
context of the specific green energy themes will provide insight into the
opportunities for using computation and bandwidth as a replacement for selected
physical laboratories and field trips. The instrumentation of the VR modules
will provide data on the impact of network bandwidth and latency on the
educational experience. This data will be directly useful for designing and
provisioning larger scale US Ignite VR-based education
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The pathways to the classroom include community
college level of education via Drexel?s partnership with Burlington County
College, high schools via an active GK-12 grant, and undergraduate courses at
Drexel?s College of Engineering. The implementation plan, course materials, and
associated technology will be regularly updated and made available to the public
via a highly interactive web portal in a format that is easily adaptable for
implementation in other universities. The results generated from this effort
will be shared via education research conferences, journals and venues, and will
help inform 1) the US IGNITE community of the benefits and limitations of using
the proposed pedagogical ecosystem, and 2) the ongoing national dialogue on
cloud-based VR education, thereby helping all stakeholders better align their
educational efforts.