* 1354405
* WORKSHOP: Refugee Protection Outside of the International Legal Framework: Expanding Cross-National and Cross-Disciplinary Collaborations, Northwestern University, May 15-17, 2014
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/2014,01/31/2015
* Bruce Spencer, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Gould
* 01/31/2015
* USD 33,967.00

Eighty percent of the world's refugees seek asylum in non-democratic states or
states that have not signed the 1951 International Convention for the Protection
of Refugees and 1967 Protocol, do not have implementing legislation or, if they
have such legislation, do not grant refugees rights as defined by the Refugee
Convention. A two-day workshop at Northwestern University will engage
researchers, practitioners and policy makers about the theoretical and practical
issues, the lessons to be learned and the strategies for achieving protection in
these states. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop is designed to advance
theorizing about the meanings of rules or laws governing refugee status outside
of the Refugee Convention framework, address empirical puzzles regarding how
refugees and international refugee advocacy networks mobilize international and
national law, and identify promising lines of inquiry regarding how national
institutions define, mediate and respond to refugee legal concerns. These
impacts are central to theory-building concerning legal mobilization and
decision making by institutions, and to understanding the conditions under which
the refugee status determination process itself structures refugees' lives. The
research advanced at the workshop will assist in mapping the future of
protection outside strict Refugee Convention parameters, and will inform efforts
to provide alternative statuses and processes of protection to refugees who are
unable to access national asylum status. The workshop will provide a background
study that will lay the foundation for future research in this area. Special
attention will be given to methodologies for measuring outcomes and for
understanding the effects of decisions not to ratify the Refugee Convention on
refugee protection and local integration. Having such knowledge will contribute
to United States efforts to provide sustainable solutions for refugees, victims
of conflict or natural disaster, and stateless people around the world.