* 1354741
* Dimensions IRCN: Diversity and Forest Change: Characterizing functional, phylogenetic and genetic contributions to diversity gradients and dynamics in tree communities
* BIO,DEB
* 04/30/2013,08/31/2016
* Stuart Davies, Smithsonian Institution
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 08/31/2016
* USD 443,010.00

This project will establish an international research coordination network that
combines two existing forest networks in the United States with a set of forest
plots in China, to advance understanding of how tree biodiversity determines the
functional aspects of forests, and to test hypotheses concerning the resilience
of forests to global change. Together these networks maintain 24 large-scale
forest plots in tropical and temperate forests in Asia and the Americas,
providing data on the demography, functional traits, phylogenetic relatedness
and environmental preferences of thousands of tree species. Through a series of
symposia, analytical workshops and international scientific exchanges, these
data will be used to ask: what functional traits underlie species distributions
across environmental gradients; how functional traits and phylogenetic
relatedness of communities link to forest function; how functional traits and
environmental tolerances vary among individuals within species; and how gene
flow contributes to genetic diversity at local and regional scales. By combining
long-term temperate and tropical forest studies across entire tree communities,
this project will parameterize models that incorporate functional and genetic
variation among species, to test predictions about current and future changes in
forests. An ultimate goal is to develop detailed models of forest composition
and its genetic and functional basis, to be simulated over a range of climatic
predictions. This integration across multiple dimensions of biodiversity will
enhance understanding of how forests are structured, a critical step towards
predicting how forests will respond to global change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will implement a series of capacity building and training initiatives to
expand science and enhance collaboration between the United States and China.
The strengthening of the network of forest research plots in Asia and the
Americas will provide information crucial to determining the role of forests in
a changing global environment. This project will engage numerous graduate
students and early-career scientists in interdisciplinary training on taxonomic,
functional and genetic dimensions of biodiversity and ecosystem processes. An
exchange program will enable students and early-career researchers from the
United States to spend 3 months in collaborating institutions in China. Chinese
scientists will have similar opportunities in the United States through parallel
funding provided by NSF-China. In addition, the scientific workshops will result
in the development of new analytical tools and data compilations that will be
made openly available through the web.