* 1354713
* Follicle Selection and Differentation in the Avian Ovary
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2018
* Alan Johnson, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 04/30/2018
* USD 261,000.00

In all birds, reproduction (ability of the ovary to produce eggs) is dependent
upon the initial development of a group of small, undifferentiated ovarian
follicles. It is from this cohort that a single follicle is selected, often on a
daily basis, to initiate growth prior to ovulation. The novel concept tested is
that follicle selection, followed immediately by rapid growth and final
differentiation, is dependent upon the acquisition of Follicle-Stimulating
Hormone (FSH) and Vasoactive Intestinal Peptide (VIP) receptor responsiveness.
Initial studies using the domestic hen as the primary research model will
establish the cellular mechanisms that prevent receptor signaling and maintain
follicles in an undifferentiated state prior to follicle selection. One
objective of the project is to test the hypothesis that ovarian follicle
selection in birds represents a process in which a single undifferentiated
follicle per day escapes inhibitory mechanisms and begins rapid growth and final
maturation prior to ovulation. A second objective will focus on cellular
mechanisms that regulate follicle growth and differentiation immediately
subsequent to selection, including the initiation and entrainment of circadian
rhythms within the ovary. The data generated from these studies are expected to:
1) enable initial predictions about mechanisms regulating follicle selection in
non-avian vertebrates (e.g., reptiles and mammalian species); 2) describe
cellular mechanisms that determine a bird's reproductive potential, and possibly
identify mechanisms that enable multiple ovulations in mammals (including
fraternal twins in humans); and 3) have practical implications to enhancing
fecundity in both threatened/endangered species and food-producing animals.
Research results will be regularly presented at professional society meetings,
and all completed studies will be published in high quality research journals in
a timely fashion. The funding provided will support both undergraduate and
graduate student research projects. The Principal Investigator actively recruits
and encourages the participation of women and students from underrepresented
populations.