* 1354802
* Symbiotic ectomycorrhizal fungi in southern South America: macroecology and evolutionary history from community to landscape scale
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Patrick Matheny, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Andrea Weeks
* 06/30/2018
* USD 450,239.00

Many questions remain about what causes organisms to occur where they do.
Answers to those questions are gradually being solved for for plants and animals
but little is known about the distribution patterns of microbes. Ectomycorrhizal
fungi are beneficial microbes that help plants obtain nutrients, resist
diseases, and tolerate drought. This project will study the biodiversity and
biogeography of ectomycorrhizal fungi in economically important trees in
southern South America such as Nothofagus (southern beech). The main goals of
this work are to document the evolutionary history of Nothofagus-associated
fungi from South America, determine how environmental variables affect fungal
diversity, and understand more about how fungi disperse around the globe. Fungi
will be documented by DNA sequencing from environmental samples and via
collections of fungal specimens (e.g. mushrooms).

This project is an international collaboration that will include research,
education, and cultural exchange among biologists, students, and citizen
scientists from the USA, Chile, and Argentina. In addition to scientific
publications on fungal biodiversity, fungal evolution, and fungi that are new to
science, this project will also produce a free, bilingual, online e-book
detailing the common and charismatic fungi from Nothofagus forests in Chile and
Argentina. This work will increase scientific literacy about fungi in South
America and data from the project will enhance native Nothofagus forestry and
will inform conservation decision-making for Nothofagus.