* 1354041
* Collaborative Research:  Integral Projection Models for Populations in Varying Environments:  Construction and Analysis
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2014,03/31/2019
* Robin Snyder, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 03/31/2019
* USD 102,847.00

All environments are variable and uncertain: some years are hotter, some wetter;
predators wax and wane in abundance. How organisms buffer themselves against
this variability, and exploit it, are major challenges for ecology. This project
will combine new statistical and mathematical theory with long-term data sets on
semi-arid plant communities to address two challenges in understanding how
variable environments affect populations. The first goal will be to identify
which environmental variables most strongly affect plant demographic rates such
as survival, growth, and fecundity. This work will draw upon long-term studies
on natural communities that provide observations on thousands of individual
plants over multiple decades, along with numerous environmental variables that
are measured at high spatial and temporal resolution. With so many potential
explanatory variables, standard statistical methods for variable selection are
unstable and unreliable. This project will combine data mining methods from
machine learning techniques with traditional statistical theory to identify
important environmental drivers, and build more reliable demographic models.
Ecological questions that will be addressed include whether demographic rates
respond primarily to resource availability (e.g., soil moisture) versus non-
resource variables such as temperature; how environment and competition
interact; and how strongly past conditions affect current performance. The
empirical data sets will be used to answer these questions and look for
generalities across multiple communities. A second goal is to understand the
individual mechanisms that underlie effects of environmental variation. For
example, if a plant population's growth is most affected by rainfall, is it
because many plants die immediately, or because of long-term effects such as
decreased life expectancy and smaller size throughout life? To address such
questions, statistical methods from discrete-state random process theory will be
extended to continuous states (e.g., individual plant size) and varying
environments, and applied to the fitted plant demographic models.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An expected transformative outcome from this project will
be new methods for demographic modeling and analysis, and much of its broader
significance will be the applications of those tools in ecology, conservation
biology and invasive species management. Statistical products from this work
will be disseminated freely as R code modules that users can adapt to their own
study systems. The project will also support the research training and mentoring
of a doctoral student in statistics, and a postdoctoral student in quantitative
ecology.