* 1354944
* Understanding evolutionary similarity and diversification of complex pathways of soil fungi to synthesize compounds with diverse ecological, biological and pharmaceutical functions
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2014,05/31/2018
* Joseph Spatafora, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 05/31/2018
* USD 476,609.00

Fungi produce biologically active molecules such as antibiotics and immune
system suppressants through complex biosynthetic pathways. This research
investigates the evolutionary processes that operate in the diversification of
these pathways, and thus the metabolites they produce, using the soil dwelling
fungus Tolypocladium. Species of Tolypocladium are known to be particularly rich
in biologically active metabolites with the best-known example being Cyclosporin
A, which is used medicinally to suppress the immune system in organ transplant
patients. Recent advancements in genomics and computational biology show
significantly greater diversity of metabolic pathways than previously detected
by traditional chemical analyses. As such, science has only observed the "tip of
the iceberg" of fungal biochemical diversity, while the majority await discovery
as promising sources of pharmaceuticals, alternatives for the control of insect
pests and bioremediation of contaminated soils, and essential in the development
of biofuels. A more robust understanding of patterns and processes that have led
to the diversification of fungal genomes, and subsequently their biologically
active molecules, will enhance the ability to exploit fungi for the betterment
of society. This research establishes a case study methodology by which other
fungi can be studied and exploited for scientific advancements. In achieving
these advancements, students and young researchers are trained in an
interdisciplinary manner and equipped to study and develop biological solutions
to the challenges of the modern World.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Genomes of 20 fungal
isolates will be sequenced, identifying and characterizing secondary metabolite
gene clusters. These genomic analyses will be coupled with manipulative growth
experiments and chemical analyses, linking the genetic factors, environment and
ecology, with the metabolites produced, and resulting in a metabolite census of
this group of fungi. Evolutionary processes and patterns of diversification
(e.g., gene duplication-divergence, horizontal gene transfer, gene fusion,
diversifying selection) will be tested using phylogenomic methodologies. The
analyses will be coupled with liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry
metabolite profiling, selective growth experiments, and RNA sequencing to link
secondary metabolite gene clusters with their metabolites. The specific aims and
experimental plan are designed to compare two major hypotheses. The first is
that diversification of secondary metabolites results from complex processes
incongruent with phylogeny. The second is that homologous domains produce
chemically distinct metabolites not previously suspected of having common
evolutionary origins. The research determines if the complex patterns of
evolution shown by genetically distinct non-ribosomal peptide synthetases and
polyketide synthases represent homologous domains and genes, respectively,
produced by evolutionary processes such as duplication-divergence, horizontal
genet transfer, gene fusion, and diversifying selection. The integration of
liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry metabolite profiling, selective
growth experiments, RNA sequencing and phylogenomic analyses will link secondary
metabolite gene clusters and the metabolites they produce, showing the
evolutionary connection between genotypes and chemical phenotypes.