* 1354422
* Molecular dissection of the STENOFOLIA transcriptional network controlling leaf blade outgrowth in Medicago truncatula
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2021
* Million Tadege, Oklahoma State University
* Continuing Grant
* Anne W. Sylvester
* 04/30/2021
* USD 719,542.00

PI: Million Tadege&lt;br/&gt;Proposal number: IOS-1354422&lt;br/&gt;Title:
Molecular dissection of the STENOFOLIA transcriptional network controlling leaf
blade outgrowth in Medicago truncatula.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Leaves are the
energy powerhouses of plants serving as major sites of photosynthetic carbon
assimilation, which sustains life on earth. The leaf blade is a highly organized
structure with cells in the upper and lower surfaces specialized for solar
energy capture and gaseous exchange, respectively. The mechanism by which this
highly organized blade development regulated is a longstanding question in plant
developmental biology. The M. truncatula regulatory gene, STENOFOLIA (STF),
critically regulates blade outgrowth in the middle region between the upper and
lower leaf surfaces. The mechanism of STF function is unknown, which creates a
major gap in understanding of the mechanism that governs leaf blade development.
The overarching objective of this project is to understand the molecular
mechanism of leaf blade development by analyzing the function of STF. This
objective will be achieved using a combination of molecular and genomics
approaches. The project will integrate knowledge from multiple disciplines
including biochemistry, evolutionary biology, and developmental biology and will
transform the mechanistic understanding of growth in plant lateral organs by
providing the molecular basis for cell proliferation and expansion in the leaf
tissue. This is very exciting because it will uncover the fundamental basis of
plant form and function. The knowledge gained from this project will enable
manipulating plant size and architecture to optimize photosynthetic efficiency
and environmental adaptation to improve biomass and crop yield for food, feed,
fuel, and fiber for the benefit of society. The project will provide excellent
training to post-doctoral fellows, graduates, undergraduates, and senior high
school students and is committed to cultivate minority participation in science.