* 1354942
* Neural and Molecular Substrates of Social Competence
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Johann 'Hans' Hofmann, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 07/31/2018
* USD 524,999.00

Social animals possess sophisticated cognitive abilities for assessing,
evaluating, and responding to a wide range of social cues. These social
abilities allow individuals to display flexible behavior based on their social
status and interactions, which is known as social competence. Despite the
detailed understanding of importance of social competence little is known about
the mechanisms, neural and molecular, that regulate this ability. Knowledge of
how responses are regulated will provide essential understanding of social
response, both typical and atypical, and allow ultimately for predictions about
specific responses by individuals. The research uses an interesting model system
to address these questions the African cichlid fish, Astatotilapia burtoni.
These fish are highly social and display extraordinary cognitive abilities, and
can even use known relationships to deduce unknown ones to infer the social rank
of other individuals transitively. This research will provide opportunities to
train undergraduate and graduate students in neuroscience and prepare them for
careers in science and outreach to the general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
specific goal of this research is cichlid fish to identify the neural circuitry,
molecular signaling, and regulatory mechanisms involved in social competence.
The proposal hypothesizes that dopamine acting through the D2 receptor mediates
the neural social network potentiating social competence. Dopamine plays a
particularly important role in encoding the rewarding properties of social
stimuli and is known to modulate motivated, goal-directed behavior. The
researchers integrate behavioral, neuroanatomical, pharmacological and genomic
approaches to discover (1) how animals behave in response to subtle social
information; (2) how social information rewires neural circuits on a short time
scale; (3) how manipulation of the dopaminergic pathway governs behavioral
flexibility; and (4) how social information and the dopaminergic system interact
to affect genome activity. The results thus far suggest that not only do
individuals respond to a social stimulus differently depending on the social
context, but that the behavioral effects of manipulating the dopaminergic reward
system also differ across contexts. Given that the neural networks governing
social behavior are remarkably conserved across all vertebrates, the results of
the planned research will have far-reaching implications for how the brains of
social animals, including humans, perceive and respond to their social
environment.