* 1354133
* Collaborative Research: Social Environment Effects on Hormones and the Integrated Behavioral Phenotype
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Jordan Karubian, Tulane University
* Continuing Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 08/31/2019
* USD 319,999.00

Animals must adjust their behaviors and other traits to a constantly changing
social environment. For example, the strategies and the signals that individuals
use to attract mates and breed often depend on an individual's social status
relative to others in the population, and that status can fluctuate as group
composition changes and/or other individuals change in rank. Accordingly, the
hormonal and genetic mechanisms that underlie such behaviors and signals are
likely to be sensitive to social conditions. Yet, we know relatively little
about these mechanisms, particularly in wild populations living under natural
conditions. This project will examine the mechanisms that allow for behavioral
flexibility, and the ways that those mechanisms evolve, using Australian fairy-
wrens (genus Malurus) as a model system. These study species are uniquely suited
to this research because they show pronounced variation, across both individuals
and populations, in the visual signals that individuals use to attract mates,
and a great deal is known about the effects of hormones (particularly androgens
like testosterone) on the development of these signals. This project will use a
state-of-the-art semi-automated radio tracking system to continuously monitor
social interactions among individuals to examine the effects of those
interactions on hormones and gene expression in the brain, and use experimental
manipulation of social conditions in the field to demonstrate the underlying
causes. Comparisons across populations and across the sexes will be conducted,
making this one of the first studies to examine the role and regulation of
breeding signals in females. Overall, this research will contribute to a better
understanding of the hormonal and genetic mechanisms that allow individuals to
adjust to a constantly changing social environment. In addition this work will
build capacity in Papua New Guinea, a richly biodiverse region of considerable
conservation concern, through key partnerships and direct involvement of locals
in research, educational outreach, and interchange activities. Public
educational materials also will be created, including short videos presenting
results from the research as well as the process of doing the research, for
broad dissemination through proven and highly visited internet channels. Thus,
this project will have broad impacts on both conservation and public
understanding of science.

A central goal of the animal behavior research agenda is to identify the role of
androgens and other hormones in regulating expression of ornaments and
associated reproductive behaviors, yet to date these roles remain unclear. One
view, which has received relatively little attention from behavioral ecologists,
is that androgens are phenotypic integrators that act to produce an adaptive
multi-dimensional phenotype that is well suited to its social environment. This
collaborative project will build on previous research with two sister species of
Malurus fairy-wren that exhibit intraspecific variation in male and female
ornamentation, making this system uniquely suited for examining these issues.
The project consists of three inter-related studies that, together and
synergistically, will address key questions regarding how androgens modulate
expression of breeding signals and associated behaviors. First, high-density
data on social interactions, collected from an automated telemetry array in
conjunction with experimental manipulation of social environment, will be used
to examine the role of social interactions and early-life conditions in
regulating individual androgen levels and breeding phenotype. Second, a
combination of observational, genomic and hormone manipulation approaches will
be used to examine the extent to which androgens affect whole suites of
characters to produce an integrated reproductive phenotype. Finally, hormone
implant experiments and genomic analyses across the sexes and across two closely
related species will reveal the degree of evolutionary constraint on hormonal
mechanisms regulating ornament elaboration and behavior. By bridging the gap
between the ways that behavioral ecologists and endocrinologists view hormones,
this project will transform the ways that we view the role of hormones in
regulating phenotypic integration and signaling.