* 1354971
* Defining the Tyrosine Biosynthetic Pathways in Plants
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Hiroshi Maeda, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 08/31/2018
* USD 450,000.00

Non-technical summary:&lt;br/&gt;Plants synthesize an aromatic amino acid
tyrosine (Tyr), which is an essential nutrient in human diets and a key
precursor of numerous plant specialized compounds. These Tyr-derived plant
natural products have profound impacts on plant growth, development and
environmental responses, and also have important nutritional and pharmacological
activities in humans (e.g., vitamin E, morphine). Despite their importance in
both plant and human biology, we still do not know how Tyr is synthesized in
plants. Therefore, this project will gain fundamental knowledge to enhance the
nutritional quality or pharmaceutical values of crops and medicinal plants, and
can potentially improve plant growth and stress responses for sustainable
production of food and biomass. An outreach event, "Pigment-Art", will take
advantage of attractive and beneficial plant pigments derived from aromatic
amino acids (e.g., betalains). While younger children will appreciate the
beautiful and complex colors in natural pigments, parents and older children
will have opportunities to learn about how these pigments are synthesized by
plants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description of the
Project:&lt;br/&gt;Accumulating evidence suggests that many plants synthesize
Tyr via the intermediate arogenate and therefore differ from microbial models
that usually use 4-hydroxyphenylpyruvate as an intermediate. However,
significant variations appear to exist for the Tyr biosynthetic routes among
different plant species. The goals of this project are to define the Tyr
biosynthetic route(s) in plants and determine their compartmentalization and
crucial regulatory step(s). The proposed research will build upon PI's recent
isolation of Arabidopsis and legume genes encoding arogenate and prephenate
dehydrogenases (ADH and PDH), key enzymes of the Tyr pathway. Arabidopsis ADHs
have strong substrate specificity toward arogenate, are localized in the
plastids and inhibited by Tyr. In contrast, legume dehydrogenases specifically
use prephenate, lack a plastid transit peptide, and are insensitive to Tyr. The
primary hypothesis of this study is that Arabidopsis mainly uses the plastidic
arogenate pathway that is regulated by Tyr, whereas legumes synthesize Tyr via
both arogenate and 4-hydroxyphenylpyruvate with unknown localization and
regulatory mechanism. In this project, kinetic analysis and localization studies
are first planned for the newly identified legume PDHs (Aim 1). In planta
functions of PDHs and ADHs will be investigated and compared using two
contrasting plant models, Medicago truncatula (Aim 2) and Arabidopsis thaliana
(Aim 3). Targeted metabolite profiling and stable-isotope feeding experiments
will be further conducted in the generated mutants and transgenics to directly
measure the distribution of carbon flow among the alternative Tyr pathways.
Although primary metabolism is generally assumed to be conserved across plant
species, our preliminary data indicate otherwise. This project will directly
test this assumption and address how Tyr biosynthesis, a primary metabolic
pathway, has evolved in different plants to support the enormous chemical
diversity that exists in the downstream specialized metabolism.