* 1354046
* Mechanisms of Circadian Clock Network Output
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2014,05/31/2019
* Orie Shafer, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 05/31/2019
* USD 700,000.00

Life on earth is profoundly rhythmic. Animals, plants, and microbes resonate
deeply with the predictable and often severe daily changes imposed by our
rotating planet. In animals, circadian clocks residing deep within the brain
produce an endogenous sense of time that is used to orchestrate many important
biological processes, including the daily oscillation between wakefulness and
sleep. In animals, the circadian clock is composed of a network of neurons
within the brain, each of which expresses a highly conserved molecular clock.
The proper function of this network and communication to downstream brain
regions is critical for human health and psychological well-being. The research
program supported by this award seeks to understand how the clock network of the
brain produces an endogenous sense of time and how it communicates with
downstream brain regions to orchestrate daily behavioral and physiological
rhythms. The objective of this project is to determine the neurophysiological
basis of circadian clock output in the brain of the fly Drosophila melanogaster,
an organism that has consistently enriched our understanding of biological
timekeeping in animals. The studies will address a fundamental mystery in the
neuroscience of circadian timekeeping and could help guide efforts to alleviate
the negative metabolic and psychological consequences of human circadian
dysfunction created by our modern around-the-clock society.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broad goal of this investigation is to understand the
neurophysiological basis of circadian clock output in the central nervous system
of Drosophila melanogaster. The work will take advantage of both well-
established neurogenetic techniques and newly emerging live imaging methods for
the experimental investigation of clock neuron output in Drosophila. These
latter methods make possible the measurement of Ca2+ and cAMP dynamics in
central brain networks during the acute excitation of genetically defined
classes of CCNN neurons. The specific objectives of this project are to identify
the neuronal targets of the CCNN, to determine the roles that specific neuronal
oscillators within the CCNN play in the control of feeding and metabolic
rhythms, and to develop new genetic tools for the examination of neuronal class
specific contributions to clock controlled outputs. These experiments will
significantly advance our understanding of how the CCNN modulates the brain
centers controlling behavior and metabolism and represent a shift in the
experimental approach to clock output in the animal brain. The specific aims of
this project are: To determine the functional connectivity between the CCNN and
established endocrine, sleep and locomotor centers of the brain; To determine
the neural basis the circadian modulation of feeding and metabolism by the CCNN;
To conduct a undergraduate-led screen for enhancer-trap flippase elements
yielding CCNN sub-class specific GAL4/UAS expression for the focused
visualization and manipulation of specific clock neuron subsets. Furthermore,
the principle investigator will develop educational and outreach activities to
introduce students of various ages to molecular and behavioral neuroscience that
incorporate modern genetic tools and teach the fundamentals of experimental
design and interpretation.