* 1354773
* Cellular and metabolic integration of symbiotic organelles in the ciliate Mesodinium rubrum
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2018
* Matthew Johnson, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Purnima Bhanot
* 04/30/2018
* USD 593,767.00

Photosynthetic life (plants and algae) has a complex evolutionary history due to
symbiotic interactions that have resulted in the transfer of chloroplasts (the
photosynthetic organelle) among unrelated groups of organisms. While there is
abundant evidence for the role of symbiosis in these evolutionary events, little
is known regarding how organisms adapt to become "green". This project will
investigate early events in the acquisition of a chloroplast and how an organism
has restructured its entire metabolism in order to use photosynthesis, despite
lacking the genes necessary to run it. The investigators will focus on a common
marine ciliate that is known to feed on one particular group of algae, and steal
its cellular machinery (i.e. the organelles: chloroplasts, mitochondria, and
nucleus). The ciliate is able to incorporate these organelles into its own cell,
and even replicate them as the cell divides, by utilizing genes expressed from
the temporary stolen nucleus. The investigators will use next generation
(transcriptomics, proteomics, metabolomics) and traditional (microscopy, cell
physiology) techniques to discover how organisms can adapt to a photosynthetic
metabolism and incorporate foreign organelles into their own cell. The
investigators will focus on how the ciliate is able to steal a nucleus and
facilitate its gene expression, and the subsequent targeting of proteins back to
the stolen organelles that are reorganized within its cell. This foreign nucleus
cannot divide in the ciliate, and therefore must be routinely replaced by
feeding after the cell divides. These results will have broad applications to
studies of symbiosis (including parasitism), and will reshape how we think about
the role of symbiosis in eukaryotic evolution. The investigators will work with
students (grades 8-12) in collaboration with the Zephyr Education Foundation, to
expand marine science literacy and to teach about symbiosis. They will also
train under-represented undergraduates through laboratory research projects.