* 1354100
* Research in the Origins and Development of Modern Cartography
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2021
* Matthew Edney, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2021
* USD 867,347.00

Project Overview

This project studies the development of cartography in the nineteenth century
when the modern concept of cartography as the science of the measurement of the
world first originated and flourished. An international team of expert editors
will solicit, guide, interpret, and integrate the research of over two hundred
contributors to develop a comprehensive and coherent account of the evolution of
cartography in a social and cultural context. They will trace multiple facets of
this new concept of mapping science within a wide variety of scientific,
technological, political, governmental, economic, and artistic contexts. The
increasing role of civil and military authorities in collecting, mapping, and
using scientific data as well as the rise of mass cartographic literacy and the
democratization of map use will also be studied. The final product will be an
encyclopedic volume; there will also be a free, online publication of the
volume.

Intellectual Merit

This research project promotes new scholarship that will enable intellectuals,
specialists, and the public to understand the critical, formative period for
modern spatial technologies and science. It stands to make significant
contributions to the understanding of contemporary cartography, geography, and
science. It will explain and interpret the origins and formation of modern
cartography, and so of modern science, as cultural and social phenomena. The
editorial team confirmed their volume design through extensive consultations
with leading experts on science, technology, and cartography in the era.
Strategies for working with contributors, for guiding their research, and for
meticulously fact checking their findings were refined through the preparation
of similar volumes on cartography in the eighteenth and twentieth century. The
Press has already commissioned peer reviews of the design and methodology and
has pre-approved the volume for publication.

Broader Impacts

As an interpretive guide to the origins of modern cartography (and more
generally to the socio-cultural constitution of modern science and technology),
it will serve to create scholarly networks and to stimulate innovative and
interdisciplinary research. Its comprehensive content will enable researchers
and readers to more effectively study the interrelationships of mapping sciences
and technologies and their social impacts. The free, online publication of will
capitalize on the widespread fascination and engagement with maps to publicly
promote its analysis of the nature of cartography, science, and technology. In
uncovering and exploring the foundations of modern cartography, the project will
help create a sophisticated public understanding of geospatial science and
technology.