* 1354377
* MicroRNA regulation of an insect diapause
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2014,03/31/2018
* David Denlinger, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 03/31/2018
* USD 352,022.00

One consequence of global climate change is a shift in the seasonal distribution
of medically and economically important insect species. As temperatures increase
many species are emerging earlier in the spring and producing more generations
per year, thus having a bigger impact on human well being. Knowing how insects
coordinate their seasonal development with appropriate seasons for growth and
development is critical for predicting changes in seasonal distribution of key
insect species. Much of the year is unsuitable for continuous development and
during this time many insects enter a period of dormancy known as diapause.
Diapause allows insects to "escape" from predictable periods of harsh
environmental conditions. Characterized by arrested development and reduced
metabolism, diapause significantly increases an insect?s lifespan in addition to
providing protection from environmental extremes. The aim of this research is to
further our understanding of the molecular basis of diapause by examining the
regulatory role of microRNAs (miRNAs) in initiating and maintaining diapause in
the flesh fly, Sarcophaga bullata. miRNAs are small RNA fragments that post-
transcriptionally regulate gene expression. They represent one type of
epigenetic mechanism that can change the phenotype (i.e., morphological or
physiological attributes) of an organism without changing the underlying DNA
sequence. These small RNAs appear to be essential for diapause because genes
that encode components of the miRNA processing machinery are more highly
expressed in diapausing S. bullata pupae than in their non-diapause
counterparts. miRNAs are known to regulate biological processes that are
important for establishing and maintaining diapause, including developmental
timing, metabolism, and stress-resistance. These studies will also provide new
information about the maternal inheritance of miRNAs and the influence of
maternal history on the expression and activity of miRNAs. In S. bullata a
maternal effect prevents diapause in offspring of females that have gone through
diapause. Maternal effects commonly regulate diapause in insects, especially in
Diptera, but little is known about how such maternal effects are regulated by
miRNAs or any other factor. Together, this research is expected to provide
entirely new information about the regulation of diapause and the seasonal
patterns of insects that are a consequence of diapause. Understanding how miRNAs
regulate the maternal block of diapause in the female?s progeny may provide new
tools to manipulate the diapause response and, ultimately, control population
outbreaks of insect pests. In addition to providing new information about how
diapause is regulated, this research will generate some of the first miRNA
sequences for a non-Drosophila fly. We anticipate that the new miRNA sequences
will help provide a foundation for future studies on the evolution of insect
miRNA sequences and establish a framework for understanding the ecological
relevance of these small RNAs in the adaptations of animals to an ever-changing
environment. This research will provide training for a postdoctoral researcher,
and graduate and undergraduate students. It will also enable members of the
laboratory to continue their outreach programs with local elementary schools,
high schools and public libraries in the Columbus area.