* 1354093
* OPUS: Snythesis of the behavior, population, community and disease ecology of African lions
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2014,08/31/2015
* Craig Packer, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 08/31/2015
* USD 150,000.00

This award will support a synthesis of thirty-six years of research on African
lions, focusing on how body size and habitat have molded the ecology and
evolution of this unusually cooperative mammalian species. Large body size
allows lions to dominate competing, carnivore species and to monopolize the best
locations for ambushing prey. The distribution of these valuable hunting sites
is limited to a few key areas in savanna landscapes, resulting in intense
competition between neighbors, and ultimately in the evolution of cooperative
behavior and group living. This synthesis will address whether lions'
cooperative behavior can most profitably be understood as the product of the
differential survival and reproduction of individuals or of entire social
groups. The work will also assess the impact of lions on the population sizes of
competing carnivore species, on the population sizes of the lions' preferred
prey, and on the savanna vegetation consumed by these
herbivores.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will produce a book to be
published by the University of Chicago Press and written in a manner accessible
for the general public. The book will include chapters that address how lion
behavior and ecology increases the risk of their becoming cattle killers and
man-eaters, and how to use this knowledge to design appropriate strategies for
mitigating human-lion conflicts. The synthesis of information on this topic will
be invaluable in designing effective conservation strategies for this iconic
species.