* 1354107
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: EarthCube Building Blocks, Leveraging Semantics and Linked Data for Geoscience Data Sharing and Discovery
* GEO,RISE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2015
* Cynthia Chandler, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 08/31/2015
* USD 74,993.00

This innovative project carries out exploratory research applying semantic
technologies to support data representation, discovery, sharing, and integration
between disparate geoscience data types and structures. It is a risky, high pay-
off activity that, if successful, has the potential to transform our ability to
discover, access, and use geoscience data in ways not possible at present. The
goal of this research is to develop a prototype involving the data collections
of some major NSF-funded Data Management Centers: IEDA and R2R at the Lamont
Doherty Earth Observatory at Columbia University and BCO-DMO at the Woods Hole
Oceanographic Institution. The effort is focused on making NSF-collected data
for the ocean sciences and other associated datasets more easily and widely
accessible and available to researchers and the public. Linked Open Data
methodologies will be employed. Essential elements of this approach include the
use of unique data identifiers to mark, link-to, and dereference specific data
and details. Once the intial relationships are aligned, the new system can
automatically infer new relationships between data and data locations. Goals
will be to semantically integrate the data already available from the initially
targeted data reposotiries in such a way that the approach can be scaled up to
the whole of EarthCube, a new NSF initiative to develop a geoscience knowledge
and data mangement system for the 21st Century. This project is a collaboration
between ocean science resaerchers, computer scientists, and ocean data
management centers from Maryland, Ohio, New York, and Massachusetts. Braoder
impacts of the work include building infrastructure for science and improving
public accessiblity to NSF-funded data collections.