* 1354799
* Surface lipid metabolome on maize silks - Genetic regulation and protective capacity against abiotic and biotic stresses
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2014,07/31/2020
* Basil Nikolau, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 07/31/2020
* USD 1,406,027.00

The aerial surfaces of land plants are protected by unique lipids, which provide
a primary line of defense against numerous biological and environmental
stresses. The surface lipids on the stigmatic silks of maize are biologically
unique because they are rich in hydrocarbons, which are the inert end-point
metabolites of the surface lipid network. This project will utilize maize silks
as the model biological system to provide a fundamental understanding of this
unique, discrete metabolic process by comprehensively dissecting within a single
organism the metabolic and genetic networks that produce important surface
lipids. Moreover, this project will elucidate the specific surface lipid
constituents of maize silks that provide critical protection against
environmental stresses (water stress and insect feeding) that commonly impact
crops like maize during the often-stressful period of pollination. All
metabolite and transcriptome data will be deposited in the Plant Metabolomics
Resource database (metnetdb.org/PMR) and the latter will also be deposited in
the NCBI-SRA and NCBI-GEO databases. Quantitative trait locus (QTL) data will be
searchable at MaizeGDB (http://maizegdb.org/qtl.php) and made available at the
integrated web portal for QTL dissection, GeneNetwork (genenetwork.org). Seed
stocks for quantitative genetic mapping populations will be deposited at the
Maize Genetics Cooperative Stock Center (http://maizecoop.cropsci.uiuc.edu). A
significant societal impact of this project will be enhancement of the
sustainability of US crop production via increased crop yields and/or decreased
inputs. The identification of the protective surface lipids and the genes that
produce them will provide the technological know how for applied breeding of
customized lipid compositions that protect against many stresses, both in corn
as well as in other crops. Further, the chemical similarity between silk surface
lipids and petroleum components will be leveraged for applications in network
bioengineering to produce advanced biofuels in other biological systems. During
the project, >400 high school and college students from diverse socioeconomic,
geographic and ethnic backgrounds will be exposed to hypothesis-driven research
via three synergistic programs: A) a collaboration with Iowa State University's
SCIENCE BOUND program will engage diverse secondary school students in
scientific education via hands-on research modules; B) two SCIENCE BOUND
students will conduct summer-research projects together with a high school
teacher from a rural or high needs district and with a student from Chowan
University, a 4-year undergrad institution with significant minority enrollment.
These research experiences will help the teachers better engage an even larger
number of students in scientific inquiry; and C) a discussion-based
undergraduate course will be developed to serve as a bridge between fundamental
knowledge learned through coursework and the application of that knowledge for
conducting scientific research.