* 1354811
* Collaborative Proposal: "SG" Identifying Sources and Degradation Mechanisms of Methylmercury in Temperate Forest Ecosystems
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2018
* Martin Tsui, University of North Carolina Greensboro
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 03/31/2018
* USD 97,000.00

This project is aimed at understanding the cycling of mercury, including the
mechanisms of its transformation into the highly-toxic form, methylmercury, in
terrestrial systems. Mercury is naturally present in ecosystems, but also comes
from human sources. Methylmercury bio-accumulates in food webs and can threaten
forest organisms such as songbirds. This research will examine mercury cycling
in four different temperate forests across the United States using mercury
stable isotope analysis of forest food webs. This technique can fingerprint the
methylmercury in forest organisms and help determine the pathways and sources
including rain, soil and tree leaves. After obtaining the isotope fingerprint of
all samples, statistical models will be used to estimate the relative
contribution of each source (precipitation, soil and tree leaves) to
methylmercury accumulation in forest food webs. The investigators are basing
this research on two surprising findings: 1) that methylmercury is high in soils
(surprising because forest soils are not anoxic); and 2) that methylmercury is
being degraded in soils, and thus the mercury loading is much higher than
previously predicted.

The proposed work will provide unique training opportunities for undergraduate
and graduate students of different academic backgrounds from both the University
of North Carolina at Greensboro and the University of Michigan. The principal
investigators will integrate this research into classes at both institutions,
including field visits and case studies. The principal investigators will also
carry out public outreach in the form of a website intended to highlight the
findings and impacts of mercury on wildlife to non-scientific audiences.