* 1354277
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: A cross-linguistic study of the cognitive representation of part-whole structures in Mesoamerican languages
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2014,03/31/2018
* Dedre Gentner, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 03/31/2018
* USD 15,120.00

Does language influence thought? Do linguistic categories influence cognitive
categories? Such questions remain the subject of controversy. This dissertation
project includes a set of psycholinguistic experiments designed to address this
foundational issue by studying how the parts of physical objects are represented
in language and thought. In the languages of central and southern Mexico, body
part terms commonly serve as general-purpose terms for the parts of any
arbitrary object. It has been proposed that there are basic differences in how
words are assigned to parts in these languages. In Juchitán Zapotec, many terms
are assigned based on the part's position in the entire object, whereas in
Tseltal Maya, the assignment process takes local shape into account. English
part terms, on the other hand, are thought to be more influenced by the function
of the part.

In order to test whether speakers of different languages show measurable
differences in their cognitive processing of parts and wholes, speakers of
Juchitán Zapotec, Tseltal, and English will be presented with unfamiliar 3-D
stimuli and asked to compare the parts. The participants' reaction times will be
measured in order to determine whether some stimuli are more difficult to
compare than others. In other tasks, the participants will be interviewed to get
a fuller picture of how they use part terms.

This research will also contribute to the documentation of cultural practices
and lexical knowledge of the speakers of two indigenous languages of the
Americas. The project will enhance international collaboration between
researchers in Mexico and the U.S., and collaboration across the disciplines of
linguistics, anthropology, and psychology. Finally, this research will be an
important part of a graduate student's training as a scholar, providing field
work experience with two additional indigenous languages.