* 1354121
* Scholar's Award: Developing Innovators and Expertise for Fostering Innovation
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2014,02/28/2017
* Matthew Wisnioski, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 02/28/2017
* USD 187,425.00

Developing Innovators and Expertise for Fostering
Innovation&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Currently, a range of U.S. stakeholders are
investing billions of dollars collectively in the construction of innovation
centers and the reform of STEM education. The project investigates how
innovation theorists in the past wrestled with and framed the challenges that
continue to vex educators, policymakers, and practitioners engaged in present
initiatives. How can governments foster private research and development in a
global economy? How can researchers be trained for entrepreneurial careers
irrespective of disciplinary specialty? In what ways does a focus on
commercialization, entrepreneurship, and its products alter, and potentially
narrow, what counts as valuable knowledge? How can STEM participation be made
more diverse, and will that diversity result in unforeseen discoveries that
would not have occurred otherwise?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project traces the
impact of innovation theorists on universities, corporate research centers, and
federal agencies during the 1960s to the 1980s and on today?s proliferation of
local, regional, and national innovation initiatives. The PI will explore how
these theorists developed forms of expertise designed to improve STEM
participation and performance by fostering creativity, entrepreneurialism,
interdisciplinary, and social relevance in technoscientific practitioners.
Findings will be disseminated via a book, a graduate student seminar, and a
workshop directed at STEM graduate students and policymakers.