* 1354906
* Song Learning and Fluctuating Brain Estrogens
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Luke Remage-Healey, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 07/31/2019
* USD 640,000.00

Learning is dependent on the actions of small molecules in the brain, called
neuromodulators. Common neuromodulators include dopamine and serotonin, which
are involved in learning and memory in animals from worms to humans. The current
work will explore a recently-identified neuromodulator system: the production of
estrogens within the brain. A series of studies will examine how brain estrogen
production may support learning complex motor sequences. Understanding the
brain's ability to produce its own supply of estrogens may open up new
perspectives on cognition, memory, and the function of basic neural circuits
that are common among vertebrate animals.

Estrogens are typically considered reproductive hormones secreted by the
ovaries, yet it is now clear that estrogens are produced within the brain
itself, in both males and females. A combination of approaches will test the
hypothesis that estrogens can be produced within brain circuits to rapidly
enhance the consolidation of recent experiences. Songbirds provide an
exceptional opportunity to study the underlying brain mechanisms for the
learning and memorization of song. There are substantial neural and behavioral
parallels between song learning in songbirds and language/speech learning in
humans. Juvenile songbirds typically learn songs from an adult tutor during a
brief critical sensory period. A recently-optimized method enables the
measurement and manipulation of brain estrogens in behaving songbirds while they
learn from song tutors and consolidate new songs. Because estrogens have been
associated with learning and memory in many animals, including human beings,
this research therefore has potential for significant impacts. The work will
also involve training students from underrepresented groups in
multidisciplinary, integrative research and outreach activities.