* 1354718
* Heterogeneity in the phloem of minor veins
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2019
* Robert Turgeon, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 03/31/2019
* USD 637,267.00

The phloem transports nutrients, developmental signals and defense compounds
throughout the plant body. It is often assumed that the phloem is a homogeneous
tissue. However, on the basis of preliminary data the investigators suggest
that, in the small veins of leaves where transported materials are loaded into
the phloem, the network is heterogeneous in its structure and biochemistry, with
specific functions assigned to distinct subsets of phloem cells. This hypothesis
will be tested in several species by a number of techniques. Both light and
electron microscopy will be used to quantify cell-specific features involved in
transport, including the channels (plasmodesmata) that connect the phloem to
surrounding cells. Cell-specific promoters (the DNA elements that control gene
expression) will be used to identify cell types within veins and this
information will be used in conjunction with microscopy to profile gene
expression patterns in the different cell types. In a third project, specific
phloem cells will be selectively killed with a toxin synthesized under the
control of cell-specific promoters and these plants will be used to obtain and
characterize phloem sap to identify nutrients, macromolecules and defense
compounds transported in individual cell types. In terms of broader impacts,
specific cells involved in the synthesis and transport of compounds required for
the proper development and health of crop plants will be identified. Educational
broader impacts include the incorporation of experimental hypotheses and results
in undergraduate course material, employment of undergraduate students in phloem
sap studies, and continued participation in the Cornell Prison Education
Program. RNA sequence data will be deposited at the National Center for
Biotechnology Information and processed data files will be uploaded to iPlant.