* 1354763
* Collaborative Research: Urban-dependent selection on bird song: proximate and ultimate causes, and evolutionary consequences
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/2014,02/29/2020
* David Luther, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 02/29/2020
* USD 434,457.00

Cities are recent environments for most organisms; yet little is known about the
adaptations of species that persist in urban settings. A recent surge of
interest in acoustic communication in urban contexts highlights a potential
adaptation of birds to life in many different cities. These studies have raised
several fundamental questions regarding this potential adaptation, which have
global applications to studies of animal communication and mate selection. This
proposal will address three of these fundamental questions: (1) how are birds
adjusting their song to the urban environment?; (2) how has song urbanization
affected signal information?; and (3) are urban songs adaptive? To address these
questions, this study will employ behavioral, ecological and mechanistic
modeling approaches, using an established NSF model organism for behavioral
studies, white-crowned sparrows. Meeting the proposal's objectives will
transform the state of understanding of urban-dependent selection on mating
behaviors and, more broadly, the adaptations of species that persist in urban
environments. There are several aspects of the proposed study that should yield
broad impacts: (1) broad dissemination of research results through community
organizations, local and national museum displays, media outlets, and
development of learner-centered teaching modules, (2) research opportunities for
students from demographic groups that are under-represented in the sciences, (3)
development of a statistical software package for simulating bird song
evolution, and a workshop to train scientists, educators, and students in its
use, and (4) collaboration and sharing of data with the National Park Service
Sound Division, which will help national parks local to this study as well as
national parks nationwide with their sound management plans.