* 1354819
* Temperature, seasonality and recurrent insect outbreaks - Tortix moths as a new mathematical and empirical model system
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2014,02/28/2018
* Ottar Bjornstad, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 02/28/2018
* USD 330,000.00

Instability of populations of animals, manifested as sudden outbreaks and
crashes in their numbers, can have major effects on whole ecological systems.
This project will build on recent discoveries in insects to investigate how
temperature and the life history traits of a species can interact to change the
timing of life cycles and the amplitude of changes in population size. The
effort will combine sophisticated mathematical modeling, time-series analysis of
existing data, and lab experiments to obtain a deep understanding of how
temperature impacts the dynamics of populations of a tortrix moth. The
investigators will test the hypothesis that warmer temperatures and more extreme
seasonality favor outbreaks of insects by accelerating and synchronizing their
development, such that multiple, overlapping population cycles combine to form a
single, less stable cycle.

Tortrix moths are ubiquitous agricultural pests of high-value fruit, berry and
nut crops. Findings from this project will enhance the ability of farmers and
land managers to forecast outbreaks of these pests and to identify the life
stages at which they can be most easily controlled. The broader impacts of this
project also include the training of two graduate students and at least three
undergraduates, and development of an international scientific collaboration
between the U.S. and Canada. Findings will be disseminated to the public through
agricultural extension materials.