* 1354963
* Collaborative Research:  Understanding Constraints on Floral Evolution: A Phylogenetic Approach to Comparative Anthocyanin Evolution in Ruellia (Acanthaceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/2014,09/30/2020
* Erin Tripp, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 09/30/2020
* USD 499,989.00

Small changes in a few genes involved in plant pigment synthesis, such as in the
red anthocyanin pigments, can have dramatic effect on the evolutionary
trajectory of a lineage. The new flower color may require a different suite of
pollinators that would influence the ability of the lineage to diversify. This
project combines new genomic technologies and traditional methods to investigate
the evolutionary trade-offs of flower color evolution in a group of plants,
Ruellia (Acanthaceae), with 200+ species in the Americas. Cutting edge genomic
approaches will place the plant anthocyanin biochemical pathway in an
evolutionary context to understand what happens when, for example, purple
flowers evolve from red-flowered ancestors. The phylogeny or family tree of
Ruellia will be reconstructed using novel molecular markers to be developed for
this project; these markers will subsequently be useful to numerous other
researchers.

Flowers are among the most common means by which people connect to nature:
floral biology has great potential to engage broad audiences in science. This
research will shed light on the anthocyanin biochemical pathway which
contributes to numerous, important plant functions (e.g., pollinator and fruit
disperser attraction, UV sunscreen, herbivore defense), and have also been
linked to human health benefits (e.g., anti-cancer, -viral, -inflammatory,
-arteriosclerosis activity; treatments for hypertension, vision disorders).
Anthocyanins are common constituents of human diets, being found in frequently
consumed fruits and vegetables. This research project will add substantially to
knowledge of the genetic basis of anthocyanin production and will thus have
implications for human health research.