* 1354218
* Collaborative Research LTREB: Understanding the strength, duration, and stability of connectivity effects on community diversity
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2014,01/31/2019
* Nicholas Haddad, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 01/31/2019
* USD 180,708.00

Habitat loss is the greatest cause of biodiversity loss, as it isolates small
patches of habitat along with the populations in these fragments. This project
examines landscape connectivity, which is the inverse of fragmentation, and the
degree to which corridors among fragments facilitate the movement of organisms
and thus alleviate the effects of fragmentation. Although habitat connectivity
is considered to be fundamental to the maintenance of species diversity, there
is remarkably little empirical evidence documenting the effects of corridors.
The investigators will extend an ongoing experiment explicitly designed to test
the effects of habitat connectivity. Results to date show that species diversity
increases when fragments are connected by corridors, but the question remains
whether these responses are short-term or persistent. The project will generate
long-term data to resolve the mechanisms underlying the relationship between
connectivity, diversity, and time, and to determine whether connectivity effects
are long-lasting or transient.

This experiment provides a direct link to conservation by manipulating
connectivity through landscape corridors. Strategies to reconnect landscapes
through landscape corridors have dominated land acquisitions in conservation.
Results of this project will provide some of the first evidence for land
managers of the value of landscape connections for protecting biological
diversity. The project will develop a solutions-oriented workshop with
scientists and land managers to catalyze the translation of science to practical
long-term land conservation in the southeastern United States study region. A
website dedicated to bridging the science and practice of conservation corridors
will contribute to these efforts. Both graduate and undergraduate students will
be engaged in and trained through participation in the research, continuing a
successful collaboration with the US Forest Service to train and mentor women
and students from underrepresented groups.