* 1354890
* RCN: Infectious Disease Evolution Across Scales
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2019
* Andrea Graham, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 12/31/2019
* USD 499,916.00

This Research Coordination Network will investigate pathogens across scales of
biological organization with the goal of better understanding of the processes
that determine pathogen transmission and disease occurrence. Why do pathogens,
even different strains within a species, differ so dramatically in the severity
of disease induced in a host? And why do pathogens vary in efficiency of
transmission from one host to the next? These questions focus on different
biological scales (the host organism versus the host population) yet are
inextricably connected in determining evolutionary pressures on pathogens:
persistence of a strain is jointly determined by exploitation of individual
hosts and by transmission across the host population. Network activities will
build collaborations among microbiologists, immunologists, epidemiologists and
evolutionary biologists via workshops and research exchanges. Network members
will develop data and tools to: a) identify causes of variation among strains of
important pathogens; b) predict pathogen evolution in diverse immunological and
epidemiological contexts; and c) design medical interventions to minimize
chances of pathogen evolution rendering drugs or vaccines obsolete.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will bring benefits to multiple stakeholders.
For researchers, the Network will provide a database with linked analytical
tools, plus ample training opportunities. For students of biology, mathematics
and medicine, the Network will generate teaching modules that convey
interdisciplinary skills and insights. Finally, the Network will promote the
development of evolution-proof medical treatments.