* 1354558
* Integrative species discovery and comparison of multilocus species delimitation methods in short-range endemic harvestmen (Opiliones, Arachnida)
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2014,12/31/2017
* Marshal Hedin, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* ashley dowling
* 12/31/2017
* USD 433,362.00

Some biodiversity lineages are of special conservation concern because of
specific life history characteristics. These 'short-range endemic' taxa are
often small-bodied, habitat-specialized, and dispersal-limited which leads to
naturally small geographic distributions which can be highly impacted by small
environmental changes. This study focuses on a group of harvestman spiders,
which are short-range endemics, to develop a phylogenetic and taxonomic
understanding to better facilitate conservation. The investigators will use
genomic and morphological data to investigate the nature of species boundaries,
reconstruct species relationships, and describe new species. Species
descriptions will be made available to the scientific community using digital
taxonomic tools, and organismal information will be transferred more broadly via
web-based resources. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has broader societal and
scientific significance in many ways. The investigators will train a
postdoctoral researcher, a doctoral student, and at least one undergraduate
student recruited from under-represented groups at San Diego State University, a
Hispanic-Serving Institution. Trainees will work with the PI and two of the most
prominent harvestmen researchers in the world. This training represents a
tremendous opportunity to transfer taxonomic knowledge across generations. The
PI will develop a one-week "Harvestmen Biology &amp; Identification" field
course, to be offered in the southern Appalachians, helping to directly engage
students in modern systematics research and conservation issues.