* 1354608
* RUI: Role of POU factors in the regulation of the timing of metamorphosis
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/2014,02/28/2018
* Yuichiro Suzuki, Wellesley College
* Standard Grant
* Paul Krieg
* 02/28/2018
* USD 138,204.00

In many organisms, including humans, postembryonic development is marked by an
abrupt change in physiology that initiates dramatic changes in growth and
morphology. While the neuroendocrine changes involved in these major
developmental transitions have been well characterized, the regulation
underlying the timing of initiation of these changes remains poorly understood.
POU factors are highly conserved transcription factors that have been shown to
regulate neuroendocrine changes during puberty in vertebrates. In beetles, the
removal of the POU factor, Ventral veins lacking (Vvl), also causes larvae to
undergo precocious metamorphosis. The goal of the project is to examine how Vvl
interacts with the known regulators of metamorphosis and to examine the roles of
other POU factors during metamorphosis. To better understand what this protein
does, the project will determine the regulation of the gene, the tissues in
which the protein acts and its gene targets, using gene knockdown and gene
expression analyses in the genetic model system, Tribolium castaneum. In both
vertebrates and invertebrates, POU factors appear to play crucial roles in
regulating the postembryonic developmental transitions and sexual maturity.
Thus, this project has broader implications for identifying how POU factors
regulate gene expression and developmental timing in a wide range of organisms.
Importantly, given the current trend towards precocious puberty onset among
youth, understanding the regulation of developmental transitions will have
important medical and public health implications. A majority of the proposed
study will involve the female undergraduate students from Wellesley College, a
diverse group of people from a wide range of socioeconomic backgrounds. In
addition, parts of this project will be brought into the classroom where
students can conduct independent projects to learn modern molecular techniques,
Finally, during the summers, the PI's lab will host a number of high school
students to expose students from disadvantaged backgrounds to scientific
research.