* 1354998
* LSD1 reprograms epigenetic memory to enable changes in cell fate
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2020
* David Katz, Emory University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Klein
* 08/31/2020
* USD 817,667.00

Nontechnical explanation&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In 2001, Dr. David Allis proposed
that small chemical modifications in the packaging of DNA could form a code that
affects the expression of genes. Since then, an intense effort has been underway
to understand what these different modifications do and how they affect the
biology of organisms. Previously my lab provided evidence in worms suggesting
that these modifications can be stably inherited from cell to cell as cells
replicate themselves. These experiments will determine what happens to this
information as genes are passed from parents to offspring in mammals. In
addition, this research will determine whether or not the information contained
in the packaging of DNA can influence the information encoded in the DNA itself.
By understanding these basic biological mechanisms, this work has the potential
to shed light on the cause of a broad range of diseases, from birth defects to
autism. All of the experiments will be carried out in partnership with
undergraduates from the nearby Oglethorpe University, under the guidance of
Oglethorpe professor Dr. Karen Schmeichel. These students, many of whom are
minorities and/or first in their family to go to college, have no access to
research using mice, the preeminent human model. Therefore, providing these
students with the opportunity to participate in this research has the potential
to profoundly impact their understanding of science and scientific
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two of
the most fundamental parts of the existence of multicellular organisms are (1)
the ability of cells to maintain their cell fate, and (2) how cells undergo
changes in cell fate during key developmental transitions. To accomplish this,
cells must be able to (A) faithfully transmit patterns of gene expression
through mitosis and (B) change transcriptional patterns during developmental
transitions. However, the mechanisms that control these processes are currently
unknown. To investigate these mechanisms we will use a mouse model of the
histone demethylase LSD1/KDM1a to determine the function of this enzyme during
(1) the gamete-to-embryo transition and (2) in testis stem cells. Through these
experiments, we will (A) determine whether histone methylation can function as a
transcriptional memory in mammals, (B) investigate the relationship between
histone methylation and DNA methylation and (C) determine the function of LSD1
in regulating cell fate. By providing a potential paradigm shift in our
understanding of how histone methylation functions to maintain cell fates and
how this histone methylation is regulated during cell fate transitions, this
work has the potential to highly impact our understanding and treatment of a
broad spectrum of diseases, from birth defects to autism.