* 1354515
* Scholar's Award: Collaborative Explanation
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2014,07/31/2014
* Melinda Fagan, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 07/31/2014
* USD 175,087.00

Project Overview

The PI will engage in research to develop a new philosophical account of
collaborative explanations, an important kind of scientific explanation that
answers questions about how complex systems work in terms of their interacting
parts; they produce understanding by unifying causal systems at multiple levels.
The key notion to be explored and analyzed is jointness, the relation among
components working together. The PI will investigate how collaborative
explanations contrast with other philosophical accounts of explanation,
determine what analogies (if any) are there between collaborative explanation
and collaborative scientific practices, and explore the kinds of knowledge or
understanding that results from collaborative explanation. The study will yield
an account of collaborative explanation explicitly distinguished from
alternatives, a cogent analysis of jointness that yields plausible diagnoses of
several important cases, and provides epistemic grounds for distinctive features
of collaborative explanation.

Intellectual Merit

The proposed research fills a significant gap in current philosophical accounts
of scientific explanation. The latter fall mainly into two classes: covering-law
views, and causal theories that take physics to be fundamental. But neither
clarifies the remarkable progress in biology since the mid-20th century. Though
recent accounts of mechanistic explanation do so, these treat it as a special
case of causal explanation. Focusing on collaboration, the PI's approach offers
a fresh perspective on a traditional topic. The proposed research also
contributes to social epistemology. Though science is intensely collaborative,
philosophers often downplay this aspect. By making the concept of collaboration
central to scientific explanation, the proposed research is well-suited to
explore analogies (and perhaps stronger connections) between features of
scientific explanations and the practices that give rise to them.

Broader Impacts

The proposed research has potential to open new theoretical terrain in
philosophy of science, foster ties with allied fields of study, and promote
greater participation of women in philosophy. It will articulate new theoretical
connections with social epistemology thereby forging connections with other
disciplines in the humanities and social sciences. The PI participates in
several interdisciplinary initiatives that will bring results before diverse
audiences; results of the proposed research will be communicated to historians,
anthropologists, environmental philosophers, biologists, social scientists, and
policy researchers. Finally, the PI belongs to an under-represented group, women
philosophers of science, and support for this research will help redress this
imbalance