* 1354309
* Protein interaction topologies regulating virus transmission by insect vectors
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2014,03/31/2019
* Michelle Heck, Boyce Thompson Institute Plant Research
* Continuing Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 03/31/2019
* USD 800,000.00

Insect-vectored viruses pose one of the greatest threats to plant and animal,
including human, health on a global scale. Viruses use proteins as tools to
ensure their own transmission by insects and infection in hosts. Viruses have
finely tuned their interactions with host and vector proteins for movement
within and between hosts. The term topology is used here to indicate structural
and surface features of proteins and their interactions. The investigators will
use Protein Interaction Reporter, an innovative technology that couples chemical
cross-linking and mass spectrometry, to visualize quantitative and structural
information about protein complexes involved in virus transmission and
infection. The benefits to society include the development of novel strategies
that disrupt virus movement within and between hosts. Few effective control
strategies have been developed to thwart transmission of any insect-transmitted
virus. Most have negative impacts on the environment and human health and are
unsustainable. This project is at the interface of chemistry and biology.
Protein Interaction Reporter is a cutting-edge technology that will potentially
transform our understanding of how viruses infect and are transmitted by
insects. Several examples of novel protein topological information the
investigators have already discovered highlight the power of this synergistic
approach to further fundamental understanding of molecular pathways, topologies,
and interactions involved in virus transmission by insects, yet are far beyond
the boundaries of conventional approaches. The investigators will provide
advanced training to postdoctoral associates and undergraduate students in
biology and chemistry with an emphasis on including trainees from
underrepresented groups. They will also hold a grant-writing workshop for
scientists who wish to integrate mass spectrometry into their teaching and
research programs.