* 1354625
* Unveiling the diversity and ecological role of the obligate parasitic fungi in phylum Cryptomycota
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2014,02/28/2018
* Timothy James, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 02/28/2018
* USD 550,000.00

This project will investigate the biological and genetic diversity of a recently
discovered group of fungi known as Cryptomycota. The group is primarily known
only from molecular signatures which have been ubiquitously recovered in the
environment using DNA techniques. From what little is known of the group, these
fungi appear to be parasitic on other organisms, yet, the precise set of hosts
and habitat requirements of Cryptomycota remain mysterious. This research will
catalog the diversity of the group and provide novel insights into its
morphology, host-range, and environmental function. Individual cells isolated
from multiple habitat types in North America will be will be analyzed using
state-of-the-art genomics methods and microscopy to put a face and function onto
organisms that heretofore have been merely characterized as environmental
barcodes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cryptomycota apparently make up a large
proportion of the diversity of organisms in many habitats, ranging from ponds
and soil to the sea. Understanding the function of these organisms and what they
parasitize is vital for developing a predictive understanding of food webs and
nutrient cycling. Moreover, elucidating what organisms these fungi parasitize
could have significant implications for the security of our food supply and the
production of biofuels. There may also be implications for human health. The
senior personnel will train postdoctoral researchers, graduate and undergraduate
students in modern techniques of mycology, genomics, and bioinformatics. The DNA
sequence data generated in this study will be made publicly available through
webservers, which will be enriched with educational and research content
regarding Cryptomycota.