* 1354087
* Invisible Innovators: How the knowledge and experiences of low-income and first-generation students (LIFGs) can contribute to US engineering problem definition and solving
* ENG,EEC
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2016
* Juan Lucena, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* James Moore
* 12/31/2016
* USD 200,843.00

Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this exploratory
research is to discover how innovation and creativity in engineering problem
solving can be fostered by integrating the knowledge and experiences of low-
income and first-generation students (LIFGs) into engineering education. The
research team will: 1) engage in an ethnographic analysis of LIFG students'
school and work experiences to identify the elements of their knowledge and
practice that are the most relevant to engineering; 2) use the ethnographic data
to write, pilot, and assess case studies to help engineering educators recognize
and value LIFG knowledge and experience in engineering problem definition and
solving; and 3) develop and deliver a workshop for faculty at a research
university and community college to further theorize where different kinds of
engineering knowledge exist in their areas of teaching and practice and how to
recognize LIFG students' knowledges and experiences as capabilities in
engineering practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Significance and
Importance:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research seeks to make LIFGs visible and
relevant to engineering education reform. Broadening participation is a key
feature of engineering education reform, but dominant definitions of diversity
focus on gender, ethnic minorities and persons with disabilities, leaving
socioeconomic inequality -- and its link to the other underrepresented
demographic categories -- mostly unexamined. The scant research that does exist
about LIFGs is grounded in a deficiency model, focusing on what these students
lack. This project breaks with the existing scholarship by identifying the ways
in which LIFG knowledge and experience outside the classroom, including the
tacit knowledge they develop in their lives and at work, could offer innovative
ways for all students to define and solve pressing engineering problems. This is
a radically different approach to understanding "diversity," as it explicitly
includes socioeconomic class background as a potential resource rather than a
hindrance. This exploratory, interdisciplinary research lays the foundation to
integrate those findings into future work on engineering education research and
diversity initiatives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Early Concept Grants for
Exploratory Research (EAGER) proposal is funded through the Broadening
Participation in Engineering Program of the Engineering Education and Centers
Division and by the Division of Undergraduate Education of the Education and
Human Resources Directorate.