* 1354072
* The Development of Adaptive Embryo Behavior
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2022
* Karen Warkentin, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 08/31/2022
* USD 951,144.00

Embryos of many species assess and respond to their environment in ways that
matter for survival. Many features and challenges of embryonic life are broadly
shared across animals, but frog eggs are particularly tractable to study.
Structures such as egg capsules protect and constrain the embryo inside,
creating a trade-off of costs and benefits. Upon hatching, animals enter a new
environment, with both new dangers and resources. When to hatch is an essential
decision embryos make, based on environmental cues. Hatching is also a physical
feat that embryos must perform. The ability to assess cues, to exit the egg, and
to survive outside the egg all change as embryos develop. Thus, under the same
conditions, what embryos can do and what they should do to survive also changes.
This project will examine how and why development changes behavior, using
embryos of red-eyed treefrogs that hatch up to 40% prematurely to escape threats
to the egg. It will assess the importance of maturation, adaptive changes in
decisions matched to abilities, embryonic learning, and how embryos use two
kinds of information; simple cues of oxygen availability and complex vibrations
that can indicate predator attack. It will improve our understanding of embryo
lives, behavioral development, and how animals use different kinds of
information to make decisions, including broadly important but poorly understood
vibrational information. The adaptive behavior of embryos is accessible and
appealing, and thus ideal for scientific education and outreach. This project
will offer interdisciplinary biology-engineering training for graduate and
undergraduate students, as well as Neotropical research and cross-cultural
experiences for US students and Latin American interns. The PIs will work with
the media, museums, and zoos to disseminate results broadly. They will offer
research experiences for teachers and develop online multimedia resources for
educators at multiple levels. New methods and tools developed by this project
will facilitate other research on embryo behavior and animal responses to
vibrational cues. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is an integrative study of
the development and regulation of environmentally cued hatching in red-eyed
treefrogs, for which multiple selective trade-offs shaping hatching timing are
known. Embryos use cues in at least two sensory modalities for their hatching
decision. Older embryos hatch more readily, but even 30%-premature embryos
sometimes hatch within seconds of a cue. This project will assess: I) how the
speed and success of hatching change across effector development, focusing on
hatching glands; II) how sensor development changes sensitivity to cues and cue
properties, addressing developmental changes in mechanoreception by the inner
ear and lateral line vs. more consistent, early developed, oxygen sensing; and
III) how hatching decision rules for responses to simple hypoxia cues and
complex vibrational, and potentially tactile, physical disturbance cues are
shaped by developmentally changing trade-offs, a history of stage-specific
selection, and the earlier experiences of embryos. The team will use (a)
histology and microscopy to characterize morphological changes, (b) respirometry
to assess metabolic changes, (c) measures of vestibulo-ocular reflexes to assess
otic function, and (d) macro-videography to analyze embryo behavior and hatching
performance. They will assess ontogenetic changes in hatching under controlled
hypoxia, vibration playback, and predator attacks, and develop new playback
methods for separating motion and tactile components of physical disturbance
cues. Mechanosensory stimuli and hypoxia are common cues for hatching across
taxa. Moreover, vibrational signals and cues inform behavior in many other
contexts, later in life, and oxygen availability shapes the behavior of many
aquatic animals. Results from red-eyed treefrog embryos will advance our
understanding of behavioral development and animal information use more broadly.
Datasets will be deposited in DRYAD. Outreach materials, including images and
video, will be posted on Warkentin's lab website or contributed to the
Encyclopedia of Life or National Association of Biology Teachers web resource
page.