* 1354501
* Collaborative Research: Maintenance, Operations and Data Analysis of Arecibo and Millstone Hill Interferometers
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2014,04/30/2017
* John Noto, Scientific Solutions Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* John Meriwether
* 04/30/2017
* USD 261,659.00

This project supports the operation and maintenance of four Fabry-Perot Doppler
Imagers, two at the Millstone Hill Observatory in Massachusetts and two at the
Arecibo Observatory in Puerto Rico. These instruments provide data on the
behavior of the neutral components of the Earth's thermosphere, and contribute
to studies of interactions among the Earth's ionosphere and thermosphere in
response to solar forcing as a system. This will address the distribution of
energy and momentum throughout different latitudes and layers of the atmosphere.
Data and operation will be centralized through a client-server architecture that
allows for remote operation, data collection and automated analysis. Data will
continue to be published to the web and Madrigal database daily, within hours of
observation. The project will provide educational opportunities for
undergraduate students through collaborations. SSI is pursuing non-traditional
educational opportunities to educate the public about space science and optics
in general.&lt;br/&gt; The ASTRA team will use the Millstone Hill and Arecibo
data to investigate the magnitude, occurrence rate and variability of the
midnight temperature maximum (MTM), and the annual and semiannual variability of
the upper thermosphere. These results will be compared with TIMEGCM model
output. Thermospheric vertical winds will be measured at each location using two
different techniques, a direct line-of-sight technique and the Burnside
technique where vertical winds are inferred from the horizontal wind gradient.
When available these vertical winds will be compared to vertical motion measured
by the incoherent scatter radars at each location. These observations allow for
the inter-comparison and verification of the veracity of different measurement
techniques and will ultimately allow for a better understanding of the 3-d
dynamics of the thermosphere.