* 1354972
* The potential for climate-induced disruption of plant-microbe symbioses along altitudinal gradients
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2020
* Jennifer Rudgers, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 05/31/2020
* USD 829,238.00

Species are moving up mountainsides as temperatures rise. As ranges move to
higher altitudes, important interactions between species may be disrupted, with
as yet unknown consequences. The coupled dynamics arising from species
interactions can produce complex and unanticipated ecological responses to
climate change. Novel species responses may feed back on the rate of climate
change itself by altering processes that influence carbon cycling. Fungal
symbionts of plants, such as endophytes and mycorrhizal fungi, are now well
documented to influence the resilience of plants to climate change. Fungi also
play critical roles in carbon cycling, by storing carbon in recalcitrant forms
and decomposing organic material. Therefore, the potential for climate change to
decouple plant and fungal interactions deserves careful attention. While plant
movement under changing climates is easily observed, movement of fungal species
is inconspicuous and little studied. This project will gauge the potential for
plant-fungal symbioses to become destabilized under future climates and test the
consequences of disruptions for individual plant species and carbon cycling.
This project has four major components. First, the distributions of fungal
symbionts colonizing plant leaves and roots will be described along replicated
elevation gradients in the Rocky Mountains of Colorado, using microscopy and DNA
sequencing. This work constitutes the largest altitudinal survey of fungal
symbionts anywhere in the world. Second, an NSF-funded, 22-year long warming
experiment will be leveraged to test, for the first time, whether fungal
responses to climate warming match their distributional patterns along natural,
altitudinal gradients. Third, reciprocal transplants of plants and fungi will
mimic range shifts under a 3Â°C warmer climate and experimentally test the
consequences of symbiosis decoupling. Fourth, functional assays will evaluate
how disrupted symbioses affect carbon cycling.

Broader Impacts: A majority of the budget is allocated to training the next
generation of scientists, including students from underrepresented groups at the
University of New Mexico, a majority-minority institution. K-12 outreach
includes high school teacher training and curriculum development for under-
served schools and symbiosis workshops in a kids nature camp and adult citizen
science program supported through the Rocky Mountain Biological Laboratory.