* 1354138
* Investigating the Neo-lithic Transition
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2014,01/31/2020
* Mary Stiner, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/2020
* USD 231,026.00

The fundamental goal of this research is to provide insight into the process of
human - environmental interaction, and how human and natural systems, each
influence the other. The early Neo-lithic period was perhaps the greatest
transition in human record--a time of dramatic change in which people moved from
a foraging lifestyle to a farming-based one, thus altering both the course of
human history and our place in environmental systems. Although we recognize the
significance of the Neo-lithic period, it remains poorly documented. Improved
documentation of this important time period of human change may help us better
understand our present day rapid technical change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the
support of the National Science Foundation, Dr. Mary Stiner and an international
team of archaeologists will investigate the very beginnings of sheep
domestication and herding practices in the Middle East. The research focuses on
the social and economic consequences of early sheep management and related
changes to the human-built environment. The study will be conducted at one of
the first settlements in central Turkey, the pre-pottery Neolithic site of
Aþýklý Höyük (transl. ankle-bone hill), dating to the interval of 10,300-11,000
years ago. Using the theoretical framework of human-animal co-evolution, this
study considers how iterative problem-solving altered the conditions of
selection for both humans and sheep across roughly 50 human generations. The
investigation will be accomplished through an integrated study of animal bones,
geological traces and botanical (phytolith) remains from the site.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The transitional period between foraging and food-
producing societies is poorly known, in stark contrast to a wealth of
information on the later Neolithic. Prior research at Aþýklý Höyük by the PI and
colleagues has demonstrated that sheep were held captive on site. Managing sheep
in this way brought on both advantages and challenges to these people. Such
close human-animal proximity is expected to have provoked novel strategies of
waste and pest management, alterations in architecture and community layout, and
reorganization of social institutions surrounding the exploitation of these
animals. This study will provide critical information on the day-to-day contexts
of animal management in its formative stages, and how this initial history of
close interaction between humans and animals set society on a new path of
socioeconomic change. The investigation will also shed light on the "selection
rules" that ultimately produced domesticated forms of sheep.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is innovative in its implementation of an
interdisciplinary approach to test ideas drawn in a developmental evolutionary
framework. The study will last 3 years (2014-2017), and NSF funds will
contribute to excavation and material recovery costs and support a wide range of
specialized laboratory studies in radiocarbon dating, sediment micromorphology,
phytolith analysis, and zooarchaeology. NSF funds will also cover travel and per
diem costs for the PI, collaborators and UA graduate students, and provide
short-term focused training opportunities for Turkish PhD students in
archaeological science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this
research center on the surprising relations between small, cumulative
innovations in animal management and their long-term effects on fundamental
qualities of human society. Nearly every aspect of modern human existence is
touched in some way by our dependence upon domestic plants and animals. Humans'
concerted use and manipulation of a select few species (including sheep) has
altered the course of history and greatly affected humans place in natural
systems. As profound as some of these effects have been, scientists and a keenly
interested public still do not understand how the processes were set in motion.
The archaeology of Aþýklý Höyük is sufficiently detailed and continuous to serve
as a laboratory for wedding our understandings of ecological and social
evolutionary processes behind the story of animal domestication. The research
meanwhile addresses larger needs for integrative approaches in domestication
research and the development of skilled, creative scientists for the next
generation.