* 1354078
* OPUS: Synthesizing Defensive Symbiosis from a Microbial Perspective
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2014,01/31/2017
* Keith Clay, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 01/31/2017
* USD 145,279.00

Essentially all plants and animals are colonized by a diverse array of symbiotic
microorganisms. For example, 90% of the cells in the human body are bacteria.
Some microorganisms may be pathogens that cause disease or death of their hosts
while others, such as gut bacteria of animals, may be essential for their
nutrition and survival. A growing body of literature suggests that a number of
symbiotic microorganisms play a defensive role, protecting their hosts against
natural enemies such as parasites, pathogens and herbivores. The goal of this
project is to review and synthesize the results of past studies to gain new
insights into the underlying mechanisms and ecological consequences of defensive
symbiosis. Past research leading to this goal has focused on two distinct groups
of defensive symbionts: toxic alkaloid-producing fungal symbionts of grasses
that make host plants poisonous to grazing animals and bacterial symbionts of
ticks that may exclude pathogens or reduce their transmission. These
interactions can provide a strong advantage to hosts, leading to an increase in
the prevalence of defensive symbiosis. The major product of this project will be
a book on defensive symbiosis that synthesizes previous research in relation to
broader areas of research in ecology, microbiology and plant and animal health,
and that highlights important areas for future research. A second product will
be an open-access database from a 13-year experiment manipulating defensive
symbiosis in experimental grasslands. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Defensive symbiosis
has significant impacts on our economy, the environment and human health. For
example, toxin-producing fungal symbionts of grasses are a serious problem for
grazing livestock but provide effective biocontrol against pests in turfgrass
systems. Likewise, many arthropods host bacterial symbionts that inhibit
pathogen infection or transmission, including important human pathogens, such as
the dengue fever virus. In humans, altering our normal microbiota can lead to a
number of health problems including disease. In sum, key species in many
ecosystems are characterized by defensive symbiosis. The resulting book will
provide a widely accessible and comprehensive body of past results, improving
our understanding of defensive symbiosis and informing future applications of
these interactions. The database will provide research opportunities for
students and other scientists.