* 1354934
* Collaborative Research: Mechanisms and evolution of thermogenic capacity in high-altitude deer mice
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2016
* Zac Cheviron, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Kimberly Hammond
* 05/31/2016
* USD 448,139.00

Adaptation to high altitude environments poses some of the most extreme
challenges for endothermic ("warm-blooded") animals such as mammals that
strongly depend on metabolically generated heat for maintaining the body
temperature. Metabolic heat generation occurs predominantly through oxygen-
dependent (aerobic) metabolism, and reduced oxygen availability (hypoxia) at
high altitude may limit the capacity for maintaining of the optimal body
temperature. This study will use populations of deer mice (Peromyscus
maniculatus) adapted to different altitudes as a model to determine which
physiological mechanisms permit them to survive under hypoxic and cold
conditions of high altitudes. The PIs will use a combination of physiological,
genetic and metabolic studies to identify the potentially adaptive traits in
mice at different altitudes and use modeling approach to integrate these traits
and link them to the organism?s fitness in different environments. Although this
study focuses on the populations of deer mice, many molecular and physiological
mechanisms of metabolic regulation and thermoregulation are highly conserved
among the mammals; therefore, the findings of this study will have implications
for understanding physiological adaptations to cold and hypoxia in high-altitude
populations of other mammals including humans. This project integrates research
with diverse and extensive educational and public outreach activities including
training of graduate and undergraduate students, fostering international
collaborations, workshops for high school teachers and public displays at a
local museum. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research project is to
identify the mechanistic basis of adaptive population differences in thermogenic
capacity between deer mice that are native to different elevations. The
investigators will conduct common-garden acclimation experiments in captive-
bred, pedigreed mice to assess the roles of phenotypic plasticity and genotypic
specialization in adaptation to different altitudes. Measures of whole-animal
thermogenic capacity will be integrated with measures of various subordinate
traits and a functional genomic analysis of the underlying regulatory networks.
The scale of this systems-level analysis, which involves a sophisticated
modeling effort to integrate a comprehensive set of physiological, genetic and
metabolic variables, has never before been attempted. This research will yield
important insights into the mechanistic basis of physiological adaptation to the
combined challenges of hypoxia and cold exposure. This research involves an
important collaboration with investigators at McMaster University in Canada, who
have specialized expertise and access to facilities required for conduct of some
experiments. A component of the foreign collaboration will be research
experiences at McMaster University for undergraduate students from the
University of Nebraska - Lincoln, and the University of Illinois Urbana-
Champaign. The undergraduate research experiences are being supported by co-
funding from the International Science and Engineering section of the Office of
International and Integrative Activities. Stories about life in extreme
environments exert a powerful hold on the public imagination, and the
investigators will capitalize on this fascination to develop a public outreach
program that is centered on the "Sunday with a Scientist" program at the
University of Nebraska State Museum. Programs will be developed for the general
public that will focus on 'adaptation to extreme environments'. At the
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, researchers will be involved in a
series of workshops in evolutionary biology aimed at assisting high school
teachers to develop tools and effective approaches to teach evolutionary biology
using examples from this research.