* 1354104
* LTREB Renewal: Drivers and consequences of phenological change at high altitudes
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2014,09/30/2020
* David Inouye, Rocky Mountain Biological Laboratory
* Continuing Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 09/30/2020
* USD 522,832.00

This project builds upon 40 years of existing data to investigate how climate
change is affecting the timing (phenology) and extent of flowering by 120
species of wildflowers in high alpine areas in the Rocky Mountains. The
investigators will combine insights from historical data with new observations
and experiments over the next five years to learn how environmental variables
such as water availability and temperature affect timing and abundance of
flowering. In addition they will record the phenology and abundance of species
dependent upon those flowers, such as pollinators like bees, butterflies, and
hummingbirds, and insect seed predators and their parasitoids. They will
collaborate with other researchers to develop a unique dataset showing the
phenological relationships among species and trophic levels and how these
relationships are shifting in a changing climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research fosters new collaborations among senior and junior personnel, supports
and trains postdoctoral researchers as well as several undergraduate and
graduate students, and provides training opportunities for K-12 teachers. It
will continue one of the longest, continuous-running sets of phenological
observations in North America, thereby increasing our understanding of the long-
term ecological and evolutionary responses of populations and communities to
climate change. The project contributes to long-term records of snowfall and
avalanche activity in the Rocky Mountains.