* 1354837
* Collaborative research: Chemoreception of prey chemical defenses
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* I. King Jordan, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 07/31/2019
* USD 629,447.00

Chemical defenses are a major mechanism by which organisms interact with their
environment, increasing community complexity by allowing many prey to co-occur
with predators. In particular, chemical defenses commonly provide protection
from predators for marine sponges and algae, as well as plants and insects found
in freshwater environments. An important mystery regards the identity of
chemoreceptors used by predators to detect chemical defenses and avoid noxious
prey. In previous work, McCarty & Kubanek discovered a small protein expressed
in the heads of various fish species that appears to explain why sponge chemical
defenses are rejected by these fish when placed in their food. The first goal of
this work is to determine how this protein, named RL-TGR, functions. The second
goal is to determine whether other proteins, like RL-TGR, are involved in
chemical sensing of other chemical defenses in aquatic environments. These
studies will enable a new level of understanding of how predators and prey
interact in the marine environment. This program includes educational
opportunities for multiple undergraduates and graduate students, as well as an
exploration program for high school students in association with the Georgia
Aquarium in Atlanta.

The "RL-TGR" co-receptor is related to vertebrate RAMP proteins and thereby both
the trafficking of this protein to cell membranes and its subsequent function
require co-expression of a G-protein coupled receptor (GPCR) - however, the
determinants of RL-TGR function have yet to be identified. Objectives of the
collaborative project include the following: 1) Determine the mechanism of
action of RL-TGR in chemoreception. Both zebrafish (a model organism) and
bluehead wrasse (a marine generalist predator) respond to the presence of
sponge-derived deterrent compounds laced into their food. The anatomical
distribution of RL-TGR will be mapped in zebrafish and bluehead wrasse using
both gene and protein expression approaches. Which portions of RL-TGR modulate
responses to chemical defenses will be determined using mutagenesis,
electrophysiological assays, and co-expression with GPCRs. The endogenous
GPCR(s) that physically and functionally couple with RL-TGR to enable
chemoreception by fish will be identified, including via mass spectrometric
proteomics. 2) Explore the breadth of RL-TGR signaling and terpene glycoside-
based chemical defense. The diversity and evolution of RL-TGR-like co-receptors
in animals will be explored using bioinformatic approaches. We will compare RL-
TGR-mediated binding and physiological responses to various chemical defense
ligands from diverse prey in expression studies using RL-TGR orthologs from
model fish species. These studies will apply new knowledge about the mechanism
of RL-TGR signaling to enable an understanding of the breadth of RL-TGR function
in chemical defense chemoreception.