* 1354689
* Using dendroisotopes in North America and Asia to examine how temperate forests respond to changes in acid deposition
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2019
* William Peterjohn, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 04/30/2019
* USD 650,000.00

Understanding the response of forests to air pollution is critical as it affects
clean water, timber production and carbon storage. Comparing forests in
different parts of the earth will help us understand if the response is uniform
or regionally specific. This project compares forest responses in the temperate
deciduous forest in the eastern United States and in eastern China. These two
countries have opposite histories and trajectories of air pollution. When the
Industrial Revolution began, air pollution in the form of acid deposition
increased rapidly in the U.S. and was at high levels until the Clean Air Act was
enacted in 1970 when the pollution dropped dramatically. Over the same time
period, China has had low levels of air pollution until relatively recently as
pollution levels have increased to historic highs. In a preliminary study using
tree rings and carbon isotopes, an important isotopic signal was found in
Eastern red cedars in the West Virginia that indicated these trees are now
recovering from air pollution. This observation, however, is limited to a single
species from a single stand of trees. This project will determine how wide-
spread and universal this response is by using additional tree species along a
transect stretching across the southern, central, and northern Appalachian
region. Similar transects in China will be used to compare the isotopic
signatures and growth of trees from similar genera that are currently undergoing
opposite patterns of change in acid deposition. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If
widespread, results from this study will have important implications for carbon
storage and cycling in many northern hemisphere forests, especially those
downwind from pollution sources. Understanding such complexities will provide
much needed information on the overall vulnerability and resilience of forests
to dynamic changes in acidic pollution and atmospheric CO2. To broaden the
societal impact of the proposed research, data will be made available to inform
policy makers, federal land managers, modelers, and other scientists who may
benefit from the results. Activities will be incorporated into effective
learning activities for high school students and adults to provide a deeper
understanding of the link between effective government policies (such as the
Clean Air Act) and the health of forest ecosystems. Further, this project will
provide training for graduate students and undergraduates, particularly those
from facets of society that are underrepresented in science education and
research.