* 1354095
* The Emergence Of Modern Human Behavior
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Gilliane Monnier, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2018
* USD 162,432.00

Humanity has been associated with high levels of extinctions among competing
species, not only in the modern world of industrialized agriculture but even
from the first appearance of our species, Homo sapiens, during the Pleistocene
Epoch. In fact, one of the fundamental questions in human evolution is, what was
the nature of the interaction between the earliest modern humans from Africa and
their Eurasian competitors, the Neanderthals, that resulted in the latter's
extinction 30,000 years ago? Physical anthropology shows that the modern human
advantage was not physical prowess. Current archaeological research thus focuses
on the modern human landscape adaptation, i.e., how they strategized use of
resources in time and space (how they hunted animals, foraged for plants, and
relied on other humans for security), as potentially distinct from their
evolutionary cousins. Testing competing hypotheses of the contrast between
Neanderthal and modern human landscape adaptations requires high-resolution
archaeological data from the excavation of sites with the potential to
discriminate what activities the occupants were pursuing in that given site.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The multidisciplinary team created by Dr. Gilbert
Tostevin &amp; Dr. Gilliane Monnier, both of the University of Minnesota, along
with colleagues in the Czech Republic, Germany, and Israel, will investigate one
such site, Tvaro ná-Za kolou in the Czech Republic, that contains artifacts of
the archaeological culture most likely representing the earliest modern human
penetration into Neanderthal-occupied Europe. This culture, the Bohunician,
appears to have spread into Central Europe from the Near East but did not
penetrate further west than Bohemia, nor further east than western Ukraine. The
limited success of the Bohunician adaptation over the Neanderthals stands in
contrast to the Aurignacian, the modern human culture that spread 5,000 years
later across all of Europe and is associated with the extinction of the
Neanderthals. The project at Tvaro ná-Za kolou is designed to produce the
highest resolution of data on the Bohunician landscape adaptation to date,
thereby advancing archaeologists' ability to contrast the Bohunician,
Aurignacian, and Neanderthal landscape adaptations. Not only will the project
help discriminate what made modern humans' Ice Age ancestors so successful, it
will also provide field and laboratory training for US, Czech, and other
nations' graduate students in the teams innovative microarchaeological and 3D
artifact modeling techniques, the latter providing the first publicly-accessible
digital collection of artifacts from the entirety of a site of this
age.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of this project is the high-resolution
excavation, analysis, and dating of the Tvaro ná-Za kolou site. By
reconstructing stone tool production at the site in relation to the use of
organic artifacts that did not preserve (but that can be detected chemically in
the site's sediment), the team will establish a new method for determining how a
site's function within the population's landscape adaptation affects the
artifactual content of the site. When applied to other sites in the region, this
approach will transform archaeologists' ability to understand adaptive
differences between modern humans and Neanderthals in this, and other, regions.