* 1354631
* Collaborative Research: Evolution, Diversification, and Conservation of a Megadiverse Flagship Lichen Genus
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Bernard Goffinet, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 07/31/2019
* USD 223,000.00

Lichens are symbiotic associations between a fungus and one or more algae or
cyanobacteria. They perform critical ecological functions such as soil stability
and water purification in many ecosystems. The lichen genus Sticta performs an
important function in forest and woodland ecosystems in temperate and tropical
regions. Due to their large size and capacity to store and release large amounts
of water, these lichens contribute to the water cycle, including in regions that
are water reservoirs for urban areas. Most species contain cyanobacteria that
fix atmospheric nitrogen and thus function as biological fertilizers. Sticta
species are particularly sensitive indicators of ecological disturbance, air
pollution and global climate change, and have therefore disappeared from many
habitats over vast geographical regions in the Northern Hemisphere. Although
Sticta includes 120 species, genetic data suggest that perhaps as many as 400
species await discovery throughout the world, particularly in tropical
mountains. An international team of researchers seeks to fully elucidate Sticta
diversity using modern genomic approaches, and reconstruct its evolutionary
history to further our understanding of the role of global climatic shifts and
geological events on the diversification of these symbiotic fungi. This
knowledge is critical in understanding and conserving their important ecological
roles they play for our society. The project also contains components of citizen
science and outreach materials aimed at public education and
ecotourism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project brings together a broad array of
tools to elucidate the evolution and diversification of Sticta within a
framework of historical biogeography, including a combination of traditional and
next-generation DNA sequencing methods to test the viability of DNA barcoding
for a large lichen fungal genus. The research will begin with targeted
collection of Sticta specimens which will be used for DNA sequence and
morphological analyses. Using phylogenetic methods the project will infer
species delimitations, divergence dates among lineages, biogeography, ecological
niche and morphological character state reconstructions. Novel approaches that
effectively integrate molecular and morphological data are implemented. This
includes morphology-based phylogenetic binning to place historical type
specimens within the molecular phylogeny. These tools will resolve the
biodiversity questions within Sticta and generate tools essential to their
identification. The evolution of phenotypes and photosymbiodemes (lichens that
include two different types of photobionts) and their importance for the
understanding of morphogenesis and interactions of fungal and algal or
cyanobacterial partners in lichens will be studied. The project trains two
postdocs and includes two international workshops.