* 1354253
* The unicellular origin of biological senescence: Its evolution and population dynamics
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2014,09/30/2019
* Lin Chao, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 09/30/2019
* USD 557,850.00

The supported research project investigates the origin of biological aging in
single-celled organisms such as bacteria. The hypothesis to be tested is that
whenever bacteria accrue non-genetic damage, such as oxidized proteins, it is
more advantageous for a mother cell to reproduce by allocating asymmetrically
more damage to one of her two daughter cells. Because damage causes a cell to
grow more slowly, the daughter receiving less damage is rejuvenated and the one
receiving more is aged. The advantage of asymmetry was predicted by a
theoretical analysis conducted with a computational model and it can be
illustrated with an investment analogy. Consider having bank accounts A ($1,000
at 8% yearly) and B ($500 at 6% and $500 at 10%). If more money is the goal,
account B has more after two years. Partitioning damage asymmetrically generates
a fast and a slow growing daughter, and it is equivalent to having account B.
Partitioning damage symmetrically is comparable to account A. The demonstration
that bacteria age would overturn a long standing dogma in biology that aging is
a characteristic of only complex and multi-cellular organisms such as humans. If
bacterial aging is real, a scientific paradigm will have shifted and text books
will have to be rewritten. Moreover, if aging is universal to both bacteria and
humans, a common mechanism may exist and the results of this study would help
guide research on aging in all organisms. If there is a common mechanism, a
common solution may also exist. The fact that human aging is often also
associated with oxidative damage is already a promising
link.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A unicellular origin of aging does not require
natural selection on groups because it is the fitness of the lineage that is
maximized by the asymmetrical partitioning of damage. Two sets of experiments
with the bacterium Escherichia coli will be completed to test the proposed
models of aging in the supported research. First, the effect of short term
variation in the level of damage experienced by a single bacterial species will
be examined. Second, the degree of asymmetry will be estimated and compared for
different bacterial species that have evolved over long term under high levels
of damage. Damage levels will be manipulated by adding extrinsic damage agents
(e.g. heat, peroxides, antibiotics, and radiation). The analyses of the
theoretical models predict (i) that short term variation in damage levels causes
the bacteria to transition from immortality to mortality and (ii) that long term
exposure to high levels leads to the evolution of higher degrees of asymmetry.
The degree of asymmetry is quantified by the asymmetry parameter in the models.
The parameter is estimated by fitting the models to population data, which are
the doubling or generation time of individual cells estimated by time-lapse
microscopy of dividing bacterial populations. Novel insights will be attained by
this robust investigation of bacterial aging providing the framework to
readdress both the short-term and long-term aspects of the population dynamics
and evolution, respectively.