* 1355846
* ABI Innovation: Beyond dN/dS: Population Genetics, Genome Structure, and Protein Structure
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2014,02/28/2015
* David Liberles, University of Wyoming
* Continuing Grant
* Anne Maglia
* 02/28/2015
* USD 457,886.00

Full genome sequences, including the sequence for all protein-encoding genes,
now exist for many different species. Within these sequences lie the molecular
underpinnings of species differentiation. Presently it is not possible to
systematically compare homologous genes from different species and predict which
have changed function. New mechanistic models that describe the underlying
population genetic, evolutionary, and biochemical processes and constraints on
amino acid change between species will be developed and applied to genome
comparisons, including to the divergence between humans and chimpanzees.
Additionally, the project will provide educational opportunities for
undergraduate and graduate students as well as postdoctoral training. Further, a
popular video, interactive educational website, and poster-based museum exhibit
on comparative genomics will be produced to explain the concepts of comparative
genomic analysis to a popular science audience. The project involves
collaboration with the American Museum of Natural History and researchers at
University of Otago in New Zealand.

Current widely used approaches in comparative genomics simply look for a
statistical excess of nucleotide changes that change the encoded amino acid,
normalized by the expectation from synonymous nucleotide changes (the ratio of
nonsynonymous to synonymous nucleotide substitution rates), but do not look at
amino acid biochemistry or structural biology. They also do not consider genome
structure (linkage) or population genetic considerations of the probability of
fixation of an amino acid change. This research will develop approaches that
explicitly consider the linkage of sites on chromosomes in a population genetic
model and in different ways, also consider the biochemical and structural
context of amino acid changes. The new models will be used initially in
comparisons of the human and chimpanzee genome protein coding set and will
subsequently be implemented in a phylogenetic context to enable comparison of
gene families from multiple species. Potential downstream applications of this
modeling approach that enables better mechanistic understanding of lineage-
specific evolution include prediction of proteins or pathways where functions
have changed. This can point to proteins and pathways that make a species unique
as well as validating when model organisms are likely to be good models for
particular molecular systems. Information related to this project will be
available at http://www.wyomingbioinformatics.org/LiberlesGroup.