* 1355902
* Using Primate Comparative Biology to Understand Human Uniqueness
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2018
* Charles Nunn, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 03/31/2018
* USD 234,495.00

A fundamental question in biology concerns the ways that species differ from one
another. Perhaps nowhere is this more prominent than in the field of biological
anthropology, where researchers investigate how and why humans differ from other
primates, often under the assumption that human traits resulted from a unique
constellation of forces that made our lineage particularly successful. Humans
are clearly unique in many ways relative to other primates, including use of
language, impressive problem-solving abilities, and cumulative cultural
evolution. It is less clear how other biological traits - such as life history
and physiology - have catalyzed these major changes. Have our unique cognitive
abilities arisen from only a few underlying biological changes, or many changes?
Which traits are involved, and how do they relate to one another?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central goal of this research to rigorously identify
biological traits that are exceptional in humans, and thus important to other
traits involved in our extraordinary success. This goal will be achieved through
in-depth, advanced analyses of a wide range of important variables involving
brain size, lifespan and related traits, and key physiological variables, such
as immune system characteristics and body temperature. The research team will
also investigate parasites and pathogens, which have been hypothesized to be
super-abundant in humans, yet are known to depress cognitive performance. Two
new statistical approaches will be developed. One set of methods predicts trait
values in humans based on a statistical model estimated in non-human primates,
and then evaluates whether the observed value in Homo sapiens departs from the
predicted value. A second set of methods investigates evolutionary rates on
different parts of an evolutionary tree. Under the hypothesis that a biological
trait is exceptional in humans relative to non-human primates, elevated rates of
evolutionary change in that trait are expected along the lineage leading to
humans. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In terms of intellectual merit, the research will
open new avenues to better integrate studies of non-human primates into our
understanding of human evolution. In the process, the research will address the
question, what are the fundamental biological traits that have lead to human
uniqueness and success? The new methods complement existing approaches to
studying the fossil record, and they provide ways to investigate traits that do
not fossilize, including behavioral and ecological traits.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research also will support important broader impacts,
especially involving hands-on training in statistics and databases for the next
generation of young scientists, and opportunities for these developing
scientists to expand their knowledge of biology and anthropology. The research
team also will produce new databases of primate and human characteristics that
enable other scientists and students to investigate additional research
questions important in the fields of biological anthropology. Finally, the
investigator will organize a conference symposium in the final year of funding
to share the results of this effort and stimulate future extensions of it