* 1355014
* Developmental Integration and the Ecology of Life Histories in Phylogenetic Perspective
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2014,03/31/2018
* Richard Wrangham, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 03/31/2018
* USD 221,004.00

Of central importance in the science of human biology, as well as that of other
species, is full understanding of the complex processes that underlie
development, including both the integration of these processes and their
evolutionary bases. While experiences during the critical period of childhood
are known to have important and lasting effects on future growth, reproduction,
health and behavior, the fundamental biology of this system remains poorly
understood. This is especially salient for the human species, which has the
longest juvenile phase of any animal. By incorporating a phylogenetic approach
that examines physical, hormonal, and behavioral development in our closest
living relative, the chimpanzee, we can advance understanding of this critical
period of development, and determine how different developmental trajectories
interact with each other and with the environment to produce adult traits.
Comparison of chimpanzees and humans will provide a model for the ways in which
biological influences combine with the ecological and social environments to
generate adult characteristics, and contribute to understanding when and how
unique features of human life history arose in our lineage (such as early
weaning, prolonged reliance on parental support, and the adolescent growth
spurt).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; By using a series of novel, non-invasive
techniques, this study will achieve the first detailed documentation of the
development of wild chimpanzees, and provide the basis for a comparative,
phylogenetic approach to the science of primate, including human, development.
Trajectories to be analyzed include physical growth (linear growth, body weight,
muscle mass, and tooth eruption), nutrition (behavioral measures of nursing
intensity, hormonal measures of maternal and infant energy balance, and isotopic
measures of maternal and infant diet), hormones (testosterone, cortisol,
estradiol, progesterone, DHEAS and C-peptide), and multiple dimensions of
behavior. Hypotheses to be tested will assess how maternal condition, early life
nutrition, stress, and related factors influence the timing and rates of
development, and the role of hormones in these interactions. The results will be
important for understanding sex differences in physiology and behavior.
Ultimately, understanding these relationships will allow us to better infer life
history shifts associated with changing habitats, ecologies, and morphologies in
the hominin evolutionary lineage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Numerous domestic and
international broader impacts are tied to the project. Data generated by the
research will be utilized to promote K-12 education in the U.S., working with
teachers in both New York and New Mexico to enhance curricula and foster science
literacy and appreciation. Education and training of both U.S. and Ugandan
undergraduate and graduate students will be fostered through incorporation of
these students into the project, and through utilization of the generated data
for future research. International collaboration and capacity building, as well
as conservation of endangered species, will be promoted by providing economic
incentives for protection in Kibale National Park (job creation, training,
research fees), supporting anti-poaching and ecotourism programs, and educating
Ugandan primary school children about wildlife and habitat conservation.