* 1355176
* Collaborative Research: SG: piRNA Dynamics in the Absence of Active Transposable Elements
* BIO,DEB
* 04/15/2014,03/31/2017
* David Ray, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 03/31/2017
* USD 55,908.00

Transposable elements (TEs) are DNA sequences with the ability to move and make
copies in a genome through -cut and paste- or -copy and paste- mechanisms. TEs
are major components of vertebrate genomes, and account for at least 45% of the
human genome. Because the unrestricted proliferation of TEs can have profound,
and mostly deleterious, biological effects, the question of how organisms
control TE mobilization has attracted high interest. Experimental data suggest
that TEs and a recently discovered class of small non-coding RNAs called piRNAs,
are involved in an evolutionary arms race, similar to that of pathogens and the
immune system. Briefly, piRNAs direct proteins against TE derived messenger
RNAs. However, the details of the interplay between piRNAs and TEs are far from
clear. The research objective of this project is to characterize piRNA
repertoires in the ground squirrel, which lacks ongoing TE activity, by
contrasting them with mouse which have ongoing TE
activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding how genomes protect themselves from
the challenges presented by TE invasion is a fundamental question in
evolutionary genomics. This project represents a step in that direction. TEs
have the ability to change genes and their expression, and as such they can have
profound biological effects. In addition, the piRNA pathway has enormous
potential for applications in biotechology and medicine. If the investigators
are able to direct this pathway, they should be able to target deleterious gene
variants, such as those involved in cancer, and this project will contribute
towards this long term objective. In addition, this project will permit the
training of young researchers in bioinformatics.