* 1355098
* Mechanisms of osmosensing and osmotic stress responses in tilapia
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2014,05/31/2018
* Dietmar Kueltz, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Emily Carrington
* 05/31/2018
* USD 705,089.00

Remarkable progress has been made in understanding the effector mechanisms of
osmoregulation in fishes and many other animals. In contrast, less is known
about the mechanisms by which these effectors are regulated, how osmotic changes
in the environment are perceived, and how osmosensory information is transduced
via intracellular signaling pathways to the osmoregulatory effectors. By
approaching these questions starting from a robust and tractable osmoregulatory
effector system to identify its regulatory elements, the project addresses a
large gap in the current knowledge about fish osmoregulation/ fluid and
electrolyte homeostasis. Tilapia (Oreochromis mossambicus) represent a superb
model for studying mechanisms of osmosensing and osmotic stress signaling
because they tolerate an extremely wide range of environmental salinity. Their
genome has been sequenced and proteome well-annotated. The research supported by
this award will investigate the mechanisms and implications associated with
hyperosmotic induction of the myo-inositol biosynthesis pathway. This research
project has broad implications for biology because myo-inositol and
phosphoinosite signaling as well as osmotic stress responses are common to all
eukaryotes. It has basic implications for agricultural development because
studying mechanisms and implications associated with activation of compatible
osmolyte synthesis pathways could lead to increasing salt and drought tolerance.
Understanding the role of myo-inositol in the regulation of key intracellular
signaling pathways and energy homeostasis is also significant in the light of
stress-related disorders.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The PIs lab has generated
significant resources in the past to advance the study of osmosensory and
osmoregulatory mechanisms in tilapia, including quantitative proteomics
workflows and several highly osmotolerant cell lines. Preliminary data show that
both enzymes involved in this pathway, myo-inositol phosphate synthase (MIPS)
and inositol monophosphatase 1 (IMPase 1), as well as myo-inositol levels are
extremely highly upregulated during hyperosmotic stress in multiple tilapia
tissues and cell lines. Thus, this pathway represents a robust system for the
proposed studies. The project aims to identify osmoresponsive cis elements in
the MIPS and IMPase1 genes and test the hypothesis that such elements are
necessary for hyperosmotic induction of the myo-inositol biosynthesis pathway.
Moreover, the hypothesis that MIPS and IMPase1 influence cellular osmoregulation
beyond myo-inositol being a compatible osmolyte will be tested. Specifically, it
is proposed that MIPS and IMPase 1 directly interact with other proteins
involved in osmoprotection and that their regulation indirectly affects cellular
phosphoinosite signaling (PI3K/ PTEN/Akt and PLC/PKC/IP3 pathways) and energy
metabolism (by sequestering glucose-6-phosphate). The project uses sophisticated
proteomics tools and workflows to capture molecular phenotypes associated with
osmotic stress signaling in an unprecedented fashion. This unique combination of
resources will significantly enhance our understanding of osmotic stress
signaling mechanisms and provide novel insight into evolutionary driving forces
that have shaped myo-inositol as a key metabolite in most organisms.
Dissemination of activities and results of this project will be done via peer-
reviewed publications, conference presentations, seminars, and broader outreach
avenues, including engagement of K12 students and educators, aquaculture
producers, community groups, and conservation organizations in research. A
public lab website will be developed to showcase research and outreach
activities. Two graduate students will be trained and each of them will
supervise an undergraduate intern. Priority will be given to recruit students
from underrepresented minorities.