* 1355872
* SPIRIT: Scholarship Program Initiative via Recruitment, Innovation, and Transformation
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2019
* Chip Ferguson, Western Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* John Jackman
* 05/31/2019
* USD 625,179.00

The United States faces a national need to increase substantially the number of
American scientists and engineers. This project at Western Carolina State
University addresses this need by providing academic and financial support to
students pursuing engineering and engineering technology degrees at that
institution. This initiative is called SPIRIT: Scholarship Program Initiative
via Recruitment, Innovation, and Transformation. SPIRIT creates a focused
approach to the recruitment, retention, education, and placement of engineering
and technology students with academic talent and financial need. This program
helps to develop domestic, workforce ready, engineers by providing scholarships
that will assist qualified SPIRIT scholars to reduce their financial burden for
obtaining an undergraduate education. The project promotes diversity in STEM
fields, specifically for lower income students in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will utilize student-centered strategies to achieve goals for student
retention and success in engineering and engineering technology majors. The
educational program focuses on problem-based learning communities that nurture
technical skills and professional skills. Students will be recruited into
horizontally and vertically integrated cohorts that are developed into a Project
Based Learning (PBL) community. The community will be characterized by extensive
faculty mentoring, fundamental and applied research, hands-on design projects,
and industry engagement. The horizontal integration method creates sub-cohorts
with same-year students from different disciplines such as electrical
engineering or mechanical engineering working in an environment that reflects
how engineers work in the real world. The vertical integration method will
enable sub-cohorts from different years to work together on different stages of
projects in a PBL setting. The objectives of the SPIRIT program are to ensure an
interdisciplinary environment that enhances technical competency through
learning outcomes. These outcomes address improvements in critical skills such
as intentional learning, problem solving, teamwork, project management,
interpersonal communications, and leadership.