* 1355505
* EAGER: BISON: Bio-Inspired Solutions for RobustWireless Sensor Networking
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2016
* Sajal Das, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Thyagarajan Nandagopal
* 09/30/2016
* USD 115,986.00

Through billions of years 'computation' using 'survival of the fittest'
algorithm, biological systems have naturally become robust and self-adaptive to
environmental changes, such as perturbations and adverse situations. Inspired by
this phenomenon, this ambitious EAGER project, called BISON, will aim to design
robust wireless sensor networks (WSNs), by leveraging optimal results from
nature's computation. Functional robustness of living organisms is often
attributed to the optimized topological structures of gene regulatory networks
(GRNs) that oversee proper behavior of biological cells by means of signal
transmissions between the genes. GRNs are adaptive to dynamic changes (e.g.,
noises and perturbations) and also resilient to the removal or malfunction of
nodes. Recognizing that WSNs conceptually operate under similar conditions, the
BISON project will exploit intrinsic features of GRNs to improve efficiency and
robustness of WSNs.

This exploratory project will: (i) establish innovative mapping between GRNs and
WSNs by modeling them as graphs, and (ii) apply bio-inspired robust templates in
GRNs to design resilient and transmission-efficient WSN topologies. Approaching
from biological principles will lead to a novel paradigm shift in robust design
of wireless sensor networks with applications in environmental and health
monitoring, intrusion detection and target tracking, and vulnerability analysis
of cyber-physical systems. The proposed fundamental approach will produce new
research in comparing GRN topologies from different organisms under the unifying
goal of understanding their information transport robustness.

The BISON project aims to transcend the mapping between biological networks and
robust WSNs to other networks such as wireless cellular networks, vehicular and
social networks. Research findings will be integrated into existing computer
science courses, such as advances in sensor networks and fundamentals of
wireless networks, at the Missouri University of Science and Technology, thus
training diverse students in an interdisciplinary topic. Efforts will also be
made to recruit women and minority students, and engage undergraduates to bio-
inspired applications. Research outcomes will be disseminated through a
dedicated website, publications and presentations in high quality conferences
and journals, and through the Complex Networks Dynamics (CoNeD) workshop co-
founded by the PI.