* 1355181
* Signaling mechanisms that regulate attractive axon guidance at the CNS midline
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2019
* Greg Bashaw, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Evan Balaban
* 06/30/2019
* USD 1,092,000.00

The establishment of proper neuron connections during development is essential
for coordinated behavior. Axons, the wires of the nervous system, are guided to
their targets by attractive and repulsive cues. This project will investigate
the mechanisms that promote axon attraction to the midline of the fly central
nervous system. Similar to the vertebrate floor plate, the fly midline is an
intermediate target for navigating axons, which must decide whether or not to
cross the midline. Netrin attracts axons to the midline through receptors of the
Deleted in Colorectal Carcinoma (DCC) family (frazzled in Drosophila). However,
it is unclear how Frazzled/DCC signaling mediates axon attraction and what
additional mechanisms contribute to midline circuit assembly. Defining these
mechanisms will enrich understanding of how guidance molecules work in the
intact animal and have the potential to suggest therapeutic targets for
disorders of the nervous system. The project includes outreach activities that
are aimed at increasing high school scientific literacy and aptitude. Each
summer, a high school teacher will spend six weeks in the laboratory, where
he/she will collaborate with lab personnel to conduct original research and
design a teaching module to bring back to the classroom.

To define mechanisms mediating axon attraction, this proposal seeks 1) to
identify genes that act with Fra to control midline guidance, 2) to determine
how the novel role of Fra in activating gene transcription is regulated by
receptor proteolysis, and 3) to test if nuclear localization and transcriptional
activation function of the Fra intracellular domain (ICD) are required for Fra-
dependent gene expression. A sensitized genetic screen will identify new
components that act with Fra to promote midline crossing, and molecular genetic
approaches will be used to investigate a novel role for Semaphorin1a (identified
in our screen) during midline guidance. Molecular and genetic approaches will be
used to test the importance of proteolysis of the Fra receptor. Candidate genes
from the screen will be tested for roles in Fra-dependent transcription. In
vitro assays in insect and yeast cells will be used to delimit sequences that
are necessary and sufficient for nuclear localization, nuclear export, and
transactivation function of the Fra ICD. Finally, in vivo requirements for these
elements will be tested by generating mutated forms of the Fra receptor,
expressing them as transgenes, and assaying their ability to promote midline
axon attraction and target gene expression.