* 1355240
* Antagonistic Pleiotropy in JNK signaling: dissecting age-dependent interactions
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2019
* Michael Shapira, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 04/30/2019
* USD 927,384.00

The theory of Antagonistic Pleiotropy postulates that aging is a consequence of
inverse correlation between age and selection pressure. Under this theory,
positive selection of mechanisms with early-life beneficial effects occurs, in
spite of late-life detrimental effects. Understanding when and how such
mechanisms become detrimental is crucial for understanding the principles
directing the evolution of aging and the aging process itself. However, our
understanding of the molecular underpinnings of antagonistic pleiotropy is
lacking. This award will support investigation of a novel mechanism involving
the conserved C. elegans JNK protein homolog KGB-I to provide relevant
information about the molecular mechanisms of antagonistic pleiotropy and aging.
KGB-1 provides protection against heavy metals and protein folding stress during
development but reverses its contribution and becomes detrimental during early
adulthood, sensitizing animals to stress and shortening their lifespan. The
project seeks to understand what causes the switch in KGB-1's effect and the
general implications of the switch for aging. The project aims will be achieved
by dissecting, genetically and biochemically, age-dependent interactions of
KGB-1. Specific studies will be conducted to: 1) Characterize age-dependent and
tissue-specific interactions between KGB-1 and other proteins; 2) Examine
contribution of genes induced in a KGB-1-, and age-dependent manner to
downstream phenotypes; 3) Identify proteins physically interacting with KGB-1 in
different ages to characterize shifts in KGB-1's network of interactions.
Mutant, RNAi knock-down animals, or transgenic strains will be used in these
studies to examine genetic and physical interactions between KGB-1 and its
mediators. Additional strains will be used to characterize tissue specificity in
the contribution of KGB-1 to stress-resistance phenotypes and in its
interactions with its mediators. The research will provide information on a
fundamental feature of the evolution of aging and provide a better understanding
of the aging process itself. Undergraduate and graduate students, including
individuals from underrepresented groups, will be trained in scientific
research, participate in research and scientific meetings, and publish their
results during the project. In addition, science enrichment outreach to local
elementary schools will be conducted. All microarray data generated as part of
the study will be uploaded upon publication to the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO:
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/) database repository. Molecular biology
reagents (i.e. plasmids, bacterial clones) generated as part of this work will
be available to members of the scientific community upon request. Transgenic C.
elegans strains generated by this project will be available immediately after
publication to members of the scientific community and will be deposited in the
C. elegans Genetics Center at the University of Minnesota
(http://www.cgc.cbs.umn.edu/) for wider distribution. Results will be published
in peer-reviewed journals, preferably open access ones, and presented at
research conferences.