* 1355981
* Elm STEMS: An Integrated Approach to Cultivating Academic Success in Science, Technology and Math
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/2014,05/31/2021
* Nina Theis, College of Our Lady of the Elms
* Standard Grant
* Susan Carson
* 05/31/2021
* USD 620,620.00

Through the Elm STEMs project, the College of Our Lady of the Elms (Elms
College) is expanding enrollment in its biology, chemistry, mathematics or
computer information technology programs through new career-building,
experiential opportunities in STEM. The goal of this S-STEM project is to
support qualified students with financial need, provide them with the tools for
success, and connect them with the regional technology industry in New England.
The project is awarding scholarships to a total of 21 S-STEM scholar students
(10 first-year and 11 transfer students). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives
of this project are to: 1) increase enrollment of first-year and transfer
students in STEM, 2) increase retention of these scholars and support them
through graduation, 3) provide opportunities for experiential learning (research
or internships), and 4) increase the number of scholars continuing to graduate
studies or finding employment in their field. This project builds upon a strong
existing student-support infrastructure as well as implements programs newly
created for the Elm STEMS program to provide evidence-based support for the
S-STEM scholars: a special section of the First Year Seminar taught by STEM
faculty provides cohort building and peer mentoring for S-STEM scholars; a new
Scientific and Technical Communications course for juniors and transfer students
develops critical skills and bring transfer students into the cohort; and the
STEM Career Series and the STEM on the Road field trip program provides
opportunities for career exploration. To ensure academic success, Elms is
implementing student supports that include scheduled tutoring and enhanced
proactive faculty advisement. A cohort experience is promoted based on common
participation in a first year seminar, a junior year workshop, and a STEM-based
service learning project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Elms College's recruitment
strategy targets high-achieving students from local high schools and community
colleges, many of which have large underrepresented minority and first-
generation populations. To increase awareness in high school students and
community college students of the wide range of STEM career opportunities in the
region, Elms is implementing outreach and career education, including
recruitment events that include theme-based engaging hands-on activities (such
as forensics, lab-based biotechnology, and field-based environmental assessment)
and networking opportunities with local industry. Additional partnerships with
local high school teachers and community college faculty and counselors are
being developed to support these outreach efforts.