* 1355436
* Collaborative research:  Dynamics and origins of explosive silicic volcanism at 2300 mbsl on a mid-ocean ridge spreading center
* GEO,OCE
* 02/15/2014,01/31/2017
* Ryan Portner, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 01/31/2017
* USD 161,105.00

Very little is known about explosive silicic volcanic eruptions in deep sea
environments because so few have been discovered and documented. On land these
types of eruptions pose significant hazards for populations living near the
volcano and/or along the path of any ash cloud dispersal zone. This research
analyzes samples from a 2012 Monterrey Bay Aquarium Research Institute (MBARI)
cruise to the Alarcon Rise in the Gulf of California that discovered a unique
silicic (rhyolite, dacitic, andesitic) eruption center lying 2,300 to 2,400
meters below the sea surface. Goals of the research are to fill a major gap in
our understanding of deep marine explosive volcanic events. Work includes
collection of a comprehensive geochemical, petrological, and volcanological
dataset of the volatile and degassing history of the eruptive center. It will
involve merging topographic/feature information obtained from high resolution (1
meter) bathymetric maps of the area and analyses of 6 volcaniclastic scoop bags
and 24 push cores that contain samples of pumice and fluidal silicic material.
Data will be used to determine the mechanism of magmatic differentiation and
volatile enrichment, as well as volcaniclastic transport processes, pyroclast
dispersal extent, and fragmentation mechanisms. It will also determine how much
magmatic volatiles influence magma viscosity and eruption style in deep sea
explosive eruptions by measuring the volatile (H2O, CO2, S, etc.) contents in
the eruptive glasses. Additionally, U-Th and U-Th/He and Ar age dating will take
place to determine if the deposits represent more than one eruption and, if
there is more than one, when they took place. Both stable isotopes (O and H) and
radiogenic isotopes (Sr, Nd, Pb, Hf) of the collected lavas and glasses will be
analyzed to examine impacts of potential continental and oceanic crustal
assimilation in the origination of the eruption(s). Broader impacts of the
research are strong and multifaceted. They include the creation of a website and
virtual reality displays of the study area and its volcano and volcanic deposits
for educators and the distribution of this visual over YouTube and at the
Monterrey Bay Aquarium Research Institute Open House. There is also significant
international collaboration with scientists from Mexico and Australia; and there
will be an increase in the infrastructure for science by developing new
geochemical analytical procedures and capabilities at the University of
California, Santa Cruz. Additional impacts are that the project supports two
early career PIs, one of whom is at an institution in an EPSCoR state (Rhode
Island).