* 1355457
* Maine EPSCoR:  The Nexus of Coastal Social-Environmental Systems and Sustainable Ecological Aquaculture
* O/D,OIA
* 08/01/2014,01/31/2020
* Carol Kim, University of Maine
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jose Colom
* 01/31/2020
* USD 20,000,000.00

Abstract

Proposal Number: IIA-1355457

Proposal Title: Maine EPSCoR: The Nexus of Coastal Social-Environmental Systems
and Sustainable Ecological Aquaculture

Institution: University of Maine

Non-Technical Description Research through the Sustainable Ecological
Aquaculture Network (SEANET) will contribute to important scientific debates on
how to balance the social ecological knowledge gained with local decision-making
through its efforts to develop comprehensive, transdisciplinary, coastal marine
science that is positioned at the knowledge interface of marine fisheries,
ecosystems conservation and restoration. The project is innovative and
potentially transformative displaying considerable possibilities for advancing
knowledge and discovery about Sustainable Ecological Aquaculture (SEA) within
Maine?s coastal social, economic, and environmental nexus. Other coastal regions
face problems similar to those in Maine and results could inform sustainable
solutions to coastal community and aquaculture problems on a global basis.

Maine develops research and education activities to engage a wide number of
constituents. The project will increase public scientific literacy and train a
modern STEM workforce. New STEM programs, mentoring, and research opportunities
will specifically recruit females, Native Americans, and other minority
students. Other initiatives include student internships, innovation workshops
and the creation of a statewide collaborative network of faculty, postdocs,
graduate and undergraduate students working together with stakeholders. Middle
and secondary teachers will also be supported to engage in curriculum
development. Economic development activities include the creation of
Geographical Information Systems maps that identify the risks and carrying
capacity for high valued commercial harvest species. The activities strengthen
areas noted to be important within the State?s Science and Technology Plan such
as workforce training and development in the areas of marine ecology and
aquaculture.

Technical Description This project seeks develops SEANET to determine the social
and environmental carrying capacities of aquaculture systems in Maine?s coastal
bioregions. SEANET is envisioned as a statewide, multi-institutional, academic
research network that will advance knowledge and discovery about SEA within
coastal Maine?s social, economic, and environmental nexus. SEANET capitalizes on
Maine?s diverse Spcio- ecological systems contexts by comparing and contrasting
three coastal bioregions, south, midcoast, and downeast, which comprise
important research gradients in amounts of oceanic versus freshwater inputs,
physical oceanography, degrees of urbanization and nutrient inputs, social-
economic demographics, and intensities of fisheries and aquaculture
developments. A suite of new buoys and sensors, industrial partnerships and
models will be used with existing data to assess and monitor the carrying
capacity of these areas for aquaculture species over time. Social research will
engage local stakeholders using focus groups, surveys, and interviews and
combined with modeling will address perceptions, attitudes and local values
related to aquaculture. The project involves many of the institutes of higher
education across the state including community colleges as well as local
producer groups and state government agencies.