* 1355469
* Testing multi-disciplinary theories of suicide using a cross-cultural database
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2014,01/31/2016
* Edward Hagen, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 01/31/2016
* USD 61,395.00

At its most fundamental level cultural anthropology seeks to explain the
similarities and differences between cultures. One approach to this is the
coding of ethnographic cases from individual anthropologists into data sets that
can be used to conduct statistical tests of hypotheses. This proposal takes this
approach in a cross-cultural study of suicide. Worldwide, suicide accounts for
more deaths than all wars and homicides combined. Attempted suicides, which
among young adults are estimated to outnumber completions by a factor of
100-200, often cause serious injury. The vast majority of research on
suicidality has been conducted in a narrow range of societies, primarily the
nation states of Europe and its former colonies, using study designs that
provide little information on the social and cultural contexts of individual
suicide cases. Hence, theories of, and treatments for, suicidality are currently
developed with little detailed knowledge of the phenomenon in the majority of
human societies. Given increasing cultural and ethnic diversity in the U.S. and
more frequent online interaction between people of different cultural
backgrounds, understanding the cross-cultural motivations and causes of suicide
is a benefit to public health.

This project will investigate suicide using ethnographic data from 245 societies
representing a broad range of human cultural diversity. Cross-cultural data on
suicide will be obtained from the Human Relations Area Files (HRAF), which
contain over a million pages of ethnographic reports, spanning several
centuries, on hundreds of different cultures.Key theories of suicidal behavior
from anthropology, clinical psychology, and evolutionary biology will be tested
against ethnographic accounts of suicide in the HRAF. The theories will include:
a group of related anthropological explanations for suicide which see it, in
part, as a means for relatively powerless individuals to strike back at powerful
others with whom they are in conflict; leading theoretical models from clinical
psychology, which emphasize escape from pain, burdensomeness on others, problem
solving deficits, and emotional dysregulation; and a theory from evolutionary
biology that views suicide as a costly signal of need. In addition, the accounts
of suicide will be synthesized in a meta-ethnography, providing a comprehensive
anthropological view of suicide that will complement perspectives from other
disciplines.