* 1355563
* Aspire to Succeed
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2020
* Jemima Ingle, University of Saint Mary
* Continuing Grant
* Tom Higgins
* 07/31/2020
* USD 616,402.00

Through this S-STEM project, the University of Saint Mary (USM) is supporting a
total of 14 academically talented students with financial need who are majoring
in biology, chemistry, or mathematics through scholarships and a coordinated set
of student support structures. The project goals of increasing the number of
students enrolled in these majors at USM by 16%, increasing the retention rates
in these programs by 12%, and graduating 80% of the Scholars within four years
align with the workforce needs in the Kansas City area and statewide. Moreover,
USM is leveraging partnerships with local industries to engage students through
monthly lecture series, service learning projects, and coordinated internship
opportunities.

USM is implementing a holistic set of evidence-based interventions and practices
shown to increase retention and success, including as a two-semester First Year
Experience program that incorporates service learning projects and develops
students' study, critical thinking, and writing skills, tutoring, and peer
review sessions. Scholars also participate in bi-weekly individual advising and
cohort meetings and professional development activities, which are intended to
support student success. Formal structures that provide scholars opportunities
to participate in research or internships are expected to increase the retention
of the scholars and provide career preparation. These professional development
and research-oriented activities are strategies for the project to achieve the
goal that 75% of Scholars are employed in a STEM field or enter a STEM graduate
program within one year of graduation.