* 1355000
* Collaborative Research: Species tree reconstruction using neutral and non-neutral phylogenomic data.
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2020
* David Weisrock, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 08/31/2020
* USD 597,224.00

Understanding the evolutionary relationships among organisms within the Tree of
Life is essential for learning how life has evolved on Earth. By unraveling
these interrelationships, the historical causes and consequences of biological
phenomena ranging from disease to diet can be understood. Decades of research
has shed light on many regions of the Tree, but still, many relationships are
poorly understood. Recent technological advancements now allow biological
researchers to collect DNA sequence data from the genomes of organisms on an
unprecedented scale, and these massive data have the potential to untangle these
difficult branching patterns in the Tree of Life. However, much remains to be
learned about how genomes evolve across the many branching events of the Tree.
This project will use these large DNA sequence data sets to study the branching
patterns of evolutionary relationships in Strepsirrhine primates, a group that
contains the highly endangered lemurs of Madagascar, and salamandrid
salamanders, a diverse group of amphibians most commonly known as the newts.
These two very different organismal groups will be used to answer questions
about how different types of genes evolve at the molecular level as the lineages
that contain them diversify and split over time. This will help evolutionary
biologists answer the important question of which data from across the genome is
best sampled to properly infer the organismal placement in the Tree of Life.
This project will involve participants across multiple levels of education,
including undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral researchers, as well as
established faculty. This research will inform conservation planning of these
two iconic organisms. Additionally the research will link with public outreach
activities at the Duke Lemur Center and the North Carolina Museum of Natural
Science.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; This research project will use next generation
DNA sequence technology to sequence large portions of strepsirrhine primates and
salamandrid salamanders genomes. These data will include hundreds of loci under
positive selection as well as hundreds of loci from neutrally evolving parts of
the genome. Analyses of these data will explore the ways in which massive data
sets can be used in phylogeny reconstruction. The phylogenetic reconstruction
will be focused within groups which have exhibited patterns of recent and rapid
species radiations and contain branches that have challenged phylogenetic
reconstruction. The researchers will assess the performance of genes under
positive selection in reconstructing difficult clades. While the use of genes
under selection is something typically avoided in molecular phylogenetics,
properties of these positive-selection loci suggest that they may be an ideal
source of phylogenetic information for the most challenging of branches. The
loci under positive-selection will be annotated by gene properties thereby
providing a tremendous wealth of gene ontology information. The researchers will
assess the performance of functional classes of genes in phylogeny
reconstruction to gauge whether particular functional classes of genes are
better at recovering phylogeny. Overall, the results of this project will
provide empirically-derived solutions to the phylogenetics community for how a
genomic data can be used to solve challenging phylogenetic questions.