* 1355932
* Sr, Nd, Pb and Hf isotopes of basalts from the Quebrada/Discovery/Gofar transform fault system;key to test models of melt generation,transport and focusing beneath mid-ocean ridges
* GEO,OCE
* 02/15/2014,01/31/2016
* Alberto Saal, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 01/31/2016
* USD 137,898.00

Mid-ocean ridges are associated with the largest number of active volcanoes and
volcanic features on Earth. Understanding how magmas erupting on the seafloor
form and from what depths and parent compositions/lithologies they are sourced,
is critical for being able to predict and model complex crustal processes. This
research will complete the geochemical characterization of an important suite of
lavas collected from the East Pacific Rise in the Central Pacific Ocean by
producing the Sr, Nd, Pb, and Hf isotopic compositions of over eighty lavas from
the Quebrada/Discovery/Gofar transform fault system. The isotope data will
complement already existing major and trace element chemical suites and
measurements of volatiles trapped in the volcanic glasses. By combining these
new geochemical data with computer models of geodynamic processes, this research
will allow the composition of mantle source material to be determined, as well
as the physical condition under which melts are generated, transported, and
aggregated under mid-ocean ridges. Broader impacts of this research are
multifaceted and strong. They include tight integration of research and
education, with undergraduates being involved in the full research process and
being trained in state-of-the-art geochemical analytical work. Working with
university programs that recruit minority scholars, the investigator will
include minority students in his research group and train them in research
thinking and high-end analytical work over the summer. Through the lead
investigator and students involved in his laboratory, there will also be
significant interaction with local elementary schools to help provide them with
science programs and scientist role models to replace science educators who, due
to budgetary constraints, have been cut from elementary school programs. Other
broader impacts include support of an institution in an EPSCoR state (Rhode
Island) and support of an NSF-funded analytical instrument which serves
institutions across the state of Rhode Island.