* 1355911
* Building Data Infrastructure: The Beginning School Study Data Archive
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/2014,06/30/2015
* Karl Alexander, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 06/30/2015
* USD 24,652.00

SES-1355911 Karl Alexander Johns Hopkins University

The Beginning School Study (BSS), launched in Baltimore in 1982, has followed
the life course of a large (N = 790) representative random sample of children
who began first grade that year in 20 of Baltimore's public schools. The BSS
study participants were interviewed individually most years from first grade
through high school completion (often twice annually, fall and spring) and then
again in two after high school interviews, four years later in 1998 at roughly
age 22 and then again roughly a decade after high school (in 2006 at age 28).
These post-high school interviews both achieved 80 percent coverage of the
original group. Additionally, questionnaire data were procured from teachers
most years through 9th grade, from parents most years through 10th grade, and
from school records all along the way. This grant provides resources to
supplement the BSS data archive with additional materials -- the original
completed interviews and questionnaires from the project's nearly 25 years of
fieldwork

The BSS data archive is a valuable data resource that can be used to answer
questions about the academic, personal and social development of typical urban
youth as they advance through school in a high poverty setting and then begin to
forge lives of their own as young adults. At present all the coded data gathered
over the lifetime of this project are available to the wider research community
at Harvard's Murray Research Center, a data archive and lending library for
projects focused on youth development. The current grant completes the process
by having the project's twenty-five years of original data forms -- interviews
and questionnaires, added to the Murray Center data archive. The original forms
include verbatim replies to the project's many open-ended questions and marginal
notes made by the BSS staff that can help clarify ambiguities

Broader Impacts

The supplementary materials enhance the data archive stored at the Harvard
Murray Research Center. The archival of the complete BSS data set and original
survey instruments provides an invaluable set of longitudinal data on a cohort
of study members that span over 25 years, from entry into elementary school
through early adulthood. The final archival phase provides rich textured
information that can help to illuminate the findings from the multiple surveys,
schools records, and census data. BSS study results have been well reported in
the both the local and national news and directly served as the bases for policy
changes to address summer slippage, i.e., found that inner city poor students
did not engage in academic enrichment activities over the summer and returned to
school in the fall having digressed academically. Study findings were used by
the federal government, Baltimore City, and local and state governments as the
rationale for supporting year round schooling for socially and economically
disadvantaged youth.