* 1355222
* IOS: Regulation of hematopoietic development by the peripheral nervous system
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/2014,02/28/2019
* Katja Brueckner, University of California-San Francisco
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Klein
* 02/28/2019
* USD 550,000.00

One of the outstanding questions in animal development is how sensory inputs,
through local innervation by the peripheral nervous system (PNS), regulate organ
microenvironments and stem cell niches. The proposed research addresses this
question using a simple invertebrate model, i.e. the Hematopoietic Pockets (HPs)
in the body wall of the optically transparent Drosophila melanogaster larva. In
this system, blood cells develop in direct physical contact with segmentally
repeated sensory PNS clusters, and functionally rely on the PNS for their
attraction, proliferation and trophic survival. The objective of the proposed
research is to identify (1) which responses of the hematopoietic cells are
regulated by PNS activity, and (2) what are the cellular and molecular
mechanisms in the relay of PNS activity to blood cell signaling, using a
combination of inducible genetic systems, live imaging and ex vivo analyses. The
long-term goal of this research is to understand the signals through which
development of the hematopoietic system is modulated by the peripheral nervous
system and its sensory inputs. This work is significant because it is expected
to reveal general principles how the development of animal tissues is regulated
by the PNS and its afferent inputs, allowing adaptation of the animal. The
proposed research will benefit global and local research communities and
integrate the education of underprivileged students. Scientists on the project
will contribute to the scientific community and the education of students and
teachers through traditional approaches and by developing a Drosophila Genetics
App for smartphones to map out genetic strategies that will be made publicly
available.