* 1355856
* Collaborative Research:   Marginal instability and deep cycle turbulence in the equatorial oceans
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2014,02/28/2018
* Sutanu Sarkar, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 02/28/2018
* USD 304,421.00

Overview: Thirty years after its discovery, the deep cycle of equatorial
turbulence remains unexplained. Climate forecast models are unable to represent
it accurately, leading to errors in ocean heat uptake. This project brings
together two research groups who have made recent progress on the problem to
pursue a unified understanding. Combining existing observations and new large-
eddy simulations (LES), they will explore deep cycle physics over the range of
seasonal and ENSO variability and in all three equatorial oceans. The
previously-unexploited deep cycle property of marginal instability will be used
together with numerical simulations to (1) document the history of the deep
cycle over the past 25 years, (2) describe the mechanics of the deep cycle, and
(3) develop improved parameterizations for use in climate
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: The broad variability of mixing
in the upper equatorial Pacific is exemplified by the turbulent diapycnal heat
flux sampled at the same location and in the same season, but coinciding with
different phases of the El Niño/ Southern Oscillation (ENSO) cycle. Early in the
1991 El Niño, currents were slow and the heat flux was relatively weak. In the
2008 cruise, which coincided with La Niña, currents were much more energetic.
The resulting heat flux was stronger by an order of magnitude, and heat was
transported to 100 m depth. Despite the extreme difference in magnitude, these
mixing regimes exhibited a striking commonality: strong turbulence coincided
with a distinct layer in which the gradient Richardson number (Ri) remained
within a factor of two of the value of a quarter. Persistent clustering of Ri
near 1/4 over a range of depths signifies the state of marginal instability.
This near-critical state is maintained in the mean by a balance between large-
scale forcing (which reduces Ri) and turbulence (which increases it). Deep cycle
mixing is crucial to the climate via its effects on both the zonal current
system and the sea surface temperature. In this observational data analyses and
large eddy simulations, the investigators will explore the physics of the deep
cycle with particular attention to the property of marginal instability. Using
marginal instability as a proxy, they will document the history and longitudinal
dependence of the deep cycle from existing data. This will lead to both a deeper
understanding of the phenomenon and an improved ability to parameterize its
effects in large-scale models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The causes
of long-term Sea Surface Temperature variations will be examined and the results
will contribute to ENSO and interdecadal climate prediction. The project will
also foster a new collaboration, support a junior researcher, and complement an
existing NSF observational project. Two presentations on equatorial oceanography
will be developed and presented at high schools and community colleges.