* 1355632
* EAGER: Towards a self-organizing map and hyper-dimensional information network for the human genome
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2015
* Kimmen Sjolander, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2015
* USD 250,000.00

Genome data enable scientists to pose a host of compelling questions spanning
diverse disciplines. However, relational databases are inefficient at modeling
the complex relationships between genes and the proteins they encode. The PI
will enable biologists to answer these questions efficiently and automatically
by developing a computational infrastructure that models the inherent structure
of biological data, by creating a graphical database of genome and proteome data
for the human genome and related eukaryotic genomes to model relationships
(evolutionary, interaction, regulatory) that cannot be represented effectively
in relational databases. Nodes will represent different biological entities -
genes, proteins, species - and edges between nodes will represent different
relationships between these entities. For example, edges between genes and
proteins can represent "Gene G encodes protein P" or "Gene G is regulated by
protein P". Edges between proteins can represent physical interaction or
homology. Different types of features for these entities at each node will be
stored and the team will use the network structure and statistical modeling
methods to enable precise predictions of various aspects of "function" --
molecular function, metabolic pathway, biological process, cellular
localization, inter-molecular interactions, protein 3D structure, etc.
Functional annotation will be automated, with results produced in both machine-
readable and human-readable formats. Intuitive web-based interfaces will be
provided for navigation and interpretation of data by experimental biologists.
Provenance of predicted functions will be provided, allowing biologists to drill
down to examine the underlying support and evidence. All core software tools
will be provided in open source, and data will be downloadable. This project
will contribute curriculum materials suitable for inclusion in undergraduate and
graduate courses in bioinformatics, genomics, phylogenomics and evolutionary
biology and provide a resource for researchers in vertebrate genomes.This
project will contribute curriculum materials suitable for inclusion in
undergraduate and graduate courses in bioinformatics, genomics, phylogenomics
and evolutionary biology, and provide a resource for researchers in vertebrate
genomes.