* 1355708
* Roger Bacon Scholars Program
* EDU,DUE
* 04/15/2014,03/31/2021
* Teresa Beam, Saint Francis College
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 03/31/2021
* USD 617,017.00

The Department of Chemistry at the University of Saint Francis (USF) is
implementing an S-STEM project entitled Roger Bacon Scholars (RB Scholars). Two
cohorts of nine students each are supported for up to four years as they
complete undergraduate degrees in biology, chemistry, science and
entrepreneurship, environmental science or mathematics. The RB Scholars program
strengthens links between the university and employers from various sectors -
industry, government and non-profit institutions. All of the program's
activities are designed to support efforts in northeast Indiana to focus on
STEM-based employment for future economic strength.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical features of the project's implementation rely on
several support mechanisms to foster student success. These include peer and
professional tutoring, mentoring by faculty members and industry partners,
networking with alumni for internships and career advice, and graduate school
and career counseling by faculty members and the university's Career Services
Office. RB Scholars also have the opportunity to engage in individual and cohort
experiences, and as a part of a senior-level capstone course, they develop
project-based learning (PBL) activities for K-12 students building upon the
knowledge gained through those experiences. The capstone project also promotes
communication, collaboration, critical thinking and creativity while providing
outreach to future science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
majors. Through these K-12 PBL projects, RB Scholars influence the next
generation of STEM students.