* 1355072
* EAGER: Building and analyzing dynamic brain functional networks
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2016
* Michael Steinbach, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2016
* USD 148,000.00

Funtional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) offers a rich source of data for
understanding brain structure and function. There is an urgent need for
computational approaches to eliciting brain structure-function relationships
from such data. While current approaches that rely on network representations of
fMRI data offer useful insights into brain connectivity, they have significant
limitations in terms of discovering and validating complex functional mechanisms
that underly brain function: the very notion of a node in the functional network
is difficult to define, inter- and intra- subject variability leads to network
representations that vary a great deal within and among subjects; and static
representations of correlations between activities of different brain regions
offer only a partial picture of brain activity which is inherently dynamic.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This exploratory research project aims to introduce
dynamic network analysis techniques to discover functional brain regions and
study their evolution over time and across subjects. It leverages the research
team's experience in the analysis of continuous and highly variable spatio-
temporal climate data to address several of the outstanding challenges in
analyzing brain networks built from fMRI data. A key goal of this exploratory
study is to explore the feasibility of analyzing network representations of fMRI
data to answer questions such as the following: Do nodes changes dynamically
with time during an fMRI scan? What community detection techniques work best for
dynamic networks? What patterns arise in dynamic brain networks? What is the
statistical validity of the observed patterns?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact: If successful, the project could establish the feasibility of research
directions that could eventually lead to computational tools that enable better
characterization of normal and abnormal brain function; better understanding of
the variation of brain function within and across individuals over time,
including patterns that characterize the brain activities of different
populations e.g., adolescents, those suffering from specific brain disorders,
etc. The project offers enhanced opportunities for interdisciplinary
collaborations between neuroscientists and computer scientists, and research-
based advanced training of graduate and postdoctoral students at the University
of Minnesota. Free dissemination of open source implementations of the
algorithms resulting from the project to the larger research community
contribute to its broader impact.