* 1355726
* Collaborative Research: Social and Biogenetic Factors of New Forms of Families
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Margaret Nelson, Middlebury College
* Continuing Grant
* Toby Parcel
* 08/31/2017
* USD 94,243.00

This research explores the relationship between the social and technological
developments associated with infertility treatment and social media. First, it
investigates the new kinds of relationships that emerge among children who share
the same egg or sperm donor, and among the parents (and other relatives) of
these "donor siblings." Second, it explores how important people think their
genes are to understanding their relationships to other people. This exploration
focuses on people's beliefs about how much genes shape and limit our
characteristics and life outcomes. The proposed research will add to Sociology's
theories of, and practical knowledge about, two related sets of issues: 1) how
and why new forms of kinship are created and sustained in today's world; and 2)
how individuals understand what social and biogenetic influences contribute to
individual behavior and family dynamics. These issues will be explored among
people who are part of various family types, people in different geographic
regions, and people who represent different social, economic, and racial/ethnic
groups.

The research is based on online surveys distributed to parents who have children
conceived through gametes and to teens and adults who were conceived through
gametes. The information from these surveys will be used to identify people who
are appropriate for in-depth interviews and to provide background for what the
researchers learn from those interviews. These interviews will involve parents
and children from a range of family types, regions, and social positions.

This research has many broader impacts related to family and household
development. It will also provide insight into new notions of considering and
acting upon familial health histories. In additional to academic publishing, the
investigators will enhance their own teaching about the sociology of the family
and plan to design special materials about this topic that others who teach in
relevant fields can adapt for their own use. Undergraduates at both Middlebury
College and Wellesley College also will be involved in the research.