* 1355437
* Mare Nostrum Caribbean: Stewardship through Strategic Research and Workforce Development
* O/D,OIA
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2021
* Kim Waddell, University of The Virgin Islands
* Cooperative Agreement
* J.D. Swanson
* 07/31/2021
* USD 20,909,419.00

Non-technical Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project "Mare Nostrum
Caribbean" ("Our Caribbean Sea") implements coral reef science in service to
ecological stewardship, with the goal of understanding how best to improve coral
reef sustainability in a region threatened by overfishing, marine pollution,
sedimentation, invasive species, and climate change. High-resolution coastal
oceanographic models are being developed to increase understanding of how
ecological patterns and processes are influenced by natural and anthropogenic
disturbances. These efforts are creating a comprehensive understanding of the
effects of climate change on coral reefs and associated ecosystems, and
assisting in the development of potential climate change mitigation strategies.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project is increasing the intellectual involvement of
Virgin Islanders with coral reef ecosystems and the stewardship of natural
resources. The Virgin Islands Institute for STEM Education Research and Practice
uses five strategies to understand and develop best practices for formal and
informal science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) education in
the Territory. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will investigate factors that
enhance or reduce a coral reef?s tolerance to environmental stress and its
resistance to transitions to alternate ecological states (i.e., ecological
resilience). Understanding these complex relationships is of paramount
importance, especially considering that within the last decade corals in the
U.S. Virgin Islands have experienced nearly 50% mortality due to climate-induced
stress from warm-water bleaching and disease. Reef degradation increases the
risk of coastal flooding, reduces fishery resources for local communities, is
linked to reduced human health, and represents a tremendous loss of yet-
undiscovered biological diversity. Studies integrate ecological, oceanographic,
environmental, and socio-economic factors to investigate the complex
relationships found within coral reef ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The U.S.
Virgin Islands' ability to enhance environmental stewardship and implement
economic change relies on an informed public, trained workforce and improved
educational system. Specific broader impacts include an increase in 1) the
numbers of K-12 through graduate students in STEM research activities and
educational advancement; 2) underrepresented minorities in STEM fields; 3)
opportunities to improve STEM teaching at all levels; and 4) the knowledge of
and participation in coral reef science by the general public and students of
all levels.