* 1355479
* A Common Prosody Platform for Testing Theories and Models of Speech Prosody
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2014,08/31/2017
* Douglas Whalen, Haskins Laboratories, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 08/31/2017
* USD 280,129.00

Prosody plays an important role in the complex mapping between meaning and the
spoken expression of words, phrases and sentences; it is critical to our
understanding of human communication and to our ability to exploit prosodic
information in both automated language production and meaning
recognition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prosody research has seen significant
development in recent decades, and numerous theories and computational models
have been proposed. However, many fundamental issues remain unresolved and some
are still under heated debate. This lack of consensus has resulted in slow
advances in developing speech applications with capabilities for processing
prosody. This project is a collaborative effort to accelerate progress in
prosody research by developing a Common Prosody Platform (CPP). CPP will consist
of an open-access web site that hosts a collection of trainable models in the
form of Praat scripts, each implementing a major theory of prosody. All the
scripts will consist of A) a computational realization of the basic assumptions
of a particular theory, which is capable of generating surface prosodic forms
(initially, F0 and duration), and B) a set of learning algorithms for automatic
analysis-by-synthesis and global optimization, which allow the script to be
trained on any speech corpora marked up with theory-specific categories. CPP
will therefore facilitate theory evaluation by enabling them to make numerical
predictions that can be directly compared with natural prosody in fine detail.
CPP will be tested on autosegmental-metrical (AM) theory, Parallel Encoding and
Target Approximation (PENTA) model, articulatory phonology/task dynamic model
(TADA), and command response (Fujisaki) model, and apply them to English, Greek,
Mandarin and Itunyoso Trique (an endangered tone
language).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of CPP will help bridge the
current gaps between theoretical conceptualization, empirical investigation and
computational modeling. The computational nature of the resulting trainable
models will also make them readily transferable to applied areas, including
speech technology, language teaching and speech communication disorders. The
research approach developed in this project may also be extendable to a general
paradigm in speech research, namely, theory testing by computational modeling.