* 1355511
* ABI Sustaining: The REDfly database of transcriptional regulatory elements
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Marc Halfon, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2018
* USD 447,396.00

The State University of New York at Buffalo is awarded a sustaining grant to
support ongoing operation of The REDfly (Regulatory Element Database for Fly).
REDfly is a freely available and easily web-accessible resource of significant
value to the biological community, both for wet-lab biologists and for bio-
informaticians. Undergraduate students will play a significant role in this
project as the primary curators for ongoing regulatory element annotation. In
addition, REDfly has a demonstrated utility for education and training. REDfly
has been the source of data for student projects in bioinformatics/computational
biology at several schools. It is also the focus of a seminar course for
undergraduates taught by the PI, "Genome Annotation," in which the students
participate in annotating regulatory elements for entry into REDfly, thus making
genuine contributions to the research community while learning the techniques of
genome annotation and biocuration and the science of gene regulation. The
students learn how to use an array of web-based sequence analysis tools, gain an
appreciation for the complexities of gene expression and anatomy, develop skills
in reading the primary literature, and are exposed to a diversity of
experimental systems and approaches.

Transcriptional cis-regulatory modules (CRMs) are a major class of genomic
sequence elements required for regulating gene expression - determining when and
where genes are turned "on" and "off." CRMs play critical roles with respect to
normal variation between individuals, birth defects, chronic diseases, and
evolution. Despite the clear importance of CRMs for many areas of biology, these
sequences are vastly underrepresented in current genome annotations. REDfly
helps fill this gap in CRM annotation by curating known CRMs and transcription
factor binding sites (TFBS) for the important research organism Drosophila
melanogaster (fruit fly). REDfly is the most detailed existing platform for
regulatory element annotation for any animal. Its records include over 1850
experimentally verified CRMs and 2000 TFBSs along with their DNA sequence, their
associated genes, and the expression patterns they direct. REDfly is a well-used
and valuable resource for the genomics, bioinformatics, and Drosophila
communities and is an important platform for supporting hypothesis-driven
empirical and computational research. It has contributed to numerous studies in
multiple areas relating to non-Drosophila as well as Drosophila systems
including CRM biology, CRM discovery, construction of regulatory network models,
interpretation of genomic datasets, and CRM evolution. The current project will
focus on continued curation of the database and is anticipated to increase the
number of records by five-fold or more. This will ensure that REDfly continues
to be available as an important source of raw data for analysis, hypothesis
generation, assessment and validation, and empirical research in molecular and
developmental biology, genetics, genomics, bioinformatics, and evolution. The
REDfly Database can be found at http://redfly.ccr.buffalo.edu.