* 1355987
* Scholarship, Learning Community, Mentoring, and Strengths-Based Campus
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Todd Frauenholtz, Bemidji State University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Turley
* 07/31/2019
* USD 622,920.00

A significant national need exists to increase substantially the number of
American scientists and engineers. This project at Bemidji State University in
Bemidji, Minnesota, addresses this need by providing academic and financial
support to students pursing degrees in science and mathematics at that
institution. The goal of the program is to impact the science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) workforce by providing scholarships for
talented students who demonstrate financial need. Bemidji State University (BSU)
provides scholarships to academically promising STEM students with financial
need, and supports them with a broad range of services. It is expected that this
program will help STEM majors to succeed in their studies, complete their
degrees, and go on to either advanced study in STEM fields or to immediately
enter and thrive in the STEM workforce. The goals of the project are to increase
the number of STEM students at BSU by ten percent and to increase the six-year
graduation rate of STEM students. The planned duration of the project is five
years. Through its partnerships with four tribal colleges within the state, BSU
is also well-positioned to increase the number of Native American STEM graduates
in the STEM disciplines. An adequate STEM workforce is critical to the future
economy of the United States. A critical step in securing the economic strength
of the nation is to graduate a larger number of capable U.S. students with STEM
degrees. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project pursues an approach to enhancing
graduation and retention rates based on research that shows that a combination
of support services and financial aid is highly effective in improving STEM
student success. The project also utilizes several existing support structures
that are in place at the university. Support structures include one-on-one
tutoring, peer mentoring, and financial literacy workshops. New support
structures include a STEM Scholars Learning Community and faculty mentoring of
STEM scholars. The project also employs the StrengthsQuest approach to identify
student interests and abilities. StrengthsQuest is an online assessment to help
identify individual abilities and preferences and to align career options with
these preferences. This resource assists students in identifying their talents
and carrying out career explorations. The project will assess the impact of
using StrengthsQuest as part of its STEM student support services. The project
team believes this information will be helpful to other post-secondary
institutions, as they look for new and better ways of supporting STEM students.
The project includes a plan for evaluation which will assess impact of the
interventions on an annual basis and at the end of the effort. The project team
has identified specific, measurable objectives that will help determine the
extent to which the project has been successful in meeting its goals. Measurable
objectives include STEM student retention; graduation rates; job placement data;
and effectiveness of student participation in the support activities. The
project provides additional outcomes of interest concerning Native Americans and
STEM careers. Given the relationships between BSU and the Native American
community, the lessons learned from this project will inform practices in
serving Native American populations throughout the United States. Project
results will be disseminated to STEM educators at the local, regional, and
national levels.