* 1355055
* Collaborative Research: Interactive Effects of Climate, Ecosystem Engineering, and Trophic Interactions on Grassland Community Dynamics
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2018
* Katharine Suding, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 03/31/2018
* USD 174,758.00

Predicting the effects of climate change on ecological systems is complicated by
the many separate and interacting ways in which climate can affect the different
species and processes in the same place. This project will investigate the
multiple effects of a decrease in annual precipitation in desert grassland in
California where burrowing, seed-eating mammals strongly affect soil nutrients,
soil moisture, and seed dispersal by plants, and where introduced plant species
compete with native ones. Researchers will exclude mammals, intercept or add
rainfall, and measure effects on populations of mammals, plants, and
invertebrates and on nutrient levels over four years. This unusual opportunity
to experimentally test multiple, complex effects of climate in a natural system
will advance our basic understanding of the ecological consequences of climate
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this project include
development of the workforce for science likely including underrepresented
groups, outreach to the public, and applications to the conservation of
biodiversity and the management of natural areas. The project will train a
postdoctoral researcher, a graduate student, and three research technicians.
Work with two local organizations will promote public science education and
volunteering. Findings will inform management of the Carrizo Plain, the last
major remnant of a major type of grassland in California and a refuge for
endangered species.