* 1355158
* Defining a Role for GABAB Receptor Signaling in Activation of TORC1 Kinase During Homeostatic Plasticity
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2014,02/28/2017
* Kimberly Raab-Graham, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Evan Balaban
* 02/28/2017
* USD 495,000.00

Fluctuations in brain neuron activity promote learning and memory. If activity
levels remain too high or too low for extended periods of time, the
communication between neurons becomes unstable, and, as a consequence, new
information cannot be learned. Neurons can alter which proteins are present at
specialized sites called synapses, where signals are transmitted from one neuron
to another. The way that neurons make these adjustments at the molecular level
is poorly understood. Recent work has shown that a protein, referred to as GABAb
receptor, causes new proteins to be synthesized by the neuron by a mechanism
that involves a second protein, referred to as mTOR. This project will determine
how GABAb receptors activate mTOR using cultured rat and mouse neurons. Cultured
neurons are the system of choice for visualizing changes in protein synthesis at
synapses. The project will determine if the GABAb receptor - mTOR interaction
promotes changes in synapse number, which then lead to enhanced communication
between neurons. The project will provide training for undergraduates,
graduates, and postdoctoral students, including students who are
underrepresented in science. It will support development of a new graduate
course that trains incoming students in neuroscience laboratory techniques and
that gives postdoctoral fellows a formal opportunity to build their teaching
skills. Outreach activities are planned through a Community Education Program,
Memory Matters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the brain, mTOR activity regulates
protein synthesis, which is essential for learning and memory. Neurons remodel
their synapses (plasticity), to accommodate dramatic changes in activity in
order to facilitate new learning (homeostasis). One of the most striking
examples of homeostatic plasticity is the formation of new synapses when
N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor (NMDAR) inputs are blocked, a mechanism thought to
require protein synthesis. Recent work from the principal investigator's
laboratory has discovered that during NMDAR blockade, GABAb receptors shift from
activating post-synaptic potassium channels to increasing L-type calcium channel
activity. The rise in calcium channel activity increases mTOR activity in
dendrites. This project will use calcium and fluorescent imaging to define the
mechanism that shifts GABAb receptor signaling to activate mTOR (Aim 1 and 2).
The project will elucidate whether the functional shift of the GABAb receptor is
required for structural changes in synapses and synapse number (Aim 3). The
project will elucidate whether the functional shift of the GABAb receptor is
required for structural changes in synapses and synapse number (Aim 3). This
project will offer new insight into molecular mechanisms of homeostatic
plasticity.