* 1355438
* Powering the Kentucky Bioeconomy for a Sustainable Future
* O/D,OIA
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Dibakar Bhattacharyya, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jose Colom
* 07/31/2019
* USD 20,000,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
IIA-1355438&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: Powering the Kentucky
Bioeconomy for a Sustainable Future &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
University of Kentucky Research Foundation&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical
Description&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to develop new technologies for energy
generation and storage in addition to new membranes that can be used in
environmental remediation. Three interlinked research activities are proposed in
the areas of Advanced Bio-Inspired Membrane Technologies, Chemical Biology for
Advanced Materials, and Electrochemical Energy Storage. Research activities will
lead to batteries that are self- repairing, lower cost and more efficient than
currently available. These sustainable energy technologies can support
manufacturing efforts and create employment in Kentucky. This project develops
research and education activities to engage a wide number of
constituents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;Kentucky
EPSCoR addresses sustainable energy and power provision, a topic of national
importance as greater focus is placed on transitioning energy demand from non-
renewable resources (for example, coal) to renewable resources. Efforts under
this project could completely re-invent engineering membranes to be selective
chemical pumps and construct nano-architectures that harness the capabilities of
complex bio-molecules. Also examined are biochemical lignification pathways,
lignin chemistry, and deconstruction strategies to engineer biomass feedstocks
and processing methods for direct conversion of lignin, with a significant focus
is on diverse value added and fuel products. Energy generation and storage will
be explored with a goal of creating a decreased environmental footprint. The use
of novel bio-based battery materials will also be explored. Efforts are focused
on inventing new material systems for self-healing electrodes and creating high
area conductive nanostructures from biomass resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will train a modern STEM workforce. New STEM programs, mentoring, and
research opportunities will specifically recruit females, first generation
college students, rural students and low income students from the Appalachian
regions of Kentucky. Other initiatives include student research internships,
workshops and the creation of a statewide Wiki Collaboratory to disseminate
information about research and education activities and events. High school
teachers will also be supported to receive STEM training related to renewable
energy research. Significant ties are developed between academic research and
industrial research leading to increased commercialization and economic
development opportunities.