* 1355671
* The Development of Cross-national Income and Wealth Databases: The Luxembourg Income and Wealth Studies 2014-2018
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2020
* Janet Gornick, CUNY Graduate School University Center
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 08/31/2020
* USD 1,805,280.00

SES-1355671 Janet Gornick CUNY Graduate School

Founded in 1983--LIS formerly known as the Luxembourg Income Study (LIS) -- is a
unique, cross-national data archive and research center which fosters primary
research by providing access to household microdata. LIS operates as a
consortium of countries, governed by an international board, and serving an
international community of researchers. LIS has four, longstanding goals: 1)
harmonize micro-datasets, from multiple countries, which include data on income,
wealth, employment and demography; 2) provide a secure method that allows access
to data with privacy restrictions; 3) create a remote-execution system to enable
research conducted from off-site locations; and 4) promote the use of microdata
in comparative research on social and economic wellbeing on a global level,
conduct research onsite, and sponsor and host scholars using the LIS data.

LIS is a unique, cross-national data infrastructure, which is indispensable for
understanding the social and economic wellbeing of people in today?s globalized
world. Created expressly to foster primary research by providing access to
household microdata, LIS enables the highest quality social science research,
both theoretical and empirical, and informs analyses of a broad array of social
and economic policies and institutions. LIS operates as a consortium of
countries, governed by an international board, and serves an international
community of researchers. LIS prepares and maintains two databases, the
Luxembourg Income Study (LIS) Database and the Luxembourg Wealth Study (LWS).
The LIS Database includes income, employment, and demographic variables at the
person- and household-level; there currently over 250 micro-datasets from 46
countries, spanning 1968 to 2011; the LWS Database contains 20 wealth datasets
from 12 countries and covers 1994 to 2007. LIS and LWS datasets, together, cover
86% of the world GDP and 64% of world population. New datasets and new countries
are being added regularly.

Broader Impacts

LIS houses the only data infrastructure that includes income, wealth, and labor
market microdata, spanning decades and from diverse geographic regions. The LIS
datasets foster research on economic and social policies and their effects on
outcomes including poverty, income inequality, employment status, wage patterns,
gender inequality, and family structure. The LWS datasets enable research on
wealth portfolios, asset levels, and the interplay between household income and
wealth. The activities, goals, and accomplishments of LIS match NSF priorities
(NSF Strategic Plan 2011-2016), most especially transforming frontiers of
knowledge, building research infrastructure, encouraging international
engagement in science, and promoting multidisciplinary research. Moreover, LIS
fits well with NSF's longstanding emphasis on making knowledge accessible to
policy-makers and the public at large. LIS serves thousands of researchers
worldwide, from various disciplines, including economics, sociology, political
science, policy studies, and public health. Users come from academia, government
agencies, non-governmental agencies, supranational organizations and news
agencies; one-third of registered users are American. LIS provides online
instructional materials, user support, and annual training workshops. LIS is a
physical and virtual venue for researchers to exchange ideas, results, and
methods; these exchanges take place through the Working Paper Series, the
Visiting Scholar Program, LIS conferences and workshops, and pre- and post-
doctoral scholarships will develop valuable new skills in a stimulating
interdisciplinary environment.