* 1355065
* Cortical Specializations for Behavioral Discrimination of Temporal Shape and Rhythm of Sound
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2019
* Monty Escabi, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Sridhar Raghavachari
* 07/31/2019
* USD 680,000.00

Human speech and other mammalian vocalizations exhibit extensive variability in
their amplitude shape and rhythm. These sound features allow for discriminating
and, ultimately, understanding the rich repertoire of vocal communications that
characterize the vocal behavior of a large variety of animals including man.
This proposal focuses on the roles of various stages of the mammalian forebrain
ascending auditory pathway in categorizing and discriminating time variations in
natural sounds, an important and open question in auditory physiology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Neural response timing properties suggest that secondary
ventral auditory cortices allow for an extended range of sensory temporal
processing not accounted for in primary auditory cortex. The neural response
properties of primary and secondary auditory cortices will be examined to
determine their functional organization and contribution to sensory
discrimination behavior. The approach involves the creation of sophisticated
acoustic stimuli that are analytically tractable on the one hand, while
mimicking the important aspects of natural sounds on the other. Neural responses
will be characterized using electrophysiological, intrinsic-signal imaging,
behavioral and computational techniques. Pharmacological manipulations will
allow reversible loss-of-function studies to determine how primary and secondary
auditory areas interact to promote behavioral discrimination of temporal cues in
sound. Further, this project will determine how temporal cues on multiple time
scales in sound are discriminated and encoded on a neural and whole organism
level for Rattus norvegicus, as this species has an expanded surface area for
primary auditory cortex and secondary auditory cortex compared to other mammals
commonly used in auditory studies. Another goal of the study is to determine the
extent to which sound percepts are built up through parallel and hierarchal
processing within auditory forebrain structures. Finally, computer models will
be developed to determine what aspects of neural activity patterns are critical
for discriminating between the shape and rhythm of communication sounds. This
multifaceted approach should allow for an unprecedented understanding of vocal
perception that could be broadly applicable. Results from the study will be
disseminated through presentations at scientific meetings and through peer-
reviewed journal articles.