* 1355894
* EAGER:From Vision to Change in Undergraduate Biology Education Across the Great Plains, Midwest, and New England
* BIO,EF
* 10/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Taylor Allen, Oberlin College
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 06/30/2017
* USD 200,029.00

An award has been made to Oberlin College to form two regional networks in
support of the Partnership for Undergraduate Life Science Education (PULSE).
Last September, the PULSE partners (HHMI, NIH, and NSF) appointed 40 Vision and
Change Leadership Fellows to stimulate transformative changes in the
undergraduate life science education community. Fellows from two-year colleges,
liberal arts colleges, comprehensive universities and research universities were
selected. All Fellows met in October, 2012 and organized into four working
groups for developing approaches to help departments implement recommendations
made in the Vision and Change report. Such improvements in how biology is taught
at all types of undergraduate institutions should increase student learning of
core concepts, should increase retention rates for students in the sciences, and
should prepare all students to be more curious and scientifically literate
citizens. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although individual faculty have been very
active in instituting reforms in their own courses, it is usually harder to
transform an entire department. This proposal plans to address that challenge by
continuing to develop regional networks of institutions so they can support and
advise one another as each implements change. Tools and resources have been
developed by the Leadership Fellows that will be field-tested by the different
types of participating institutions in the Midwest/Great Plains and New England.
For example, PULSE Rubrics for departmental self-assessment and visits by
trained Ambassadors are available to assist departments in adopting evidence-
based strategies to increase student engagement and enrich the learning
experience for all students. The networks will also pilot a systems-based
evaluation scheme designed to identify leverage points for systemic reform via
tests of hypotheses on ingredients of successful reform strategies. The
resulting insights and the scheme itself will inform and benefit other efforts
to effect systemic change in higher education. Results from these regional
activities and the evaluation will be shared with the life sciences community,
primarily via the www.pulsecommunity.org website and by continued partnerships
with other national organizations groups advocating for change in undergraduate
life science education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being funded
jointly by the Directorate for Biological Sciences and the Directorate of
Education and Human Resources, Division of Undergraduate Education as part of
their efforts to support Vision and Change in Undergraduate Biology Education.