* 1355398
* EAGER - Values in Design for Future Internet Architecture - Next Phase
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2016
* Helen Nissenbaum, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 12/31/2016
* USD 299,999.00

An EAGER grant for the Values In Design analysis for Future Internet
Architectures--Next Phase (VID4FIA-NP) project supports experimentation with a
new model for interdisciplinary collaboration, using the Future Internet
Architecture projects as an exciting testbed, and integrating social, ethical,
legal, and economic issues with the technical work of the FIA-NP project teams.
VID4FIA-NP will build a network of VID experts and find common ground with the
challenges faced by the FIA projects, using the VID methodologies for analyzing
and designing technology that recommends social values that can serve as design
requirements alongside more traditional technical constraints. These activities
will produce events that connect VID approaches with the prototyping and testing
process, and working papers, possible joint publications and other documents
formalizing our findings and methods.

Intellectual Merit: Within the extensive community of researchers and scholars
there are diverse, hotly contested views on what it means to say that technology
is or is not value free. There are smaller demonstrations of the claim that
features of technology can actively be adjusted to yield morally and socially
relevant outcomes. VID4FIA-NP will make significant, convincing contributions to
this debate by providing opportunities for social scientists, humanists,
economists, legal and policy experts, and technical experts to collaborate on
gritty design features that are socially and ethically important. Beyond
potential contributions to the general understanding of social dimensions of
technology, the project could yield insights into how to operationalize abstract
concepts such as security, privacy, etc. and how to implement them in
architecture, protocol, mechanism, etc. Not only could these contributions
directly affect the FIA-NP projects, they could have significance for IT design
generally, and even beyond, to other technologies.

Broader Impacts: Living with the consequences of technology, it is inevitable
that we applaud some and bemoan others. Such evaluation can be retrospective,
but for approaches in the VID network, there is commitment to pro-action, making
adjustments in material elements of systems and devices systematically can
affect socially relevant outcomes. Aware of the pitfalls of naive technological
determinism, the payout measured in terms of systems and artifacts that promote
--or do not subvert--attainment of societal values, is potentially great. The
opportunity to test out these ideas in a research context as ambitious as the
FIA-NP projects holds promise for better technology and deeper understanding of
the mutual shaping influence of material design on the one hand and values on
the other.