* 1355870
* Collaborative Research: The Thermal Regime of the Hikurangi Subduction Zone and Shallow Slow Slip Events, New Zealand.
* GEO,OCE
* 12/15/2014,11/30/2017
* Andrew Fisher, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Candace Major
* 11/30/2017
* USD 64,720.00

Heat flow and seismic reflection data will be collected offshore the northern
and southern Hikurangi margin in New Zealand, to develop a process-based
understanding of the thermal structure of the subduction zone. The northern area
is underlain by an aseismic creep-dominated subduction interface and is the site
of repeated shallow (&lt; 15 km depth) slow slip earthquakes (SSEs). The
southern field area contrasts strongly, with deep (&gt; 30 km) SSEs updip
inferred interseismic coupling on the plate interface, similar to Cascadia.
Acquisition of ~15 high-resolution transects will increase the number of
available heat flow measurements from this continental margin by 2 orders of
magnitude. Using sediment seismic velocities and thermal conductivities obtained
from this experiment, heatf low coverage will be expanded using regional
observations of gas hydrate-related bottom simulating
reflections.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project addresses fundamental questions
about seismicity and deformation processes on a subduction plate interface, and
how they may be linked to hydrologic and geodynamic processes. Students training
will cover a range of techniques, from marine data collection and analysis to
numerical modeling. Results of the study will be incorporated in university
courses as well as included in community science outreach efforts.&lt;br/&gt;