* 1355019
* Transcriptional Nodes Coordinate Patterning and Cellular Proliferation during Carpel Margin Meristem Development
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2014,02/28/2019
* Robert Franks, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Krieg
* 02/28/2019
* USD 819,507.00

During the development of a seedpod, the cellular and molecular interactions
that allow productive seed development are extremely complex and dynamic. Within
a developing seedpod, cells must interpret and respond to numerous cues that
coordinate positional information with gene expression and cellular
proliferation to allow the proper development of seeds. Furthermore, this
coordination of patterning cues and cellular proliferation underlies many
diverse biological processes, from cancerous growth to reproductive development,
and thus is of interest to a broad spectrum of biologists. Understanding the
molecular mechanisms that coordinate these processes in plants are also of
practical importance, and are the basis for improving agricultural production.

In this project, Dr. Franks and colleagues will investigate the molecular
interactions that allow seeds to develop within the flowering plant Arabidopsis
thaliana. By understanding these molecular mechanisms Dr. Franks' group seeks to
enable future strategies to alter seed number in agricultural or bioenergy crops
thus support efforts to supply food and fuel for a growing global population.
His efforts focus on defining the gene regulatory hierarchy that controls the
development of the specialized tissue that generates the ovules within the
seedpod (i.e. the carpel margin meristem). A multidisciplinary integration of
genetic, genomic and bioinformatic approaches will be applied to achieve these
goals. Furthermore, this study introduces a novel application of cell-sorting
technology to the study of the seedpod allowing his group to assay cellular
transcriptional states at an unprecedented level of specificity. Additionally,
Dr. Franks' group creates and presents hands-on science demonstrations and
educational science videos at North Carolina middle schools. By engaging
students and teachers at these grade school outreach events, as well as via the
training of scientists at varied levels and from diverse backgrounds, Dr.
Franks' group works to create a scientifically well-educated community.