* 1355839
* Tech Scholars
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2014,03/31/2020
* David Cotner, Pennsylvania College of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 03/31/2020
* USD 616,417.00

The Tech Scholars program at the Pennsylvania College of Technology (Penn
College) is providing scholarship support to twenty School of Industrial,
Computing, and Engineering Technologies (ICET) students in majors of Information
Technology, Electrical Technology, Automated Manufacturing and Machining,
Engineering Design Technology, Electronics/Computer Engineering Technology,
Plastics and Polymer Engineering Technology, and Welding and Fabrication
Engineering Technology. Recruitment strategies for the Tech Scholars program
target students who may not be aware of the array of technology-based majors in
ICET at Penn College and the employment opportunities in these fields. Many of
these students are the first in their family to attend college. This strategy,
coupled with student support services and career education, is increasing
student retention, leading to a greater number of graduates from ICET programs.
In turn the project is helping to address a high demand for technology graduates
and contributes to the diversity and improved capability of the technological
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to financial support through the
S-STEM scholarships, technical features of the project include academic and
professional support that promotes student retention and advances career
education through establishing a learning community, offering peer and faculty
mentoring, tutorial services, internships, field trips and guest speakers from
industry. Furthermore, comprehensive approaches are employed to encourage
students to select a four-year ICET major, to support them academically and
financially until graduation and to increase their workforce preparation and
skills. Penn College is building a cohort experience for the Tech Scholars
through common seminar sections, designated study and networking spaces and a
living/learning community. These strategies are implemented under the direction
of an industry-focused Advisory Committee. Aided by this committee, Penn College
is strengthening existing relationships with industry by involving industry
partners in multiple program components, such as workshops, internships and
participation in Advisory Committee activities. Further, through the Tech
Scholars program, Penn College is establishing new relationships with community
colleges through its outreach activities to transfer students.