* 1355423
* The 2020 Vision: Building Research, Education, and Innovation Partnerships for South Dakota
* O/D,OIA
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* James Rice, South Dakota State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* J.D. Swanson
* 07/31/2019
* USD 20,000,000.00

Non-technical Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The South Dakota Biochemical
Spatiotemporal NeTwork Resource (BioSNTR) project will develop ways to increase
agricultural productivity through scientific advances in bioscience and
informatics. The BioSNTR will use imaging and molecular biology to map the
biochemical architecture of plant and animal cells. Technologies to improve crop
yields will be developed by applying new knowledge about the ways that molecular
circuits signal plant cells to grow and function. Results from BioSNTR
activities are likely to have positive economic outcomes for South Dakota's
agriculture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project involves all of the colleges and
universities in South Dakota, and is broadening the participation of women,
Native Americans and persons with disabilities in science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics. The BioSNTR will develop a skilled, diverse
technical workforce with expertise in bioscience and informatics. South Dakota
students will gain entrepreneurial and industrial experience through internship
opportunities. BioSNTR is implementing a new PhD program in biochemistry at
South Dakota State University and strengthening the computational science
programs in several South Dakota universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The South Dakota Experimental Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR) is creating the Biochemical
Spatiotemporal NeTwork Resource (BioSNTR), a transdisciplinary, multi-
institutional program for systems bioscience research and education. BioSNTR
advances imaging and molecular biology to investigate the sophisticated
molecular circuit involved in cell signaling. Understanding this process is
essential for rational manipulation of the cell-biomaterial interface in plant
and animal systems. The vision of BioSNTR is to map the biochemical architecture
of this molecular circuit with sufficient resolution that quantitative
predictions can be made for effective control and manipulation of cell function.
Technological advances from BioSNTR will lead to improvements in crop yields,
animal welfare, and human health. Through BioSNTR, South Dakota EPSCoR is
improving the state?s physical infrastructure and human workforce in the areas
of bioscience and informatics, two scientific growth fields for South Dakota and
the nation.