* 1355720
* Collaborative Research: Defining the Role of Biologically Produced Reactive Oxygen Species in Dark Mercury Cycling
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Carl Lamborg, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 07/31/2019
* USD 822,062.00

Mercury (Hg) is a toxic trace element that bioaccumulates into marine food webs,
imposing a health threat to humans through the consumption of seafood. However,
controls on the cycling of Hg in the ocean are poorly understood. Most research
to date has focused on sun-lit and/or Hg-laden environments, where light-induced
chemical and mercury resistance reactions, respectively, have been identified as
dominant pathways for Hg cycling. The paradigm that dark Hg reactions are
irrelevant is fading and it is now apparent that dark redox reactions, both
reduction and oxidation, are important in the cycling of Hg. In this study,
researchers at the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution and Colorado School of
Mines will obtain a better understanding of the biogeochemical reactions
responsible for dark redox transformations of mercury (Hg) in marine systems.
The researchers will explore the relationship between microbial activity,
reactive oxygen species, and Hg speciation in a series of laboratory- and field-
based investigations to obtain a mechanistic understanding of dark Hg cycling.
By identifying new controls on the redox cycling of Hg in the ocean, this
research will help inform global and ecosystem models used to predict Hg
bioavailability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The proponents plan to
educate high school teachers from Boston Green Academy in South Boston on
mercury biogeochemistry and have one teacher participate in the summer research
cruises, as well as develop science curricula to engage the underrepresented
students at the school in science. One postdoc and one graduate student from
Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution and one graduate student from the Colorado
School of Mines would be supported and trained as part of this project. It is
anticipated that undergraduate students would have the opportunity to
participate in the study as summer interns.