* 1355971
* Scholarships for Oregon Scientists II
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2014,03/31/2021
* Robert Fisher, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Pushpa Ramakrishna
* 03/31/2021
* USD 618,217.00

The University of Oregon (UO), Scholarships for Oregon Scientists II(SOS2)
program addresses significant local and national needs. First, it provides clear
pathways to careers in the Pacific Northwest's High technology sector through
the long established Masters Industrial Internship Program (MIIP), which
comprises 4 strands of post-chemistry or physics baccalaureate summer course and
lab work, followed by 9-month paid internships working for one of 70+ STEM
industry partners. Second, SOS2 provides opportunities for success to high-
achieving, talented, high school students who often leave STEM major programs in
large numbers (50% in the sciences) within two years of starting undergraduate
programs. The five-year program will provide up to 60 scholarships for chemistry
and physics majors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;On-going partnerships with Eastern
Oregon schools, the district-umbrella Inter-Mountain Education Service District,
the Lane County Content in Context (C2) program, which connects five school
districts, and 10 S-STEM industry and government partners, will continue.
Established partnerships with six Oregon community colleges to produce seamless
transitions for chemistry and physics majors, allow the university access to
Oregon's most diverse higher education community. &lt;br/&gt;Lessons learned
from prior work indicate that developing effective study habits for building
science content knowledge for students during the first year in the program is
critical. Consequently, developing new and continuing supports is planned for
SOS2 participants to explicitly map connections between research and scientific
discourse and academic fundamentals such as core science content and study
skills. The proposed program also includes Freshman Interest Groups (FIG)
designed to support physical science majors. An innovative aspect of the program
is the development of elements of social persuasion by including scholars in
various science-focused, University-sponsored outreach events. A substantial
optional summer research program for SOS2 scholars is supported using internal
university funds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An external evaluator with science
education expertise provides feedback quarterly, drawing on a variety of data
sources. Evaluation activities will inform program activities and assess the
program's impact. Specifically, formative measures, including scholars' feedback
from midyear surveys assessing program elements, summaries of freshmen scholars
successes/challenges provided by the program coordinator and scholars, and
conversations with key personnel from partner institutions. Data are gathered
quarterly for all majors; GPAs and enrollment are reported. Student
Understanding of Science and Scientific Inquiry (SUSSI) is administered at the
start and the end of freshman year, after a summer of research.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Results are disseminated internally via the new University of Oregon
(UO) Center focused on K-16 STEM career development, STEMCORE. Wide
dissemination of best practices, for example, building a science-focused
community of practice, takes place at monthly STEMCORE meetings. Members of the
PI team publish articles and book chapters about innovative programs and attend
annual meetings of national professional societies. The SOS team member from the
UO Financial Aid office routinely attends national meetings for college
Financial Aid officials, where he is able to detail the structure, impact and
progress towards meeting goals for SOS2.