* 1355475
* EAGER: Learning Big Data Analytic Skills through Scientific Workflows
* CSE,OAC
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2018
* Yolanda Gil, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Alan Sussman
* 08/31/2018
* USD 239,999.00

Big data analytics has emerged as a widely desirable skill in many areas.
Although courses are now available on a variety of aspects of big data, there is
a lack of a broad and accessible course that covers the variety of topics that
concern big data analytics. As a result, acquiring practical data analytics
skills is out of reach for many students and professionals, posing severe
limitations to our ability as a society to take advantage of our vast digital
data resources.&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this work is to develop curriculum
materials for big data analytics to provide broad and practical training in data
analytics in the context of real-world and science-grade datasets and data
analytics methods. A key technical basis of the approach is the use of workflows
that capture expert analytic methods that will be presented to users for
practice with real-world datasets within pre-defined lesson units.
&lt;br/&gt;The results of this work include lesson units for learning expert-
level skills in big data analytics, a framework for non-programmers to
understand basic concepts in big data analytics, and a hands-on workflow
framework to learn by direct experimentation and exploration with scientific
data.&lt;br/&gt;The work focuses on big data problems relevant to geosciences,
such as water quality analysis, hydrology, lake ecosystem sustainability,
climate science, and earth modeling.&lt;br/&gt;This project will supplement
existing academic training materials in big data. The PIs will use real-world
geosciences data and domain tasks. All the materials will be available under
open source licenses. &lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will have great impact in the
ability of students to pursue careers in big data analytics. The framework will
be accessible to students who lack the programming skills required to assemble
themselves end-to-end data analysis systems for experimentation and practical
learning. The wide adoption of the proposed approach could ultimately lead to
broad societal impact by changing the way people interact with data, learn from
using scientific data, and their ability to participate in big data analysis.