* 1355406
* The Missouri Transect: Climate, Plants, and Community
* O/D,OIA
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2020
* Todd Mockler, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Cooperative Agreement
* Eric Lindquist
* 07/31/2020
* USD 20,000,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
IIA-1355406&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: The Missouri Transect: Climate,
Plants, and Community&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Missouri -
Columbia&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical Description&lt;br/&gt;The Missouri
Transect: Climate, Plants and Community addresses a fundamental issue in
sustainability and resilience - how plants and crops adapt to increased climate
variability. The research and education activities in the project exploit a
combination of high-resolution climate data, high-throughput genomics and
phenomics techniques, and stakeholder engagement. The project builds upon the
jurisdiction?s strengths in biotechnology and regional climate modeling.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A Science Education and Outreach Team will integrate
research and education by developing learning tools and opportunities that
inform Missouri citizens about climate change and its predicted effects on
agriculture and the environment. Public education programs will provide a better
understanding of how a changing environment affects plants and society.
Educational programs will share information about how scientists study climate
change and how they research new plant drought/stress tolerance traits. In
addition, the Missouri Transect will incorporate a diverse population of
individuals and organizations throughout the project with a special emphasis on
increasing the proficiency and interest of underrepresented groups and women in
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;The project seeks to
associate plant genotypes and phenotypes with environmental variability, with
the end goal of improved crop production. The research in this proposal seeks to
couple regional and microclimate models to specific phenotype and genotype
investigations in order to understand how plants adapt to stresses associated
with climate change. A Climate Team will develop models for the Hinkson Creek
Watershed to predict trends in precipitation and temperature that impact plant
ecosystems. A Plant Team will use high-throughput phenomics technologies to
determine how plant genotypes, phenotypes and productivity correlate with
changes in the environment. The Community Team will investigate how Missouri
communities manage resilience with increased frequency of drought, flooding, and
heat waves. The expected outcomes include enhanced knowledge about adaptation
and resilience, training and technology development around plant responses to
drought, seasonal-range climate forecasts, computational analysis and modeling
of metascale environmental sensing data, high-resolution plant phenotyping, and
an improved understanding of how stakeholders make decisions in response to
increased climate variability.