* 1355085
* Photoprotection in Diverse, Desiccation-Tolerant, Desert Green Algae and Their Close Aquatic Relatives
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Zoe Cardon, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Continuing Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 07/31/2019
* USD 629,973.00

The objective of this research is to determine the process(es) underlying the
mechanism(s) protecting the photosynthetic apparatus of desert green algae
during desiccation and rehydration. A key step in the evolution of life on Earth
was the move from living in water to surviving on land. Organisms making that
leap faced high light levels, extreme temperatures, and desiccation. Flowering
plants, conifers, mosses, and ferns are all descended from a single green algal
ancestor that successfully invaded land. Traits they share may be essential for
surviving on land, or they might simply be traits inherited from the common
ancestor. To tease apart these two possibilities, other green, photosynthetic,
terrestrial organisms must be studied that are not descended from that common
green algal ancestor. Such organisms are found among diverse, free-living,
microscopic green algae inhabiting microbiotic crusts of the desert Southwestern
U.S. Desert green algae survive desiccation much better than their aquatic algal
relatives, and desert algae recover from desiccation very rapidly (within
minutes) when rehydrated. Thus, they make an ideal system to study basic
mechanisms of desiccation tolerance. The traits land plants developed to protect
themselves from intense sunlight during drought, high heat, and cold are
particularly important as agriculture expands into marginal lands while climate
also shifts. Desert green algae share many characteristics with larger
agriculturally and ecologically important green plants, and also with the green
algae increasingly used for biofuel production. Research integration with
education and training will include development of 6-8th grade Lesson Plans,
available to teachers leading excursions at Cape Cod National Seashore focusing
on "Surprising Microbes of the Dunes". Research opportunities for undergraduates
will be focused on projects studying desiccation stress and photobiology in
green plants and microbiotic crusts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall research
objective is to determine the process(es) underlying (and phylogenetic
distribution of) rapidly-reversible mechanism(s) protecting the photosynthetic
apparatus during desiccation and rehydration, in paired desert and aquatic green
algae within four algal classes. Broad phylogenetic distribution of
photoprotective or desiccation-tolerance mechanisms across desert members of
multiple green algal classes will suggest (through parsimony) that these
mechanisms are likely ancestral traits in the larger green plant clade.
Comparison of traits in desert and closely-related aquatic relatives will
identify lineage-specific characteristics. Research will establish whether the
capacity for desiccation tolerance and desiccation-induced photoprotection has a
persistent genetic component (even when algae are grown hydrated), and whether
influences of light and speed of desiccation on the efficiency of
photoprotection are similar to their effects in lichens and mosses. Mechanisms
that have been recently proposed to underlie desiccation-induced photoprotection
(PSII to PSI spillover, P700+ oxidation, and chlorophyll-chlorophyll charge
transfer states) will be tested in the lichen Parmelia sulcata and desiccation-
tolerant green algae using fluorescence decay kinetics and modeling, EPR, and
linear and circular dichroism spectroscopy. Whole transcriptome shotgun
sequencing will be used to test whether, as in bryophytes, the transcriptome in
the representative desert-derived green alga Scenedesmus rotundus possesses
constititive cellular protection against desiccation.