* 1355163
* The effect of testosterone pulses and conditioned place preferences on social behavior in wild and laboratory Peromyscus mice
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2014,12/31/2018
* Catherine Marler, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 12/31/2018
* USD 779,999.00

When an individual animal interacts with another individual, it has a
physiological response. The researchers are trying to understand how
physiological responses can influence current and future behavior. Other studies
have shown that hormones, such as testosterone, can increase after a social
interaction. An important question is whether this hormone release can influence
future behavior. Because some hormones can result in a positive, rewarding
response, a preference for a location can form in response to the release of a
hormone such as testosterone. Thus, any male-male or male-female interaction
that results in the release of testosterone may induce an individual to seek out
that location repeatedly. Hormone release may therefore influence how
individuals use space through the development of preferences for specific
locations. This research investigates, for the first time, the natural function
of the reward-like properties of testosterone related to the development of
preferences for specific locations. This research may reveal a new mechanism,
testosterone pulses, for responding rapidly to adapt to changing social
conditions associated with specific locations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
researchers use conditioned place preference development in response to
testosterone injections to provide insight into the mechanisms balancing the
different social demands of a monogamous and territorial species, the biparental
California mouse. The hypothesis is that testosterone pulses induce spatial
distributions appropriate for the social demands of the environment and, in
turn, alter context appropriate behaviors in the form of paternal and
territorial behavior, pair bond maintenance, mate advertisement and mate-
attendance. The testosterone-induced spatial distribution may influence behavior
only through location or may further amplify and alter social interactions.
Within this framework, the researchers test questions in both simple and complex
environments. They examine complex aspects of testosterone-modified social
interactions by assessing acoustic communication in the field and laboratory.
The researchers propose to examine three aims to address the function of T
pulses and resulting effects on conditioned place preferences and social
behavior for focal pair-bonded males and their mates (Aim 1a), focal male
interactions with pups (Aim 1b), focal male interactions with a female intruder
(Aim 2), and focal male interactions with a male intruder (Aim 3). This research
will create a stimulating and collaborative student-training environment with
unique experiences that integrate behavioral endocrinology studies in the field
and laboratory. The collaboration between a midwestern R1 and small southern
research institution with fieldwork conducted at the Hastings Natural History
Reserve in California, will facilitate wide dissemination of expertise across
researchers and students, including STEM URM students. The project will be
integrated with a successful 10-year old outreach program called "Bats and Mice
in Your Backyard." Two software packages are being developed to automate the
analysis of ultrasonic vocalizations and mouse behavior from thermal videos
collected in the field and will be made available under an open source license