* 1355081
* Collaborative Research: Forest productivity and hydrological patterns regulate methane fluxes from peatlands in the Amazon basin
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2018
* Qianlai Zhuang, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 04/30/2018
* USD 103,000.00

The Amazon basin contains nearly one million square kilometers of wetlands,
predominantly peatlands, which are known to be highly productive and to store
significant quantities of carbon in plant biomass and soil. Peatlands are
characterized by soils rich in organic matter that are often saturated with
water, and are therefore often low in oxygen. These conditions often lead to the
release of methane, a greenhouse gas with ~25 times the heat-trapping capacity
of carbon dioxide, and peatlands are known to be important global sources of
methane. Until very recently, peatlands were not expected to be a significant
component of the Amazon basin since these wetlands are more common in cold,
northern latitudes and there were few records of their existence in the Amazon.
In recent years, however, multiple studies aided by satellite imagery and guided
field explorations have documented hundreds of peatlands across basins in the
West and Central Amazon. An estimated 3-6 millions of tons of organic carbon are
contained in these newly discovered Amazon peatlands, which may also represent a
significant, previously unrecorded, source of methane annually. The magnitude of
organic carbon stored in plants and soils every year vs. that released as
methane from these peatlands is not known. This project proposes to evaluate for
the first time a set of diverse Amazonian peatlands their organic carbon
content, and rates of forest productivity and methane formation and release.
This work will also include experimental manipulations of water levels to
evaluate responses of productivity and methane release to environmental changes
likely to occur as the climate warms. This project will also develop
mathematical models of these ecosystems to evaluate the impact of peatlands at
larger scales and to propose quantitative predictions for future productivity
and methane emissions. Two hypotheses will be tested in this study including (i)
whether vegetation change and water regime determine methane production and
release, and (ii) whether the response of methane production to altered water
regimes is modulated by the diversity of Amazon peatlands.

This work will contribute substantially to our understanding of feedbacks
between changes in atmospheric chemistry and climate because of the magnitude of
carbon storage in Amazonian peatlands and their potential to be major sources of
methane. The research will provide the first comprehensive analysis of these
peatlands in the Amazon, and provide quantitative predictions of future methane
emissions from the Amazon. This project will also provide data on carbon stocks
and fluxes for future comparisons under climatic change and will provide
evidence to monitor tropical peatlands for future conservation and policy-making
efforts. This collaborative effort including three US and one Peruvian
institution, will train a postdoctoral researcher, two graduate and one
undergraduate student. This project will also develop a virtual classroom
program connecting high school students in Arizona and Iquitos Peru to discuss
the impact of ecological research in Amazon peatlands and to track expeditions.
Educational activities at the high school level will be targeted to generate an
effective conservation-teaching tool to reach a broader public.