* 1355504
* Advances in Econometrics for Treatment Effect Bounds, Time-Varying-Parameter Nonstationary/Stationary Autoregressive Models, and Identification-Robust Inference
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2014,03/31/2019
* Donald Andrews, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 03/31/2019
* USD 258,080.00

This research project includes five different topics. The first develops new
treatment effect bounds for the average treatment effect (ATE) in models with
two continuous or discrete potential outcome variables, a binary treatment
variable, and a binary instrumental variable (IV) that is independent of the
potential outcomes. The ATE is not identified due to treatment effect
heterogeneity. The research develops bounds on ATE that exploit the independence
condition and an IV restriction by first considering the case where the
treatment effect distribution is binary. The bounds hold for arbitrary treatment
effect distributions. The bounds depend explicitly on the probability limit of
the IV estimator and are of a simple form, which is conducive to inference. The
assumptions imposed are neither stronger nor weaker than those currently
considered in the literature. The results are applicable to treatment effect
analysis in economics and to the analysis of medical randomized trials with
incomplete compliance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second portion develops
deterministically time-varying autoregressive (AR) models that may exhibit
(local) nonstationarity or stationarity and smooth transitions between the two.
The PI considers estimation of the parameters by nonparametric smoothing in the
time domain. Standard methods of reducing bias due to the time-varying
parameters fail in the (locally) nonstationary case. Hence, new bias reduction
methods will need to be introduced. Another important issue to be addressed is
the endogenous character of the initial conditions for the local smoothing
estimator, which are determined by the time-varying path of the sum of the AR
coefficients. The PI analyzes methods for estimation, testing, CS construction,
and forecasting. He also develops tests for the presence of time-varying
parameters. This research will provide a useful new time series model that
allows for time-varying
nonstationarity/stationarity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Third, he develops inference
methods that are robust to weak identification and identification failure in
moment condition models. Several existing methods employ conditional likelihood
ratio-type (CLR) tests and CS's that generalize the CLR test of Moreira (2003)
for the linear IV regression model. Existing procedures (i) do not necessarily
have correct asymptotic size when the dimension of the parameter is two or
greater and (ii) do not reduce to Moreira?s CLR test in the linear IV model,
which is known to have optimal power properties. The PI introduces new CLR-type
procedures that do not have these deficiencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The last
two areas of research are on inference in partially-identified models that are
defined by inequality restrictions on nonlinear functions of infinitely-many
conditional moments and Lagrange multiplier tests under weak identification or
lack of identification. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research develops new methods
for the statistical analysis of social science data. The project will benefit
society because it will improve the quality of data analysis used for a variety
of important questions. These methods will be useful for economic policy
analysis but will also be used by medical and engineering researchers who
analyze data with similar statistical features.