* 1355093
* Dissecting the anatomy of regulatory divergence
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2016
* Ilya Ruvinsky, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 12/31/2016
* USD 672,999.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ilya Ruvinsky&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal #:
1355093&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Dissecting the anatomy of regulatory
divergence?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Gene expression patterns change as species
evolve, and it is clear that some changes in gene expression are visible as
changes in genetically-encoded traits. Less well-understood is the observation
that visibly conserved traits in different species are sometimes specified by
divergent gene regulatory mechanisms. The goal of the work proposed here is to
understand how changes in gene expression influence traits in different species.
Results from this study will not only impact our understanding of the evolution
of developmental mechanisms, but also our understanding of the discovery of
broader evolutionary trends. Dr. Ruvinsky will incorporate findings of this work
into his teaching of undergraduate and graduate students at the University of
Chicago as well as to science teachers of Chicago Public Schools. Research in
Dr. Ruvinsky?s laboratory will involve undergraduate and graduate students who
will be trained in experimental and computational approaches central to this
proposal. The PI and other members of the laboratory will present their findings
at a variety of scientific meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Ruvinsky
Laboratory at the University of Chicago has established the gene unc-47 in
Caenorhabditis nematodes as a model system for the study of gene regulatory
evolution. Despite an apparently conserved expression pattern among these
nematode species, the mechanisms that control unc-47 have diverged. The PI
proposes three aims. First, Dr. Ruvinsky will dissect in detail the divergence
of cis-regulation of the unc-47 gene in Caenorhabditis. Combining comparative
and functional approaches, this work will provide a detailed picture of changes,
possibly at the single-nucleotide resolution, that led to the divergence of
regulatory mechanisms, while preserving the expression pattern. Second, using
both standard and state-of-the-art molecular genetic methods, Dr. Ruvinsky will
identify compensatory mutations in trans(cription) factors that permitted cis-
regulatory divergence of unc-47 without changes to the expression pattern of the
gene. Finally, Dr. Ruvinsky will determine the generality of the principles of
regulatory divergence inferred from the unc-47 locus. Several genes have been
identified that retain conserved expression in different species, while being
regulated in subtly different ways. The goal of this aim is to test whether the
rules governing changes in unc-47 regulation apply to other genes. Together
these experiments promise to provide a highly detailed mechanistic view of gene
regulatory evolution and thus contribute to the study of Evo-Devo.