* 1355633
* EAGER: Physio-linguistic Models of Deception Detection
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Rada Mihalcea, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Aidong Zhang
* 08/31/2017
* USD 315,986.00

The goal of this Early-concept Grant for Exploratory Research is to explore a
new generation of computational tools for joint modeling of physiological and
linguistic signals of human behavior. The project is the first to investigate
physio-linguistic models for deception analysis. To achieve this goal, the
following three research objectives are pursued. First, a novel physio-
linguistic dataset of deceit is built, covering several different domains.
Second, rule-based classifiers for deception detection are explored, using
physiological features (e.g., heart rate, respiration rate, galvanic skin
response, skin temperature), as well as linguistic features. Third, data-driven
learning approaches for multimodal deception detection are developed, taking
advantage of the recent progress in early, late, and temporal fusion models.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is exploratory in nature, and acts as a
catalyst for novel research problems. First, it explores rich sets of multimodal
features extracted from physiological and linguistic modalities, analyzing their
effectiveness in the recognition of deceit. Second, it also explores the
integration of multiple physio-linguistic modalities, through experiments with
rule-based and data-driven techniques that fuse multimodal features into joint
deception analysis models. To address the challenges of multimodal research
work, the team working on this project brings together experts from the fields
of bio-sensors, computational linguistics, and physiology and behavioral
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has high potential payoffs, as models
of deception detection have broad applicability, including: the development of
critical tools for various applications in fields such as criminal justice,
intelligence, and security; the enhancement of applications that can be
negatively affected by the presence of deceit, such as opinion analysis or
modeling of human communication; and a deeper understanding of fundamental
aspects of human behavior, which can positively impact medical applications in
psychiatry and psychology. The tools and datasets produced during this project
will be made freely available for the research
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For further information see the project web site
at: http://web.eecs.umich.edu/~mihalcea/deceptiondetection/