* 1355059
* Climate change effects on coastal wetlands - Linking microbial community composition and ecosystem responses
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Scott Neubauer, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 06/30/2018
* USD 779,967.00

Wetlands are dynamic habitats that are found at the interface of terrestrial and
aquatic ecosystems. They function to cleanse polluted water, ameliorate floods,
recharge groundwater aquifers, and support diverse flora and fauna. Regretfully,
half of Earth's wetlands have been lost in recent times due to population
expansion, pollution, coastal development, and other human activities. In
addition to the ecosystem services mentioned above, wetlands are among the most
biogeochemically active habitats on Earth. They have been identified as key
sites for carbon sequestration and regulation of greenhouse gas emissions. These
environments are very sensitive to environmental perturbation, and the effects
of global climate change - especially sea level rise - are already evident. Sea
level rise can bring saltwater into historically freshwater wetlands, changing
the chemical reactions that take place in the sediment and the composition of
soil microbial communities. This research provides a better understanding of
freshwater wetland response to saltwater intrusion and specifically focuses on
soil microorganisms and their roles in carbon sequestration and greenhouse gas
emissions. In addition to its scientific contributions, this project advances
both science education and public awareness of the threats facing tidal
freshwater wetlands, and includes activities intended to educate the community
(grade school children through adults) on basic aspects of environmental
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Microbial communities have historically been
treated as a "black box" due to assumptions that there is a high level of
functional redundancy and that microbial population dynamics (e.g., in response
to global change) are unimportant. However, numerous recent studies have
demonstrated that changes in microbial community composition can directly
influence ecosystem process rates, motivating this study of the responses of
microbial consortia to disturbance. The overall goal of this research is to link
genomics-based characterization of soil microbial communities with process-level
measurements of important ecosystem carbon transformations, and to examine their
collective responses to environmental change. This research project includes
both observational and manipulative experiments in the tidal freshwater and
oligohaline marshes of the Pamunkey/York River system in Virginia, a major
tributary of Chesapeake Bay. The project combines assessment of wetlands along
an existing riverine salinity gradient, as a space-for-time substitution for
future saltwater intrusion, with an in situ saltwater addition experiment that
characterizes changes in the coupled microbe-plant-soil system. Molecular
genetic analyses (16S sequencing, qPCR, and RT-qPCR) of the soil microbial
communities, process rate measurements (iron and sulfate reduction,
methanogenesis), and ecosystem carbon dioxide and methane exchanges are being
used to develop a detailed mechanistic understanding of how compositional
changes in microbial communities affect biogeochemical processes. This
fundamental knowledge will pave the way for future research that effectively
incorporates microbial communities into ecosystem process models.