* 1355084
* Collaborative Research: Genetic Architecture and the Evolution of Recombination
* BIO,DEB
* 04/15/2014,03/31/2020
* Christina Burch, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 03/31/2020
* USD 378,657.00

Most organisms alive today have exchanged genes with organisms of their own
species in their recent evolutionary history. However, the reasons for the
evolutionary success of genetic exchange are unclear. This research will
investigate the possibility that genetic exchange selects for types of
interactions between genes that, in turn, select for continued genetic exchange.
The overarching goal is to develop new empirical and modeling frameworks for
studying the evolution of genetic exchange. The research will (1) extend an
existing mathematical model of virus replication to capture the short-term
evolutionary dynamics of experimental virus populations, (2) determine whether
gene interactions evolve in the virus model as predicted from simpler, less
realistic, models, and (3) experimentally test the predictions obtained from the
mathematical model in real virus populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The evolution
of genetic exchange is one of the oldest and most intractable problems in
biology. In addition, the nature of gene interactions is a central focus for
several areas of biology, including physiology and systems biology. The study of
gene interactions will have far-reaching consequences for understanding complex
biological processes, including human diseases. The completion of this work will
generate new software tools that can be used to test a variety of additional
hypotheses about evolutionary processes. Finally, this award will be used to
expand a Pen Pal Program piloted in 2013 in which graduate students engage
middle school students in the process of scientific discovery by writing back
and forth about their research and other scientific interests.