* 1355742
* Collaborative Research: Opening New Views into Bankruptcy and Credit Markets Using Court Records
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2017
* Mary Hansen, American University
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Hyun Hong
* 05/31/2017
* USD 298,400.00

There have been more than 40 million personal and business bankruptcy filings in
the U.S. since 1898, but there is no good, publicly-available data set to
support research on the functioning of the bankruptcy system and the influence
of bankruptcy on the economy. This award supports the creation and distribution
of data constructed from original court records and is part of a larger project
that has a goal of producing a data set representative of all bankruptcy cases
filed between 1898 and the advent of electronic court records in the 1990s. The
data set will include details of the progress of cases through the legal system
and details of the liabilities, assets, and incomes of households and
businesses. The data will be distributed through the Interuniversity Consortium
for Political and Social Research and are expected to stimulate research across
the social sciences. This data will provide researchers new ways to investigate
trends in bankruptcy over time and correlates across space. Examples of such
research topics are: the impact of bank bailouts in the 1930s, trends in filings
by women and minorities, variation in outcomes of filings across local courts
within federal court districts, the impact of Medicare on the medical debt of
the bankrupt, the impact of federal emergency aid on bankruptcy, potential abuse
of the law through so-called 'strategic' filing, the effect of regulations on
high-interest credit on the debts of the bankrupt, the impact of the time-to-
resolution of debt obligations on recovery from recession, and racial
disparities in the use of the bankruptcy law.

The new data will also support research beyond bankruptcy and will be of use to
scholars in other fields like legal studies and history. The research conducted
with the new data has the potential to impact private legal practice, official
court practice, and policy set by legislatures, state financial regulators, the
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, and the Federal Reserve. The research may
also be used by consumer advocates to design materials for financial education
to enhance household financial well-being.