* 1355097
* Dissection of Signaling Networks Maintaining Metabolic Homeostasis
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2018
* Erik Johnson, Wake Forest University
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 12/31/2018
* USD 486,000.00

The mechanisms of how organisms maintain metabolic homeostasis in light of
significant environmental variation in food availability are not completely
understood. Of particular interest of the field are the underlying mechanisms
that form homeostatic responses to starvation. This research project will take
advantage of the tractability of the model organism, Drosophila melanogaster and
powerful molecular and imaging tools to address fundamental questions regarding
metabolic decisions. One principal outcome of this proposal is to enhance
understanding of the conservation of these metabolic networks. Preliminary
results suggest that these networks are very likely to be highly conserved, and
may therefore be leveraged for many practical applications, ranging from
therapeutics to pest management. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Preliminary data from
the PI supports the hypothesis that the energy sensor, AMP-activated protein
kinase (AMPK) regulates the secretion of Adipokinetic Hormone (AKH), which
functions to mobilize energy stores and is required for behavioral and
physiological responses to nutrient limitations. This project will investigate:
i) Functional mechanisms of hormonal signaling on AKH cell physiology; ii)
Connections between hormonal signaling systems and AMPK; and iii) Regulatory
mechanisms of AKH cell excitability. The planned experiments in this proposal
will contribute new information into the cellular signals within a defined cell
population, which is required for generating specific behavioral and
physiological changes to maintain energy homeostasis. This research project will
also be used as a vehicle to extend undergraduate research opportunities to
students, and also to faculty at regional institutions. These opportunities will
provide research opportunities to underrepresented populations at both the
faculty and student level. This seamless integration of research and education
will have broad impacts, in providing the benefits of undergraduate research
opportunities to a diversity of students.