* 1355028
* Resolving a Rapid, Mega-Diverse Radiation of Insect Herbivores
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Charles Mitter, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Weeks
* 07/31/2018
* USD 560,000.00

This project seeks to improve our understanding of the evolution and
classification of one of the largest groups of plant-feeding insects, the order
Lepidoptera, which consists of the butterflies and moths (157,000 described
species). Lepidoptera have major effects on both natural ecosystems and humans.
In natural systems they play important roles as herbivores, pollinators and prey
for birds and other species. They also include many destructive pests of
agriculture, but some species provide a commercially valuable fiber, silk, and
caterpillars are important food items in many cultures. Some species of
Lepidoptera are model research species used for discovering basic principles in
genetics, physiology, development, ecology and other areas of life sciences.
Finally, Lepidoptera such as the monarch butterfly are of central utility in
ecosystem assessment, conservation planning, and in educating the public about
environmental conservation. An accurate family tree (genealogy) is an essential
foundation for understanding the past and potential future evolution of the
diversity and traits of Lepidoptera, including those relevant to their pest
management, and to predicting the traits of previously-unstudied species. Recent
studies using DNA sequence data have made major progress toward figuring out the
genealogical relationships among the approximately 125 families into which the
Lepidoptera are currently divided. However, some relationships, particularly
those within a subgroup of families containing the majority of species, have
proven especially difficult to infer. This project will attempt to resolve these
problematic aspects of the genealogy using next-generation methods of DNA
sequencing, which provide over 100 times as much data per species studied as
previous methods. The new results are expected to have applications in many
fields, both basic and applied. In addition, the project will help train the
next generation of comparative biologists in use of these new DNA sequencing
methods, and the results will be incorporated into new educational materials for
outreach to K-12 children and the public at
large.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Relationships among most early-diverging
lepidopteran lineages, and within nearly all major superfamilies, have been
strongly resolved. In the advanced clade Apoditrysia, however, which contains
the great majority of lepidopteran species, relationships among superfamilies
have only weak support. To resolve relationships among the superfamilies of
Apoditrysia, the gene sample will be increased to 2200 kb in a subset of 160
exemplar species via transcriptome RNA-Seq. The resulting phylogeny will be used
for an analysis of divergence dates and rates of species diversification across
the Lepidoptera that will attempt to identify major factors contributing to
their great species richness. The Leptree project produced about 10,000
kilobases of DNA sequence from ~ 900 species representing 91% of families. To
test whether RNA-Seq can solve relationships left uncertain by Leptree, DNA
sequence was obtained for 1579 genes (2.2+ mb) from 38 exemplar species
representing the major lineages of Apoditrysia. In an initial maximum likelihood
phylogenetic analysis of 741 genes (764 mb) left after removal of all genes
showing any suggestion of paralogy, 10 of the 13 groupings on the tree that
united two or more superfamilies had bootstrap support over 85%, including 7
with 100% bootstrap support, vs. 0/13 with 14.8 kb only. Thus, the planned
expansion of transcriptome sampling seems likely to provide greatly improved
phylogeny resolution for the Apoditrysia. The new results will constitute the
capstone for the first-ever comprehensive, robustly supported phylogenetic
framework for the study of lepidopteran biology.