* 1355224
* IOS: Amylase genetics and biochemistry underlie a digestive specialization in prickleback fishes
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Donovan German, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Emily Carrington
* 08/31/2018
* USD 543,193.00

Studying the nutritional physiology of animals is important because we can gain
insight into how animals survive on different diets. An emergent theme within
the field of vertebrate nutritional physiology is the commonality of elevated
biochemical activity of amylase, a carbohydrate-degrading digestive enzyme, in
animals that consume plant material. Preliminary data suggest that herbivores
and omnivores express more amylase genes than do carnivores, and that
convergently-evolved herbivores express different suites of amylases. However,
beyond consistent measurements of elevated amylase activities, the genetic
underpinnings of this observation (i.e., the cause), or the functional
consequences of investing in elevated amylase activities, remain elusive.
Therefore, the goal of this study is to investigate the molecular and
biochemical underpinnings of elevated amylase activities in a family of fishes
with great dietary diversity, and to understand consequences of this enzymatic
investment. This study will be important in our understanding of what an animal
eats and why.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As part of a series of dietary studies using
prickleback fish, the studies supported by this award will: 1) use traditional
and high-throughput molecular technologies to identify the number of amylase
genes present in the genome, and being expressed at a given time
(transcriptomics); 2) model the structure of, and characterize amylase
biochemistry that may explain variation in amylase function, and 3) conduct
feeding trials with pricklebacks to determine whether growth rate and fitness
can be affected by differences in amylase machinery. The studies supported by
this award will answer fundamental questions about the mechanisms underlying
patterns in enzymatic activity, as well as potential metabolic and fitness
consequences. This project will increase diversity in science by directly
involving researchers from underrepresented groups and through an outreach
program with a local high school with a 78% minority population. The results of
this project will be published in international scientific journals and
presented at conferences.