* 1355723
* DC: Medium: Collaborative Research: Data Intensive Computing: Scalable, Social Data Analysis
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2014
* Jeffrey Heer, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2014
* USD 129,438.00

Analysts in all areas of human knowledge, from science and engineering to
economics, social science and journalism are drowning in data. The proliferation
of digital information requires tools and techniques for exploring, analyzing
and communicating data in a manner that scales as both the data and the
organizations analyzing it grow in size. Throughout the data life-cycle,
sensemaking is often a collaborative process. As different analysts each
contribute to data acquisition, cleaning, analysis, and interpretation they
contribute contextual knowledge that deepens understanding. Analysts may
disagree on how to interpret data, but then work together to reach consensus.
Many data sets are so large that thorough exploration by a single person is
unlikely. In short, social cognition plays a critical role in the process of
scalable data analysis. New analysis tools that address human cognitive
characteristics, social interaction and data analytics in an integrated fashion
can improve our ability to turn data into knowledge.

Scalable data analysis requires social interaction and therefore social context
must be embedded in data analysis tools. The goals of this project are (1) to
understand how social interaction and social context can facilitate successful
data analysis, (2) to develop models and tools for representing and annotating
data transformations, visualizations, and social activity (e.g., textual and
graphical annotations, discussions, links, tags), and (3) to design and test
visual interfaces that leverage our tools to support collaborative analysis
practices, including data entry, transformation, visualization, and
interpretation. Central concerns include (a) a focus on enabling social
interaction throughout the data life-cycle and (b) the use of scalable data
transformation routines that can return results in a time frame concordant with
interactive, exploratory data transformation and analysis.

Further information on this project can be found at:
http://vis.berkeley.edu/projects/scalable_social_data_analysis/