* 1355313
* Minority Undergraduate/Graduate Student Technical Presentation Experience at the 2013 NOBCChE Annual Technical Conference
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2014
* Bobby Wilson, Texas Southern University
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 08/31/2014
* USD 65,100.00

This award is to support the travel of fifty (50) undergraduate and graduate
students from the departments of chemistry and chemical engineering, and related
sciences at selected Historically Black Colleges & Universities (HBCU) and
Minority Serving Institutions (Minority Serving Institutions including Hispanic
Serving Institutions (MSI) and Tribal Colleges) to attend and participate in
technical symposia at the 40th NOBCChE Annual Technology Conference in
Indianapolis, IN from October 1-4, 2013.

This award will provide opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students to
present their original research to a forum composed of industry, government, and
academic peers. Students will have the opportunity to meet colleagues from other
HBCU, MSI, and majority institutions to develop research collaborations and to
explore opportunities to pursue graduate degrees in the chemistry or chemical
engineering disciplines. Students will be exposed to new ideas and innovations
in an atmosphere with role models who were trained in the science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) disciplines. These new ideas and innovations
are critical to the development of the next generation of products and
technologies. The outcome of this activity is that students will be encouraged
to pursue graduate degrees and post-doctoral positions in chemistry, chemical
engineering, and related fields of study, thus increasing the pipeline for the
development of ideas and innovations from students who in their careers may
choose employment opportunities as scientists and engineers in either the
government, academic or the industry sectors.