* 1355187
* Reproductive isolation, asynchrony, and  incompatibility in fragmented prairie populations of Echinacea  angustifolia
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2018
* Stuart Wagenius, Chicago Horticultural Society
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 03/31/2018
* USD 259,186.00

The ability of organisms to successfully reproduce in small, isolated
populations is a key factor in the generation and maintenance of biological
diversity. Reproductive failure due to isolation is a current prospect for many
of the long-lived, perennial plants that make up most of the grasslands of the
central U.S. because these grasslands now exist mainly as small remnants of a
once great prairie. Previous research has suggested that three of the most
important causes of reproductive failure in prairie plants are mismatches in the
timing of flowering, limited ability to disperse pollen, and mechanisms of
compatibility that restrict mating between closely related individuals. This
project will be the first to test how all three of these factors operate
together in a natural system. Researchers will measure timing and compatibility
of plants of Echinacea angustifolia (coneflowers) in 27 populations in Minnesota
over three years and merge these data with an 18-year, continuing study on the
population growth of the species. The intended result is a unified understanding
of how habitat fragmentation affects the reproductive potential of grassland
plants.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this project include
conservation of biodiversity, student training, and new tools for the scientific
community. Results will be communicated to land managers and the general public
through the outreach programs and collaborations of the Chicago Botanical
Garden. Baccalaureate and graduate students will learn new skills in population
biology and computing. The project will publish its detailed spatial and
temporal data sets of reproduction in Echinacea and develop freely available
software to enable other researchers to manage, visualize, and analyze this
information in Echinacea and other species.