* 1355914
* EAGER: The Sustainable Futures Protocol: A New Social Science Research Vehicle to Identify and Develop Key Psychological and Sociocultural Competencies for Sustainability Worldwide
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2013,02/28/2017
* Enrico Wensing, George Mason University
* Continuing Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 02/28/2017
* USD 358,848.00

A growing number of researchers are taking-up the many social and cultural
challenges of transitioning toward global sustainability. While rapid global
warming and extreme weather are often at the forefront of these challenges there
are many more, including reduction in poverty; managing migration; improving
access to water, healthcare, and education worldwide; sustainable development of
limited natural resources, etc. These challenges, although global, are
particularly acute in the Arctic, which is socially and culturally quite
diverse. In order to cross culturally negotiate these diverse sets of
sustainability challenges, interdisciplinary teams of researchers must work
together, as well as with local and non-local scholars and experts and variety
of stakeholders and community members. It is in this complex landscape of
sustainability challenges, scholarship, socio-economic and cultural systems, and
political geography that this project has the potential to inform future
research methods and global solutions.

This research project seeks to help develop interdisciplinary researcher, local
scholar, stakeholder, and community member teams so that they can best work
together within and across cultures and within and across challenges. In
addition the project will support these leadership teams as their network grows
globally through web-based platforms. The main goal of the project is to
identify the key social and psychological characteristics, individually and
collectively, that lead to community leaders that understand and are willing to
invest in sustainability ideas and projects. Support is given to the PI to
develop and test a complex of social science research methods and tools, labeled
the Sustainable Futures Protocols, by which the most optimal competencies for
collaboration and coordination of actions for sustainability can be understood,
measured, and, perhaps most importantly, achieved. The cross cultural component
of the research project will be the development and testing of the Sustainable
Futures Protocol in Arctic, Caribbean, and USA communities. Results from this
work will provide a testing, teaching, and development tool for individuals and
groups with regard to community leadership and optimal community dynamics for
sustainability. It will provide a guideline of skills that can be developed
individually or at the community level in order facilitate decisions about a
global sustainable future.