* 1355045
* GAP JUNCTION CHANNEL COMPOSITION AND THE CONTROL OF NEURONAL MORPHOLOGY AND CONNECTIVITY
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2014,10/31/2019
* Michael Baker, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Evan Balaban
* 10/31/2019
* USD 1,070,000.00

This project will generate new information on how an important family of
proteins, the GAP Junction proteins, partakes in the assembly of a functional
brain from its component parts, neurons and glial cells. These proteins join
together to form electrical synapses, a major means of communication between
nerve cells. During brain development, they help to define which cells can join
together in functional circuits. Mutations in gap junction proteins can lead to
devastating abnormalities in brain function. Experiments will be carried out in
a simple animal with a simple brain, the medicinal leech, where interactions
between small numbers of well-characterized nerve cells can be explored in
greater depth, with diverse experimental approaches and tools. Since critical
molecular mechanisms are highly conserved throughout evolution, these studies
will advance the general understanding of how nervous systems are built,
including those of more complex species, such as mammals. Additionally, leech
neurobiology is ideally suited to undergraduate training, offering a strong
foundation in molecular and cellular biology and electrophysiology. Student
recruitment for this project will focus on Community College transfer students,
particularly those from underrepresented groups, during the summer before they
enter UCSD, to provide an early exposure to scientific research. Continuing
their research experiences during their undergraduate careers, they will
contribute to the badly needed increase of well-trained graduates in STEM
fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed studies will be based on recent
findings that indicate that different types and distributions of gap junction
proteins can regulate the shape and connectivity of individual leech neurons.
Gap junction proteins belong to large gene families that form inter-cellular
channels and allow direct exchange of ions and small molecules. Each channel is
comprised of six protein subunits, and since many neurons express unique
complements of multiple gap junction proteins that can form the channels, a
cell's expression profile might function like lock-and-key recognition factors.
This project will test how different gap junction proteins can affect the
characteristic morphology and connectivity of identified neurons in the leech
central nervous system. The expression and function of gap junction proteins
will be modulated by gene knockdown and transgene expression in individual
developing neurons, and morphological changes will be assayed by digitizing
neuronal arbors using confocal microscopy and quantifying branch distribution,
number and length. Intracellular dye-tracer injections and electrical recordings
will detect changes in their connectivity.