* 1355431
* Workshop:  I-Corps for Learning (I-Corps-L):  A Pilot Initiative to Propagate &amp; Scale Educational Innovations
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2013,03/31/2019
* Ann McKenna, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 03/31/2019
* USD 815,579.00

PARTICIPANTS: &lt;br/&gt;Karl Smith (University of Minnesota)&lt;br/&gt;Ann
McKenna (Arizona State University)&lt;br/&gt;Christopher Swan (Tufts
University)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PROJECT DESCRIPTION &lt;br/&gt;This
project is addressing the longstanding challenge of enacting educational
transformation. It is taking an entrepreneurial approach to help NSF PI teams
develop strategies to propagate and scale their funded educational innovations.
This pilot project builds on the National Science Foundation (NSF) I-Corps
program, which was launched in 2011, and refocuses the efforts on educational
activities. The team is creating an I-Corps for Learning (I-Corps-L) model to
provide a program for NSF-funded researchers and their teams to evaluate the
sustainable scalability potential of their educational activities. The I-Corps-L
team is developing and delivering an eight-week course of study designed to
teach teams the business model design and customer development process, based on
the Lean Launchpad approach developed by Steve Blank (who, along with Jerry
Engel, will also serve as a consultant to the project).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF
is supporting 10 grantees drawn from the Computer and Information Science and
Engineering (CISE), Education and Human Resources (EHR), and Engineering (ENG)
directorates in the fall of 2013. The ten exemplary projects have been selected
by program officers and focus on key STEM concepts/courses/practices that
address potential roadblocks to STEM undergraduate student
success.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The I-Corps-L program goals are to work with these
teams to accomplish the following: &lt;br/&gt;1) Give the team an experiential
learning opportunity to help determine the readiness of their innovation for
sustainable scalability. Sustainable scalability involves a self-supported
entity that is sustainable and systematically promotes the adoption of the
educational innovation and enables and facilitates its use. &lt;br/&gt;2) Enable
the team to develop a clear go/no-go decision regarding sustainable scalability
of the innovation. &lt;br/&gt;3) Develop a transition plan and actionable tasks
to move the innovation forward to sustainable scalability.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has the potential for achieving the elusive
goal of educational transformation through propagation and scale of educational
innovations. The team participants leave the program with an expanded set of
skills and knowledge that provide them with the tools necessary to evaluate and
translate their research into applications that can benefit society. This effort
has a strong potential for having a transformative impact on STEM
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER SIGNIFICANCE &lt;br/&gt;The principal
objective of the project is to foster an entrepreneurial mindset within the
education community, so the community has the potential to impact the way
education innovations are designed and implemented. The project is encouraging
other educational enthusiasts to leverage the outcomes of this pilot to create a
broad scale impact. The results of the project can be implemented at many
institutions, having the potential to significantly improve the retention and
graduation of STEM students nationwide. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is
conducting an evaluation that will study the program's delivery, impact, and the
effectiveness. A group of thirteen research questions concerning the program are
being studied, with the results presented at the 2014 ASEE Annual Conference and
published in the Journal of Engineering Education. The evaluation effort is
being led by Dr. Gary Lichtenstein, who is an expert in mixed-methods research
and has participated in research and evaluation studies in STEM education for
over a decade. Ultimately, this pilot project is developing a model for
conducting training workshops that result in widespread use of educational
innovations to improve STEM learning.