* 1355106
* RUI: Collaborative: unPAK: undergraduates Phenotyping Arabidopsis Knockouts: A distributed genomic approach to examine evolutionarily important traits
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2019
* Courtney Murren, College of Charleston
* Continuing Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 05/31/2019
* USD 652,390.00

The unPAK (undergraduates Phenotyping Arabidopsis Knockouts) project uses the
plant Arabidopsis thaliana to examine how and when differences in DNA sequences
lead to differences in traits related to survival, growth, and reproduction. It
will detect effects, if any, of mutation in a comprehensive collection of
mutants generated by the Salk Institute, and will then compile results in a
comprehensive database. To examine the interaction of genetic and environmental
effects, unPAK's experiments are replicated within and across multiple growth
facilities and labs, and a subset of experiments deliberately manipulate soil
factors, moisture, and temperature to see how these important ecological factors
interact with genetics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;unPAK will survey enough mutant
lines to reach coverage of a third of the A. thaliana genome (approximately
9,000 genes). All data will be uploaded into a public database at
arabidopsisunpak.org, and this database of observed traits is linked to existing
genomic databases. Evidence produced by unPAK will enable testing central
hypotheses about the relationship between genomic features and important plant
characteristics. For example, the data can be used to test whether the effects
of mutation are predicted by gene attributes such as molecular signatures of
selection in the past, gene function, gene family size, or by patterns of
variability in natural populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;unPAK is centered
around participation of undergraduate researchers in the lab and the classroom,
educating and training undergraduates integratively in genetics, ecology,
evolution, and bioinformatics. The network extends across diverse post-secondary
institutions, with over 100 undergraduate apprentices participating across 13
laboratories in 3 years. Greater than 20 course-based undergraduate research
experiences (CUREs) will be supported by the program, reaching over 600
students. Any discoveries about the influence of particular genes on fruit
production, survival, or life history will have significant broader impacts in
potential application to crop species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a final part of
the project the unPAK research network itself is being studied. Using mixed-
methods approaches from the social sciences, researchers are documenting
interactions among network participants to analyze changes in network structure
over time, and to investigate factors that influence student participation and
outcomes, including students' accrual of human, cultural, and social capital.