* 1355170
* The origin and accumulation of hybrid incompatibilities in Tigriopus californicus
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2017
* Suzanne Edmands, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 12/31/2017
* USD 554,365.00

Understanding the mechanisms by which new species arise is a fundamental goal of
biology. Diverging populations accumulate genetic differences that may cause
conflicts (reduced fitness) when populations come back together and hybridize.
This leads to further isolation of the populations, and, eventually, to
speciation. Speciation work in model systems has concentrated on conflicts
involving the gender-determining chromosomes, but a great number of organisms
across the tree of life lack these chromosomes. This project uses a copepod, a
small marine invertebrate, to understand how genetic conflicts underlying
speciation evolve in organisms without gender-determing chromosomes. By
hybridizing pairs of populations from a known evolutionary tree, the study will
assess how different types of conflicts (nuclear-nuclear vs. nuclear-
mitochondrial) accumulate over time and whether the same chromosomal regions
evolve conflicts in evolutionarily independent lineages. It will assess the
repeatability of evolutionary trajectories by tracking genetic changes in large,
lab-based hybrid populations and will identify potential candidate genes
involved in conflicts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project relates to issues of
biodiversity and conservation by exploring how the lack of sex chromosomes
impacts species diversification and consequences of hybridization. Its focus on
the evolution of nuclear-mitochondrial conflicts, an important cause of disease,
gives this study potential biomedical applications. The project will train a
postdoctoral researcher, Ph.D. students, and numerous undergraduate researchers.
It will also include outreach to diverse communities in and around Los Angeles,
including a collaboration with the Aquarium of the Pacific aimed at promoting
awareness of the evolutionary processes currently at work in the ocean and their
importance.