* 1355169
* Phylogeny and diversification in the uniquely diverse beetle family Curculionidae (true weevils)
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2019
* Duane McKenna, University of Memphis
* Continuing Grant
* Amanda Ingram
* 04/30/2019
* USD 730,000.00

The lack of a reliable family tree for the extraordinarily diverse beetle family
Curculionidae (true weevils) has impeded taxonomic, systematic and applied
research on weevils. This project will reconstruct the family tree of
Curculionidae and establish a timeframe for weevil diversification by analyzing
genomic and morphological (anatomical) data. The genomic data gathered will
consist of DNA sequences from 1,000 species representing all major groups of
weevils, obtained via an approach called anchored phylogenomics. This will be
one of the first applications of this new method for gathering phylogenomic data
in insects.

Curculionidae contains >51,000 named species and is one of the largest families
of animals on Earth. Because of their intimate and often highly specialized
interactions with plants and fungi, Curculionidae are among the most significant
pests of agriculture and forestry worldwide, and some of the most abundant
insects on Earth. This project will clarify the interrelationships of all major
groups of weevils for the first time. The resulting family trees will be used to
test long-standing hypotheses about weevil relationships and evolution, and will
contribute to resolving the taxonomic problems that both pervade the internal
higher classification of weevils and impede research on economically and
ecologically important weevil species.