* 1355202
* IOS: RUI: Investigation of the Role of a Receptor Protein Tyrosine Phosphatase in Synaptic Partner Recognition
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2014,01/31/2019
* Miri VanHoven, San Jose State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Evan Balaban
* 01/31/2019
* USD 420,000.00

In the last century, a large number of neural circuits in the brain and
throughout the body have been described. These neural circuits mediate such
critical functions as perception and behavior. However, we understand much less
about the genes involved in building these circuits. This project will use a
unique fluorescent marker to visualize synaptic contacts between specific
neurons in live nematodes, allowing us to advance our understanding of neural
circuit formation by investigating the role of a conserved cell surface
molecule. The broader impact of this project is to encourage students to develop
critical thinking skills through the use of the scientific process. Toward that
goal, the project will include direct participation of undergraduate and
Master's-level researchers; mentorship of a community college professor in
genetics research during the summer; and development of modules for a new
course, which will include data generated by this research project. In addition,
the PI has and will continue to actively seek to increase participation of
underrepresented minorities and women in science through these activities.

Much is known about early steps in neural circuit formation, including the
migration of neuronal cell bodies and axons to the correct regions of the body.
Much less is known about how neurons recognize the correct partners from the
many potential partners they may encounter in a target region. This project will
utilize the trans-synaptic split-GFP based marker, NLG-1 GRASP
(Neuroligin-1-mediated GFP Reconstitution Across Synaptic Partners), to
visualize synaptic contacts between individual neurons of interest in live
animals. NLG-1 GRASP, together with a circuit-specific behavioral assay to
assess synaptic function, will be used to characterize the novel role of a
conserved receptor protein tyrosine phosphatase (RPTP) in synaptic partner
recognition. Further work will determine which domains are required for RPTP
function. Finally, genes that function with this RPTP will be identified and
studied, with the goal of elucidating a new synaptic partner recognition
pathway. The primary intellectual merit of this research is advancing our
understanding of the mechanisms that underlie the specificity of neural circuit
formation.