* 1355970
* Dynamical and Material Connectivity Across Continental Shelves
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/2014,01/31/2018
* James McWilliams, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 01/31/2018
* USD 631,905.00

Inside the surf zone, the water is typically well mixed because wave action
dominates dynamics and creates strong turbulence. Further offshore on the
continental shelf, the water is stratified by density and circulation is
primarily driven by wind and by pressure gradients. These two regimes are
typically studied separately because of the drastic differences in the dynamics
and scales of variability. However, exchange processes at the Surf-Shelf
Transition Zone (SSTZ) are critical for a number of important concerns ranging
from larval transport to pollution. This study will develop and use modeling
approaches that handle both sets of dynamics and scales gracefully and lead to a
better understanding of this important transition zone.

The primary hypotheses are (1) the SSTZ has high intrinsic variability beyond
the wind-, tide- and wave-forced flows; (2) surf eddies and submesoscale shelf
eddies have intermittent strong interactions; and (3) the eddies play a dominant
role in setting the rates of material transport across and along bathymetric
gradients, as well as vertically through the pycnocline. This research program
is a necessary precursor to addressing the many important fluxes of
biogeochemical, ecological, pollutant, and sedimentary fluxes within the SSTZ.
The approach is to use a multiply-nested circulation model (Regional Oceanic
Modeling System, ROMS) that includes the wave-averaged Stokes drift vortex force
and material advection and wave-augmented mixing processes, coupled to a surface
gravity wave model that includes Doppler-shift refraction by the current. It
will be used for a set of idealized SSTZ process studies to assess the competing
influences of bathymetric shape; stratification; surface waves; prevailing
alongshore currents and their instability; surf eddies; shelf eddies and
coastally-trapped waves; tides; and storm-water inflows. In addition, realistic
ROMS simulations, with full physics and aggressive down-scale grid nesting, will
be made for extensive periods at several SSTZ sites in Southern California, and
existing measurements will provide model validation tests. Realistic SSTZ
modeling and validation studies will be extended to other sites through unpaid
collaborations with Japanese and Santa Barbara colleagues.

Intellectual Merit : Both surf eddies and submesoscale shelf eddies are
relatively unexplored phenomena, and the proposed comprehensive theoretical and
computational examination of their nature, dynamics, and material transport
effects in the SSTZ will lead to new phenomenological discoveries, future field
experiments for validation, and reassessments of the material fluxes in this
front-line human-ocean interface.

Broader Impacts : The nearshore region is the primary intersection of human
activities with the ocean, and progress in understanding and modeling its
behavior for currents, pollutants, ecosystems, inundation, and beach morphology
will empower better management and protection. The knowledge gained will be
disseminated through professional and public lectures and publications; by
consultation with National Weather Service beach safety forecasters and Orange
County, CA, wastewater managers; and by inclusion into the undergraduate and
graduate ocean curriculum at UCLA. It will provide research training for a
minority STEM graduate student. Its research collaborations will strengthen both
an international scientific cooperation with Japan and the physical
oceanographic underpinnings of the Long Term Ecological Research program on the
giant kelp forest ecosystem in the Santa Barbara Channel.