* 1355087
* Regulation of epithelial barrier formation in Drosophila
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2014,04/30/2019
* Edward Blumenthal, Marquette University
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 04/30/2019
* USD 420,958.00

The ability to maintain an internal environment that is separated and distinct
from the external environment is fundamental to the survival of all organisms.
This function is performed in animals by epithelial tissues, which form or
synthesize barriers that are essential for structural integrity, defense against
infection, and internal homeostasis. In insects and other invertebrates,
epithelia perform their barrier function in part by synthesizing extracellular
structures such as the cuticle, eggshell, and peritrophic matrix: durable,
cross-linked matrices composed of protein, chitin, lipid, and other small
molecules. This award will support research into a novel genetic pathway that is
critical to the formation of epithelial barriers in the fruit fly Drosophila
melanogaster. The specific conservation of drd among insects strongly suggests
that the results of the planned studies will be of broad interest to insect
biologists and could be relevant in controlling insect-borne disease and
developing novel insect control strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The gene drop-
dead (drd) encodes an integral membrane protein and has traditionally been
considered a neurodegeneration gene, due to the short adult lifespan and
profound neurodegeneration displayed by drd mutant flies. However, data indicate
a defect in the development of multiple epithelial barrier structures in drd
mutants. The central hypothesis of this proposal is that drd is required for the
formation or stabilization of extracellular epithelial barrier structures. The
proposed experiments will use histologic, genetic, and biochemical approaches to
characterize the pathways by which the drd gene product regulates barrier
formation. Because insect barrier synthesis is not well understood and because
drd was not previously recognized as essential to this process, these
experiments will break new ground in our understanding of basic epithelial
biology. The award will support training for 9 undergraduates, including at
least three members of underrepresented minority (URM) groups recruited in
collaboration with the Educational Opportunity Program at Marquette University.
Research results will be disseminated through peer-reviewed publications and at
regional or national scientific meetings. Any fly stocks that are of widespread
interest will be donated to the Bloomington stock center
(http://flystocks.bio.indiana.edu/) for maintenance and distribution.