* 1355816
* Multiscale Transport in Expanding Biopolymers During Extrusion: Modeling and Experimental Verification
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2014
* Pawan Takhar, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Ruey-Hung Chen
* 07/31/2014
* USD 101,982.00

CBET-0756762&lt;br/&gt;Takhar&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A large number of products in
food, feed, plastics and biomedical industries are formed by extrusion of
starch, which involves forcing it at a high temperature and pressure through a
narrow die. Upon exiting the die, the starch expands due to sudden drop in
pressure. The expansion causes changes in structural, mechanical and textural
characteristics of starch. Controlling the final product characteristics during
expansion is a tedious task because of the involvement of multiscale heat and
fluid (liquid and vapor) transport processes interacting with the surrounding
biopolymeric matrix from micro to macroscale. [Intellectual Merit] In the
proposed research, a three-scale predictive modeling tool will be developed
using the hybrid mixture theory of porous media. Three-scale laws of
conservation of mass, momentum and energy will be used and the second law of
thermodynamics will be exploited to develop multiscale fluid and heat transport
equations coupled with thermomechanics of expansion. The developed equations
will be used for predicting the liquid and vapor transport and thermomechanical
changes in the starch matrix during expansion. The solid phase will be modeled
as viscoelastic and the liquid phase will be modeled as viscous. The effect of
glass transition, which plays a key role in expansion of starches and end-
product characteristics, will be investigated. The mathematical model will be
solved using numerical simulations. The required experimental parameters are
expected to be the liquid and vapor permeabilities, glass transition behavior,
thermal diffusivity and viscoelastic properties. Some of these parameters will
be obtained from the literature and the remaining will be measured
experimentally. Surface temperature and thermal gradients in the starch exiting
the die will be recorded using hyperdermic thermocouples. Heat transfer will be
accounted by developing a three-scale generalized Laplace equation. Various
stages of expansion will be recorded with a digital camcorder. Structural and
textural characteristics of expanded starch foam will be measured using porosity
measurements, scanning electron microscopy and mechanical testing. The computer
program will be made general so that it could also be used for other biopolymers
after using different properties. [Broader Impact] The project will train two
doctoral students and one undergraduate student. Efforts will be made to recruit
these students from women and/or minority groups. A lab exercise will be
included in senior/graduate level courses taught by PIs, in which the students
will play with the developed computer program with basic understanding of the
underlying equations and compare the results with the experimental observations.
The lab exercise will be simplified and repeated for minority freshmen, high
school students, and women interested in engineering during their visit to Texas
Tech and University of Nebraska under various programs in place at these
Universities. The project will allow including a new component to Texas Tech's
Mentor Tech program designed for minority students. The research outcomes will
be disseminated to the scientific community and biopolymer industry through
conference presentations and peer-reviewed publications. [Potentially
Transformative Nature] The study will contribute significantly for the efficient
production of foods, biodegradable plastics and numerous other products for
medical and biotechnological applications by extrusion. It will aid the
researchers and engineers in these diverse fields to develop novel starch based
products using knowledge gained from the computer based predictive tool. This
will allow saving time, effort, energy and raw materials due to efficient design
and operation of the starch expansion process.