* 1355196
* REU Site: Combining Career Preparation with Environmental Research in Chemistry, Physics and Materials Science at the University of Oregon
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2018
* Geraldine Richmond, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 06/30/2018
* USD 250,000.00

This award from the Division of Chemistry (CHE) at the National Science
Foundation supports a Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Site led by
Professor Geraldine Richmond at the University of Oregon. This Research
Experience for Undergraduates in Chemistry and Physics program combines a
cutting edge interdisciplinary research experience with career building and
mentoring activities that provide a robust research experience for the
undergraduate participants. The experience will also involve professional skills
training workshops to help the students in future career success in the next
stage of their education, and/or their first full employment opportunity. This
REU Program has been continually funded by the National Science Foundation since
1987 and has a 90% success rate of REU students going on to graduate school,
over 60% have been women, URM groups comprise almost 40%. The 10 students per
year selected for participation in this program over the summer months will be
primarily from undergraduate institutions that do not have the resources to
provide an undergraduate experience. The faculty involved with this
interdisciplinary REU program come from chemistry, physics and materials science
fields, allowing students to cross the traditional academic boundaries and
giving them an advantage that is not often found in other programs. The projects
are carefully selected to match with the students' interests. Examples of the
projects include using environmentally friendly organic and inorganic synthetic
methods to develop "greener" materials through organic/inorganic synthetic
methods, the preparation and characterization of solar energy materials, the
study of the assembly of chemical dispersants at oil-water interfaces, the
examination of toxic metal remediation through supramolecular chemistry and the
basics of computer modeling methods. The broader impact of this project is that
it will increase the numbers and potential career success of many science
undergraduate students from underrepresented groups and those from predominately
undergraduate institutions by giving them the opportunity to do hands-on
research, to learn to use state-of-the-art instrumentation and exposure to
research at a research university.