* 1355034
* Cannabinoid Signaling in Olfactory Glomeruli
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2021
* Thomas Heinbockel, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Sridhar Raghavachari
* 08/31/2021
* USD 399,117.00

The aim of this research is to investigate the role of brain-produced
cannabinoids in how the world is perceived at the level of the first stage of
sensory processing in the brain. Sensory system processing is critical for an
animal's ability to function within an environment. Humans and higher predator
species are primarily visually oriented but most lower animal species utilize
olfaction, the sense of smell, as a primary sensory modality. The ability of the
olfactory system to detect a huge array of chemicals across wide concentration
ranges is a formidable brain processing task. Processing of odor information in
the first brain relay station, the main olfactory bulb, is a major contributor
to this striking dynamic range. The experiments will increase the understanding
of olfactory processing with potential impact on other sensory systems with
similar circuit building mechanisms. Understanding the action of cannabinoids on
sensory processing will shed light on how cannabinoids lead to altered sensory
perception. Rather than purely higher order hallucinogenic action, the
experiments will reveal how primary sensory modulation is influenced by
cannabinoids and may lead to a better understanding of drug seeking behaviors.
This research will provide an educational and outreach experience of exceptional
quality for students at all levels with an emphasis on minority students at
Howard University. The aim is to broaden the participation of students with
minority background to expand the population of minority students as the science
workforce of the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Marijuana (cannabis) is the most
commonly abused illicit drug in the USA. Its bioactive ingredient, THC,
activates cannabinoid receptors in the brain in the same manner as brain-
produced endogenous cannabinoids (endocannabinoids). The endocannabinoid system
is an important intrinsic neuromodulatory system during normal brain function
and impacts sensory processing. The experiments take advantage of the highly
laminar organization of the main olfactory bulb and a growing body of knowledge
on how this system processes sensory information. This research will investigate
the role of endocannabinoids in the olfactory system using whole-cell patch-
clamp recordings, signal imaging and various mouse strains. Specifically, the
research will explore how endocannabinoids regulate the activity of output
neuron sensitivity and dynamic range in the main olfactory bulb. This will be
followed by studying if environmental conditions such as a change in olfactory
input engage endogenously produced cannabinoids. The researchers will exploit
olfactory deprivation to identify the cellular, membrane, pharmacologic and
network properties of endocannabinoid-modulated neural processing in the main
olfactory bulb.