* 1355210
* Resource Allocation in Starvation-Selected Drosophila
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2019
* Allen Gibbs, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Continuing Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 04/30/2019
* USD 507,831.00

This project will investigate the effects of selection for starvation resistance
on ovarian development in the fruitfly, Drosophila melanogaster. Starvation-
resistant flies have survived many generations of laboratory-controlled
starvation conditions, and are substantially larger than control flies, which
were continuously supplied with food. The starvation-selected flies carry much
more stored fat, in expanded fat tissues. In most insects, a larger female lays
more eggs and therefore has more surviving offspring than a smaller female. This
is not the case when large females from the starvation-resistant populations are
compared to the smaller females from the control populations. This unexpected
situation provides an excellent opportunity to look carefully at the tradeoffs
between survival and reproduction, a central theme to the understanding of life
cycles for many different species, and how they change during evolution. Because
Drosophila melanogaster is a very well studied model organism, this project will
use techniques of molecular genetics and cell biology to understand the
underlying physiology and genetic changes that have occurred during starvation
selection. The experimental toolkit available for Drosophila will be used to
test the function of specific candidate genes in ovarian development and fat
body function. This project will provide a unique learning environment for
graduate students and undergraduates at a minority serving institution, by their
participation in an integrated series of scientific activities that link
evolutionary biology to developmental biology through an organismal perspective.
Outreach activities will include production of videos displayed in the lobby of
a highly-trafficked research building on the UNLV campus, participation in the
NSF Radio 360 program, and development of a Science Café for the general public.
The latter will consist of a monthly series of short presentations and
discussions led by scientists and engineers from the UNLV community, government
and industry.