* 1355629
* EAGER: Dense micro array of atomic spin-polarized detectors for subfemtatesla level resolution of magnetic field gradient
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Andrei Shkel, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Mona Zaghloul
* 08/31/2016
* USD 300,000.00

Objective: The goal of this project is to explore an approach for detection of
magnetic field, both magnitude and directionality, with less than 1 femto-Tesla
resolution and better than 10 microns location error in a 10 square centimeter
form-factor. The proposed approach is based on implementation of a densely
packed array of glass micro-scale cells. Each cell is a hundred micron in
diameter and is filled with isotopes of rubidium and buffer gasses. Cells are
equally spaced on the same substrate, a hundred micron apart, and each cell acts
as a highly precise all-optical atomic magnetometer.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: This project will investigate the precession of nuclear spins as the
measure of magnetic field magnitude and spatial distribution of magnetometers as
a measure of magnetic field gradient. Contrary to SQUIDs, the proposed atomic
magnetic gradiometer will not require cryogenic cooling and will not have any
moving mechanical parts. A high-performance magnetometry can potentially be
achieved by measuring the apparent change of the precession frequency of nuclear
spins in response to a weak magnetic field.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Highly
sensitive, small size, and easy to use magnetometers can have transformative
effects in various areas including biology and biomedical engineering, geology
and mineral/oil exploration, as well as surveillance and defense (through
wall/underground imaging and target tracking). Small size and convenience
offered by the proposed microscale devices can lead to significant advances in
brain mapping and enable development of advanced portable brain monitoring
devices. The accessibility of such technology for personal use in the form
factor of hand-held devices will revolutionize, for example, personal health-
care, on-demand diagnostic, and self-monitoring of chronic deceases. The most
noticeable contribution will be in the area of biomagnetism, that is, the
detection of the weak magnetic fields produced by the human brain, heart, and
other organs. This research will advance scientific knowledge in the areas of
innovative sensing concepts, signal processing, and system-level implementation.
This highly multidisciplinary project will also provide unique educational
experience for undergraduate and graduate (including underrepresented) students
through team collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;