* 1355683
* Improving Programming and Financial Literacy Education Using Student-Developed Games
* EDU,DUE
* 08/05/2013,05/31/2015
* Hongwei Zhu, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 05/31/2015
* USD 86,618.00

Every year, two thirds of college seniors (about 1.8 million) in the US graduate
with significant debts. Most of them are poorly equipped to manage their debts
and make intelligent financial decisions. These same students are avid
technology users and game players who learn effectively using computer games.
Building on early successes of incorporating financial applications in
programming courses and engaging students in game development, this project
connects computing and personal finance education by teaching programming and
financial literacy simultaneously using student-developed computer games.
Programming courses are uniquely positioned to offer opportunities to help
students improve financial literacy, but there have been no integrated courses
to exploit this synergy. This project infuses financial literacy into seven
computing courses and engages students to develop financial literacy games. A
knowledge-sharing portal creates a collaborative learning environment for
students to learn programming and financial literacy concurrently. Previous
research shows that students' interests and learning outcomes improve when they
address issues closely related to their daily lives. This project builds on the
premise that games will be engaging and financial literacy is relevant to
students' lives. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This cross-disciplinary project involves
faculty members from three colleges. Each year, it directly impacts more than
550 undergraduate students in computing and other disciplines as well as over 60
high school students. The financial literacy games will be publicly accessible
and the learning materials will be contributed to online course repositories for
other institutions to use. Through journal publications, conference
presentations, workshop demonstrations, and summer game development camps, the
results of the project reach a broad audience that includes college instructors,
K-12 teachers, researchers, practitioners, and students.