* 1355190
* Collaborative: RUI: ARTS: Revisionary systematics of herbivorous sea slugs: identifying traits that promote diversification and morphological novelty.
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2014,09/30/2018
* Patrick Krug, California State L A University Auxiliary Services Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 09/30/2018
* USD 352,032.00

Sea slugs of the genus Sacoglossa exhibit an array of unusual traits that may
confer an evolutionary advantage. For example, some sea slugs species are
'solar-powered,' like plants, as they can harvest and sequester functional
photosynthetic chloroplasts after feeding on algae. This kleptoplastic ability,
along with other traits, may account for their high diversification rate and
species richness. In this project, the researchers will combine genetic,
anatomic, ecological and developmental studies to describe over 100 new species
of sea slugs. Modeling will then identify factors that determine how species are
distributed, and what makes some sacoglossans more ecologically and evolutionary
diverse than others. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Marine biodiversity is increasingly
threatened by human activities and climate change, yet actual biodiversity
richness is not reflected by the scientific names in many groups, hampering
conservation efforts. Anti-cancer compounds have been isolated from some
saccoglossans, and others have served as biological control agents for invasive
algae, but taxonomic uncertainty has limited the potential for their use in
these roles. To fully leverage an improved understanding of this biodiversity
resource, this project will train the next generation of taxonomists at two
Hispanic and predominantly undergraduate serving institutions and during an
international workshop, develop web-based resources, and provide new insight
into factors that govern diversity in marine ecosystems.