* 1355410
* Modeling the Vegetation of the Past
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2013,09/30/2015
* Simon Brewer, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 09/30/2015
* USD 158,632.00

This project tests a Dynamic Global Vegetation Model (DGVM) using
reconstructions of past vegetation for North America and Europe based on
paleoecological data. The DGVM is driven by past climate simulated with a fully
coupled General Circulation Model (GCM), and the paleovegetation reconstructions
are taken from continental scale databases of pollen and plant macrofossil data
covering North America and Europe. Past vegetation can also serve as a direct
proxy of past climate variations, and recent studies have shown that a DGVM can
be used to help interpret the climate signal from pollen and macrofossil data.
These techniques allow assessment of the role of non-climatic factors (e.g.,
CO2) in driving vegetation change. The project is able to identify and reduce
bias in climate reconstructions for glacial periods, where these factors are
significantly different from the present day.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DGVMs are one
of the primary tools used to understand how terrestrial ecosystems might be
affected by future climate change under various scenarios. By studying past
periods, the predictive ability of these models in simulating ecosystem change
under conditions that are different from the present day can be tested. The
results from the model runs can also be used to investigate past changes in
services provided by terrestrial ecosystems, including carbon sequestration and
water resources. The work will also provide an assessment of the GCM used to
simulate past climates, which will help to understand its skill in simulating
future global change. The project results will include a consistent dataset of
environmental conditions covering the last 21000 years. This will be made
publicly available at the end of the project, and will provide a context for
archeological studies and studies of land-surface history and processes. These
results will be transformed into publicly accessible online teaching resources.