* 1355203
* Neuroendocrine mechanisms mediating differences in reproductive timing.
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Deborah Lutterschmidt, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 07/31/2019
* USD 545,000.00

All animals use external cues from the environment throughout their lives to
determine what behavior to do and not do. Ultimately it is the brain that must
?decide? what the cues mean and how to respond. The goal of this study is to
understand how the brain integrates different types of environmental cues to
regulate the timing of reproduction. The researcher will accomplish this using
the garter snake to examine how temperature cues stimulate neural regulation of
reproductive activity. Garter snakes are especially robust for these studies
because its reproductive behavior is regulated exclusively by temperature.
Furthermore, Thamnophis sirtalis has one of the most extensive ranges of any
ectotherm in North America, from Canada to the Gulf of Mexico and from east to
west coasts. Thus, garter snakes provide a relatively simple yet powerful
framework for understanding why (and how) animals respond differently to the
same environmental cues. Specifically this project uses a combination of
molecular, physiological, and behavioral approaches to determine if temperature-
induced reproductive behavior is regulated by changes in thyroid hormone
metabolism within the brain. This project will broaden the participation of
undergraduates in science education and outreach, with the ultimate goal of
improving the scientific aptitude of the community. Additional broad impacts
include training diverse students in integrative research, critical thinking,
and community engagement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will test the
hypothesis that temperature-induced activation of the reproductive axis is
controlled by neural thyroid hormone metabolism. The research will use a
combination of in situ hybridization, immunohistochemistry, pharmacological
manipulation, radioimmunoassay, and behavioral testing to accomplish the
following specific aims: (1) Identify the influence of low temperature dormancy
on the neuroendocrine GnRH system; (2) Determine if temperature-induced
reproductive behavior is regulated by changes in thyroid hormone metabolism
within the hypothalamus; and (3) Determine if variation in the temperature
sensitivity of reproductive regulatory mechanisms mediates differences in
reproductive timing. This project will advance the understanding of the
neurobiology underlying plasticity in reproductive timing, and should reveal
mechanisms that may be impacted by climate change. Data from this project will
be used to generate inquiry-based learning modules for the classroom, thereby
providing students with hands-on practice in experimental design, data analysis
and data interpretation.