* 1355713
* Hydrogels and Oligonucleotide Hybridizaton for Sustained Delivery of Small Molecule Therapeutics
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Christine Schmidt, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 07/31/2017
* USD 410,672.00

1159774/ Schmidt&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded jointly by the
Biotechnology, Biochemical and Biomass Engineering Program in the Division of
Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental and Transport Systems and the
Biomaterials Program in the Division of Materials Research at the National
Science Foundation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite tremendous research efforts,
there are no therapies in the clinic for repair after injury to the spinal cord,
in part due to inhibitory proteoglycans that play a key role in limiting
regeneration in the central nervous system. Thus, the specific goal of the
proposed project is to develop therapeutic systems to decrease the negative
effects of inhibitory proteoglycans and to subsequently enhance axon
regeneration. To this end, novel aptamer antagonists against protein tyrosine
phosphatase (PTP)-sigma, a receptor for inhibitory proteoglycans in the adult
mammalian CNS, will be developed. Another exciting component of the proposed
research involves a novel use of biomaterials for sustained delivery of
biomolecules in animals. Sustained release of aptamers to the injured spinal
cord will be achieved via microparticle/hydrogel composites using
oligonucleotide hybridization. This project is truly interdisciplinary research
at the forefront of tissue engineering, nucleic acid biotechnology and
neuroscience.