* 1355354
* I-Corps:  Assessing the Commercial Potential of an Advanced Oxide Material for Infrared Detection
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,06/30/2014
* Jiwei Lu, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 06/30/2014
* USD 50,000.00

This I-Corps project will further develop an advanced oxide material for
infrared detection. Two technologies dominate the current market for infrared
detectors and thermal imagers: semiconductor-based detectors convert incident
infrared light into charge carriers, which are then amplified into an electronic
signal, while microbolometers directly transform heat into an electronic signal
using a heat-sensitive property (usually resistance). In both cases, the read-
out circuitry for today's infrared array detectors simply does not scale beyond
1-2 megapixels due to the need for multiple electric leads at each array
element. The research team has developed a technology that uses a different
approach to infrared detection. Rather than converting infrared photons to
carriers, the technology exploits changes in optical properties of an oxide thin
film that occur as the material undergoes a thermally-induced phase transition.
Conceptually, the technology would enable the replacement of the complicated and
expensive read-out circuitry on the back of today's thermal imagers with what is
essentially a filter that allows a cheap high-resolution camera to "see"
infrared/thermal radiation. The team believes this technology will enable
resolutions of over 10 megapixels, more than 10x the state-of-the-art for
commercially available uncooled thermal imagers.

The current market for infrared sensors is poised for dramatic growth in areas
such as surveillance, transportation, industrial monitoring, energy, and health
care. Existing thermal imaging devices are based on unwieldy technologies that
have difficulty scaling to resolutions greater than 1-2 megapixels. Thus,
advances in imaging processing that have been enabled by high-resolution optical
devices cannot be applied to the infrared realm. The technology will address the
unmet need of high-resolution thermal imaging by exploiting technological
innovations in optical materials to develop a revolutionary product: a high-
sensitivity, ultra-high-resolution infrared detector. The team believes the
technology could have impact in a wide set of application areas, thus the
potential for broad economic and societal impact is high.