* 1355009
* Mating regulates stem cell division frequency in testes of Drosophila melanogaster
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2019
* Cordula Schulz, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Klein
* 03/31/2019
* USD 575,998.00

The question how adult stem cells maintain themselves and how they produce
specialized cells to replenish tissues is fairly well understood for several
model tissues. However, how the activity of stem cells is regulated within the
adult is only poorly understood. Specifically, whether stem cells can increase
the production of specialized cells in situations of demand has not been
addressed in any model organism yet.

In male fruitflies, each germline stem cell division ultimately leads to the
development of exactly 64 mature gametes. Preliminary studies show that demand
for more gametes, induced by mating experiments, leads to a response: an
increase in the frequency at which male germ line stem cells divide. The
investigator plans to use genetic and molecular techniques for identifying the
communication pathway regulating the response. It is expected that the studies
reveal which tissues are involved in the communication, which biochemical
molecules mediate the communication, and which target genes are activated within
the germ line stem cells in reponse to demand. The outcome of the proposed
research will have broad impacts on our understanding how environmental events
utilize biochemical pathways to feed back on stem cells and thereby on the
vitality and activity of specific tissues in the adult body.

The proposed research has a strong teaching and outreach component. Fruitflies
are an excellent model organims widely used in research and education. Graduate
students, undergraduate students, high school students, and K-12 teachers
participating in the proposed research will be trained both intellectually and
technically. The investigator has trained many female and minority students and
intends to continue recruiting students from programs supporting students from
underrepresented groups.