* 1355916
* Quantifying the Relative Roles of Progressive Land Use Change, Irrigation, and Remote Forcing in Southern Great Plains Precipitation Variability
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Qi Hu, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 06/30/2018
* USD 446,697.00

This project seeks to understand the causes of precipitation variability in the
US Southern Great Plains (SGP), roughly equivalent to the region covered by
Nebraska, Missouri, Oklahoma, Arkansas, Texas, and Louisiana. This area is among
the most drought-prone in the US, with substantial economic impacts including
the severe consequences of the Dust Bowl and losses in the tens of billions of
dollars in 2011 and 2012. Precipitation anomalies in the region, including
rainfall deficits contributing to droughts, are generally attributed to changes
in the large-scale atmospheric circulation brought about by fluctuations in sea
surface temperature (SST). But local land surface conditions can act to
intensify remotely-forced precipitation variability through several mechanisms.
For instance, lack of rainfall leads to dry soil and reduced evaporation, which
reduces the moisture source available for precipitation and causes further
rainfall reduction. Also, warm dry conditions due to drought promote ridging in
the mid-troposphere, which can further reduce precipitation as rain-bearing
systems move around the ridge. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project considers the
extent to which the strength of such land surface feedbacks to precipitation has
changed due to changes in land use and land cover change in the SGP. Since the
1950s much of the native vegetation in the region has been replaced by
agricultural crops, and this substitution can affect the exchange of water
between the surface and the overlying atmosphere. Native plants have much deeper
roots and can access soil moisture from reserves unavailable to crops, thereby
maintaining the source of moisture for precipitation even during dry spells.
Also, crops tend to green up earlier than native plants, so that plant uptake
and transpiration of soil moisture begins earlier on agricultural land. The
enhanced early season moisture demand could increase drought susceptibility
later in the growing season. A further consideration is the widespread adoption
of irrigation, which can increase evaporation and transpiration during wet years
but is not reliable during exceptional drought years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research is conducted through a suite of simulations performed using the Weather
Research and Forecasting (WRF) model, a regional model which is configured with
high resolution over the great plains. WRF is coupled to the Community Land
Model (CLM), in which land cover can be specified to represent past and present
vegetation cover and varying levels of irrigation can be represented.
Experiments consist largely of WRF-CLM simulations over the period of the North
American Regional Reanalysis (NARR, 1979-2012), first with land cover held fixed
to the modern land cover attributes (from the National Land Cover Database).
This simulation is then compared with additional simulations in which land cover
is configured to represent conditions during the pre-settlement era (based on
data representing the year 1850), intermediate land use conditions around 1920,
and the dust bowl. Simulations for modern and intermediate land use are
performed with and without irrigation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work has
societal broader impacts due to the economic and societal impact of drought in
the SGP. The findings of the research may be useful to the agricultural sector
and SGP water managers as they make decisions regarding changes in land and
water use in the region. In addition to publications in peer-reviewed research
journals, results of the research will be distributed through the University of
Nebraska-Lincoln Extension and other extension services across the SGP. In
addition the project will support and train two graduate student, thereby
providing for the future workforce in this research area.