* 1355061
* IOS: Sensory networks and collective information processing in animal groups
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Iain Couzin, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 07/31/2019
* USD 325,000.00

Effective information transfer is essential for the coordination of behavior
within intracellular, neuronal, social and economic networks. In many animal
groups, such as schooling fish and flocking birds, the degree and speed of
inter-individual communication allows individual group members to make fast and
accurate collective decisions across a range of contexts, and often under
conditions of considerable risk. Such emergent properties are highly desirable
for many technological applications, including coordinated search, control and
response by groups of robotic agents. This project will employ an experimental
approach to map the relationship between sensory input and behavioral output in
schooling fish under a range of ecologically-relevant scenarios in order to
identify the dynamic networks of sensory communication in groups and relate this
to the elementary movement behaviors exhibited by individuals, and the highly
effective collective behavior exhibited by groups. These results will directly
inform collective robotics. Undergraduate and graduate students will be involved
in all aspects of this project and it will be integrated into classes taught by
Dr. Couzin. Dr. Couzin will also develop a summer learning module on collective
behavior for high-achieving, low-income high school students from local school
districts in NJ through the Princeton University Preparatory Program (PUPP) and
continue to work with National Geographic digital media and National Geographic
Learning to engage the public &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
reveal the complex structure of the networks underlying information flow in
groups. The predominant paradigm has been to consider individuals in such groups
as "self-propelled particles", which interact with neighbors through "social
forces". A major limitation of this approach is that it neither considers the
sensory information available to animals when making movement decisions within
groups nor considers that organisms make decisions in a state - dependent and
probabilistic fashion. To map the relationship between visual and lateral line
sensory input and resulting behavior in schooling fish under ecologically-
relevant conditions that vary in timescale and type of response, the PI will use
custom software to determine the location, body posture and eye positions of
members of the group to reconstruct the visual fields of all individuals in
groups of up to several hundred fish. Bayesian, unsupervised learning and
inverse methodologies will be used to identify the visual information used by
individuals and to map the structure of social response facilitated by the
lateral line. Multi-scale network analysis will be used to identify important
properties and meaningful motifs/substructures within groups, and to relate
these to collective capabilities. Information transfer across sensory networks
will be quantified using information theoretic techniques under the different
ecological contexts. These data will inform subsequent manipulations of
individual behavior to test predictions about how groups filter noise and
respond to extraneous cues. From this work the researchers will create new
models of collective animal behavior.