* 1355496
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: An Anthropological Analysis of Food Security, Biodiversity, and Plant Biotechnology in an Emergent Market
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2014,11/30/2015
* Vincent Crapanzano, CUNY Graduate School University Center
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 11/30/2015
* USD 18,881.00

CUNY Graduate Center doctoral candidate Priya Chandrasekaran, supervised by Dr.
Vincent Crapanzano, will research the dynamics of national food security
strategies that rely on biotechnology for intensified agricultural production.
Such policies have historically had to contend on the one hand with anxieties
about declining crop yields and population growth, and on the other hand with
concerns about a reliance on plant biotechnology and rainfed grains impacts
ecology and biodiversity. The research will be situated in the Himalayan
foothills and on millet production. This is an ideal area for investigating such
issues, given the enormous size of the population served by this agricultural
sector, the government's 20-year engagement with economic liberalization
practices, and the recent implementation of a national food security strategy
designed to address the problems of expanding population growth and stifled
grain yields through the intensification of high yield millet production. The
researcher will analyze the symbolic, cultural, and political economic
dimensions of competing projects for food security/sovereignty, biodiversity,
and development and how they impact and utilize local knowledge systems. Her
findings will contribute an ethnographic, case-based understanding to regional,
national, and transnational debates about food, agriculture, and rural
livelihoods.

The project will involve ethnographic fieldwork across local, national, and
transnational settings. To gather data on the agroecological labor and
livelihoods of farmers, the researcher will spend 9 months in two villages of
differing altitude in Uttarakhand, north India where she will use participatory
methods and conduct participant observation and interviews. To understand how
rainfed grains and farmers are implicated in concerns about food
security/sovereignty, biodiversity, and plant biotechnology, the researcher will
conduct interviews, archival research, and participant observation for 4 months
at key research, governing, corporate, and NGO sites in India and Switzerland.
She will also analyze news articles, publications, and media sources, and attend
conferences and events concerning food, agriculture, hill ecologies, and women
in development.

This research will contribute to growing anthropological debates about food
security, sustainability in agriculture, and the anthropology of development. In
particular, the project will help scientists better understand the social and
ecological implications of plant biotechnology, food governance practices, and
biodiversity.

This project will contribute to training a graduate student in multi-sited
ethnographic methods. The research will expand knowledge of global food systems;
conflicts over the right to food, nature, and property; and the process of
economic development.