* 1355292
* Collaborative Research:  Phylogenomics of palaeognathous birds and the genomic basis of flightlessness
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2014,05/31/2018
* Julia Clarke, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Dena Smith
* 05/31/2018
* USD 357,302.00

Flightless birds, including species such as the ostrich and emu (which belong to
a bird group called the ratites), present a remarkable series of traits related
to their loss of flight. Such traits include shortening of the bones in the
forelimbs, extreme increases or decreases in body size, loss of the breast bone
to which the flight muscles attach, and many other modifications. Moreover,
recent research suggests that this suite of traits may have evolved multiple
times within the ratites. By studying the evolution of such traits and
determining which regions of the genome likely underlie them, we can gain
insight into how evolution occurs in parallel in the natural world. We can also
gain a better understanding of the types of genes that change when morphological
traits are lost in the way they have been in the ratites. Ultimately, a better
understanding of links between genotype and phenotype can help us understand the
genetic basis for variation in the human phenotype. We expect that some human
malformations, including the loss of digits, bones in the hand or forelimbs,
likely occur because of mutations in some of the same genes or regulatory
regions that underlie flightlessness in the ratites. In fact, one way we will
attempt to find the genetic underpinnings of flightlessness in the ratites is to
examine the evolution of ratite genes that are known from previous studies to
cause similar morphologies in laboratory mice. Thus this study will forge
important links between mutations known in developmental studies in the lab and
natural variations we find in distantly related vertebrates.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use comparisons among the genomes of
flightless birds, in combination with morphological studies and phylogenetic
methods, to understand the genomic basis of traits contributing to
flightlessness. Complete sequencing of the genomes of 8 ratite species will
yield a robust genealogical tree of ratites and their relationships to the
tinamous, a volant bird group closely related to, and likely embedded within,
the ratites. This tree will in turn permit identification of conserved
regulatory regions occurring near genes known to contribute to limb loss in
better-studied models for development, such as chickens and mice. The timing of
origin and loss of regulatory regions, such as conserved regions occurring
outside of genes, will reveal important clues about the regulatory and genetic
basis of trait evolution in flightless birds. Previous phylogenetic work in the
strongly suggests that flight likely was lost independently in multiple lineages
of ratites in parallel. This scenario will add statistical power to our
inferences of the genomic underpinnings of morphological change, because it will
allow us to identify genomic regions that have changed independently in
flightless lineages. Thus, this project will also elucidate how convergent
morphological changes occur at the genomic level. These themes will be used in a
number of outreach activities, including an educational video, classroom
teaching of undergraduates, and graduate student outreach in local K-12 schools.