* 1355778
* FDA SIR: Risk Assessment Techniques for Apps & Devices within Interoperable Medical Frameworks
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2015
* John Hatcliff, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 09/30/2015
* USD 80,000.00

1343468 Hatcliff, John M.

In previous NSF FDA SIR work, the PIs conducted an initial investigation of how
the SAE standard Architecture and Analysis Design Language (AADL) might be
applied to specify the architecture, interfaces, and high-level behavior of ICE
apps and ICE devices. Recently, researchers at the Software Engineering
Institute (SEI) developed an Error Modeling framework (EMv2) for AADL that
enables modeling of different types of faults, fault behavior of individual
system components, modeling of fault propagation affecting related components,
as well as specification of fault tolerance strategies expected in the system
architectures. In this proposal the PIs will demonstrate how AADL EMv2 can
provide semi-automated support of safety / risk analysis activities that can be
used in regulatory submissions for ICE apps and devices. They will (a) define
libraries of common errors / faults relevant to MDCF apps and devices, (b)
illustrate how information needed to drive common risk analysis techniques such
as Fault Tree Analysis, Failure Modes, Effects, and Criticality Analysis, and
Functional Hazard Analysis can be formalized in terms of AADL architecture
annotated with Error Model information, (c) illustrate the benefits of formal
interface specifications of device behavior and conditions under which errors
may arise, be propagated, and be mitigated and (d) develop recommendations for
how the artifacts resulting from these activities might be presented as part of
regulatory submissions for ICE components.