* 1355518
* Mechanisms of convergent flower color evolution above and below the species level
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2013,04/30/2019
* Stacey Smith, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 04/30/2019
* USD 481,757.00

This project will investigate whether evolution may be predictable at the
genetic level. Phenotypic convergence, the appearance of similar forms in
independent lineages, provides an opportunity for testing the predictability of
genetic evolution. Similar phenotypes in different lineages are often due to
similar changes at the genetic level. One possible explanation is that, among
the possible mechanisms for producing a particular phenotype, some genetic
changes are preferentially fixed during the course of evolution. This project
will test the preferential fixation hypothesis by comparing the genetic basis of
white flower coloration above and below the species level. The central
hypothesis predicts that a wide array of mutations will be responsible for
white-flowered mutants within pigmented species, but only a subset of these
classes of mutations will be fixed during transitions from pigmented to white
flowers at the species level. Using a group of species in the potato family, the
PI will apply a combination of genetic, developmental, and biochemical
approaches to test this prediction. The results will lead to a better
understanding of the relationship between microevolutionary and
macroevolutionary change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These studies will have
important implications for manipulating and enhancing pigment content in
horticultural varieties and crops. Plant pigments, including those targeted by
this project, are strong antioxidants that contribute to the positive health
benefits of a diet rich in fruits and vegetables. Thus, a better understanding
of how genetic changes affect pigment biosynthesis adds to the potential for
improving crop species. The project encompasses local outreach activities for
K-12 students in order to promote interest in plant evolutionary biology and to
spread awareness about the importance of plant pigments in human health.