* 1355899
* ABI Innovation: A Probabilistic Approach to Meta-Analysis of Biological Network Interface
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Su-In Lee, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 06/30/2018
* USD 689,713.00

Genes do not work alone, but rather in an intricate network of interactions to
regulate fundamental cellular processes. Biological network inference has become
a key analysis tool in modern biology allowing scientists to gain a better
understanding of basic biology such as evolution, molecular biology and
genetics. Network inference algorithms have played significant roles in
understanding gene networks from molecular data but are limited by the large
search space of the network structure and data insufficient for statistical
power. The goal of this project is to develop a computational framework, based
on statistical and machine learning techniques, for effectively integrating
multiple heterogeneous data sets to infer gene networks accurately. The
developed methods will be applied to answer important biological questions, such
as: How is a gene network reshaped in the evolutionary process of yeast
species?, How do genes and proteins interact with one another underlying a
certain biological trait?, and Which genes contain causative sequence variations
that influence important biological traits?. This project is expected to
dramatically increase the applicability of network learning algorithms in a wide
variety of applications, especially those with smaller sample sizes. The
implementation of the developed methods will be made publicly available, which
can help many other biologists to study gene networks in their research
problems. This project is interdisciplinary in nature and has significant
emphasis on interdisciplinary education, through project courses and outreach
activities. It will have a long-term effect of advancing the field of biology,
by increasing the number of students in computer science inspired to solve
biology problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Network inference from high-throughput
biological data has significantly contributed to advancing our knowledge of
molecular biology, evolution and genetics. Its major drawback is that, due to
the exponentially large search space of the network structure, the sample size
provided by a single dataset is often not large enough to obtain valid inference
results. However, simply appending datasets from different studies is unlikely
to be successful, because in many cases they contain different variables and
overly heterogeneous samples. The goal of this project is to develop an
innovative probabilistic approach to integrate multiple heterogeneous datasets,
by jointly modeling one or more networks represented by these datasets. This
project addresses the problem of how to integrate datasets containing
heterogeneous samples (Aim 1), different sets of variables (Aim 2) and
fundamentally different types of measurements (Aim 3). The developed algorithms
in each Aim is applied to the following problems: 1) learning a network model
that can represents evolutionary rewiring of gene regulatory networks across
Saccharomyces species; 2) learning a joint latent network model that can infer a
very high-dimensional network underlying biofilm phenotypes in S. cerevisiae by
combining datasets with different variables; and 3) identifying hubs in the gene
network from many expression datasets, to guide quantitative trait loci studies
in S. cerevisiae.