* 1355955
* EAGER: Kinetic Computing Sculpture: A functional parallel cluster of Raspberry Pi computers that inspire computational thinking
* CSE,OAC
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Kirk Cameron, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Sushil K Prasad
* 08/31/2017
* USD 181,395.00

Without parallel computational thinking most modern scientific discoveries are
impracticable (e.g. sequencing the human genome, confirmation of the Higgs
boson). To recruit young minds at an early age (K-12) into the workforce and to
encourage governments to continue investment, the parallel computing field must
constantly educate non-computer scientists of all ages as to the importance of
innovation that uncovers and exploits new capabilities. Unfortunately, educating
laypersons as to the importance of parallel systems that grow exponentially
large and complicated and change rapidly is wrought with challenges.
Distribution of data and computation across a large parallel or distributed
system is carried out by complex computer software. While the algorithms and
systems used may have taken years to perfect, other than binary data packets and
logs, and perhaps the hum of a system, there is little indication of the
transmissions. Only a deeply informed individual is privy to the significance of
the events taking place on a large parallel or distributed
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this interdisciplinary project, the PIs are
exploring radically different ways to improve our ability to educate non-
computer scientists (e.g. students, K-12, funding decision makers, elderly,
etc.) as to the importance and sophistication of parallel computation. This
transformative approach combines the creation of a parallel or distributed
system with mechanisms to visualize computation. With the combined expertise of
computer scientists, educators, and artists, the PIs are designing and building
a cluster of Raspberry Pi computers in a visually compelling, kinetic sculpture.
Each computing device is attached to a compact servo mechanism fitted to an
aluminum structure that will react to both computation and data movement of
parallel programs running on the system. The PIs are designing displays that
allow visitors to the sculpture to interactively select and view the effects of
various parallel computation choices that computer and computational scientists
make every day. The effectiveness of the proposed approach will be evaluated.