* 1355101
* The Future of MOOCs and Turbocharged Technologies in STEM Education
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2014
* Ping Hsu, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Don Millard
* 09/30/2014
* USD 49,987.00

PROJECT DESCRIPTION &lt;br/&gt;This project is conducting a conference to
explore the use of Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs) and how to more
effectively integrate them into STEM teaching. The overall goal is to explore
the future of MOOCs and other disruptive educational technologies in higher
education. The conference is allowing STEM educators to share and gain knowledge
regarding the advantages and limitations of MOOC implementations to help
propagate a better understanding of how MOOCs function and where they best fit
into the STEM learning community. It is bringing faculty and technology
facilitators together to provide an opportunity for open strategic discussions
of disruptive learning technologies and creating an environment that enables and
encourages open dialog between university faculty/staff/administrators,
representatives from MOOC providers, and other constituents interested in online
STEM learning. The project is helping to further an understanding of: 1) the
role of MOOCs in modern academia in STEM fields, 2) how to best introduce them
into a university setting, and 3) how they may supplement traditional and
flipped STEM classrooms. The project is generating a publication that summarizes
the discussions, findings and follow-on activities that result from the
conference workshop.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER SIGNIFICANCE
&lt;br/&gt;Information garnered throughout the conference is being shared with
participants who, in turn, are taking the knowledge back to their institutions
and utilizing it to improve teaching and learning in their STEM fields. The
project is helping further the understanding of how to best implement MOOCs into
traditional academia, in a way that complements institutions, while also
providing maximum benefit to students. The knowledge and ability to provide
lower cost, high quality STEM education promises not only to produce immediate
benefits, but also to help produce more effective, far-reaching, and long-term
national STEM results. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The participants are sharing the
conference information with others in their particular STEM fields and at their
institutions, resulting in widespread propagation of MOOC-oriented discussions
and knowledge. All conference results and documents are being published on a
conference website, along with a summation of the overall findings. Participants
are publishing papers and contributing articles as a result of the conference;
producing valuable information regarding MOOCs that is being used nationwide on
an anytime/anywhere basis by anyone who is interested in exploring new STEM
learning environments.