* 1355771
* A Vision for Change: Using ATP (Ambassador Training Program) to Energize Departmental Transformation
* BIO,EF
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2016
* David Marcey, Longwood University
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 09/30/2016
* USD 287,186.00

An award has been made to Longwood University to organize a training program for
Ambassadors to support implementation of recommendations made in the Vision and
Change report as part of the mission of the Partnership for Undergraduate Life
Sciences Education (PULSE). In September 2012, the PULSE partners (HHMI,
NIH/NIGMS, and NSF) appointed 40 Vision and Change Leadership Fellows to
stimulate transformative changes in undergraduate biology education. Fellows
were selected from two-year colleges, liberal arts colleges, comprehensive
universities, and research universities. The Fellows organized into four working
groups with the overarching goal of helping life science departments transform
their programs in a national effort to increase student learning of core
concepts, increase student retention in the sciences, and prepare all students
to be more curious and scientifically literate citizens. The Vision and Change
report contained a number of recommendations for improving undergraduate life
sciences education but did not furnish an implementation strategy. The current
award is to train a cadre of Fellows to become external facilitators or
"Ambassadors" who will visit college and university life science departments and
assist with local planning and implementation. With support from a consultant,
the Spreading the PULSE Working Group will develop, test, and implement an
Ambassador training program. The initial cohort of Ambassadors will later train
other Fellows and, as the program grows, members of the broader community to
become Ambassadors. The V&C Rubrics, developed by the Taking the PULSE Working
Group, will serve as a blueprint for departments to evaluate their own progress
in adopting the V&C recommendations. In conjunction with this self-assessment, a
department may request an on-campus visit by a team of trained Ambassadors to
facilitate rich dialog about educational transformation and provide guidance and
resources for moving forward with the implementation of reforms. The Spreading
the PULSE Working Group is building a "Toolkit" of resources that departments
can use when reforming their approach to teaching undergraduates. From its
beginning, assessment of this organizational change effort will be a central
consideration, and the dissemination of the methods and outcomes of that
assessment will serve other projects seeking to foster department-level
innovation and transformation. Information about the Rubrics, Ambassadors
program, and Toolkit is available on the www.pulsecommunity.org website; all
items will be updated as more departments field-test them over the next one to
two years. Results from the PULSE project will be posted on the pulsecommunity
website and shared with the life sciences community at professional meetings.
This project is being funded jointly by the Directorate for Biological Sciences
and the Directorate of Education and Human Resources, Division of Undergraduate
Education as part of their efforts to support Vision and Change in Undergraduate
Biology Education.