* 1355718
* I-Corps:  Electroactive Scaffold for Cartilage Repair
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Treena Livingston, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 05/31/2014
* USD 50,000.00

Joint repair continues to be a significant challenge that demands the use of
innovative materials that can provide both mechanical and biological function.
The I-Corps team is developing an electroactive scaffold that mimics both
structural and electrical properties of the native extracellular matrix present
during early cartilage development to repair articular cartilage defects. This
biomaterial represents a different, cost-effective and simple approach to
tapping into a biological mechanism for repairing damaged articular cartilage.
The joint environment appears to be rich in mesenchymal progenitor cells, which
have been isolated from the bone marrow, periosteum, synovial membrane and
fluid, and from the articular cartilage itself. A regenerative approach for
joint tissue repair could be the recruitment of resident endogenous stem cells
to the site of damage and activation of the repair process. The electroactive
scaffold is a synthetic material, piezoelectric polyvinylidine fluoride
copolymer (FDA-approved material for suture applications), that is processed
into a fibrous form. Fibrous scaffolds have a beneficial structural feature for
cell adhesion and growth due to their large surface-to-volume and high aspect
ratios resulting from the smallness of the diameter. The piezoelectric scaffold
will actively restore function by recruiting endogenous stem cells to the site
of damage, and provide the appropriate electromechanical cues to promote their
growth and transformation into cartilage cells. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
significant number of Americans suffer from cartilage damage resulting from
injury, or wear and tear. These lesions can significantly affect a person's
quality of life and can progress to osteoarthritis (OA) that is disabling.
Cartilage damage and related OA conditions are extremely costly. Surgical
procedures to restore articular cartilage have not been able to restore a normal
cartilaginous surface and have suffered from poor integration with the
surrounding normal articular cartilage. Consequently, a growing unmet need
exists for early reconstruction of cartilage damage with a reliable treatment
method that facilitates the preservation of function as well as reduces the need
for future reconstruction or total joint replacements. The piezeoelectric
material will be developed into a medical device for use in large cartilage
defects. The commercialization potential is strong as it does not require the
sale and delivery of cells as part of the device and cost effective relative to
other devices in development by industry.