* 1355001
* RAPID:  Archaeological Investigations at Surtshellir Cave
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2015
* Kevin Smith, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 08/31/2015
* USD 45,503.00

Caves were places of fear for the Norse colonies of the North Atlantic, and were
generally avoided. One notable exception is Surtshellir cave, one of the largest
lava-tube caves in the world. Surtshellir's folklore, mythology, and historic
narratives span nearly a millennium and are dominated by images of terror, the
overthrow of the world's order, and the restoration of balance through the
actions of Viking Age chieftains and community leaders. These stories begin with
the being for whom the cave is named - Surtur, an elemental force of fire and
lava whom the Norse believed was present at the world's creation and would
destroy the world, men, and the gods at the end of time. Surtshellir has an
impressive archaeological record, documented by the PI on expeditions into
Surtshellir in 2001 and, with NSF EAGER funding, in 2012: a ship-shaped Viking
Age structure 300 meters back into the cave, massive numbers of dismembered,
intentionally fragmented animal bones, and a dry-stone wall 30 ft (10 m) long
and 15ft (4.5 m) high built to block entrance or exit from the cave.

Two explanations have been put forward for Surtshellir's unique archaeological
record: that these are the residues of outlaws' occupations or that it
represents a site at which sacrifices were made to calm Surt or to prevent the
end of the world. Assessing these alternatives will lead to major refinements of
our understanding of Viking Age religion and the social and sacral organization
that the North Atlantic Norse colonizers brought with them, or developed on
arriving in Iceland. Central to understanding this site are thin floor deposits
within the Viking Age structure that the PI?s team identified in 2012. However,
the site is now a tourist destination and these fragile Viking Age deposits and
their artifacts are being damaged and looted by unregulated access to the cave
and ultimately endangered by the ongoing collapse of the cave's roof, both of
which limit the time when the site can be documented.

The PI will use RAPID funding in August 2013 to excavate these endangered
cultural deposits before another tourist season can damage them further or the
roof's collapse seals them forever. The project's international collaborators -
the National Museum of Iceland and theIcelandic Antiquities Office view this
research as a necessary first step towards protecting the site's archaeological
resources, interpreting it for present and future generations, and enabling
sustainable and justifiable tourist access to the cave.