* 1355391
* I-Corps for Learning (I-Corps L):  A Pilot Initiative to Propagate &amp; Scale Educational Innovations TRAINING ACTIVITIES
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2013,06/30/2015
* Ashok Agrawal, American Society For Engineering Education
* Standard Grant
* Gul Kremer
* 06/30/2015
* USD 271,465.00

PARTICIPATING ORGANIZATIONS: &lt;br/&gt;American Society for Engineering
Education (ASEE)&lt;br/&gt;National Collegiate Inventors and Innovators Alliance
(NCIIA)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PROJECT DESCRIPTION &lt;br/&gt;The American Society
for Engineering Education (ASEE) is hosting and providing logistical support for
the delivery of the activities related to a TUES Central Resource Project
Workshop. This project, "I-Corps for Learning (I-Corps-L): A Pilot Initiative to
Propagate &amp; Scale Educational Innovations", includes: an introductory 3-day
training session, five online sessions, and a closing 2-day training session. In
concert with the proposed workshop, ASEE is identifying and securing suitable
meeting space for the 40-50 expected meeting participants (ten teams of 3-4
persons, the 5-person teaching team, and up to 3 I-Corps-L
consultants).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This pilot initiative is employing an agile,
action-based curriculum to improve the teaching and success rates of students in
key engineering and computer science courses. The project is helping to
accelerate the process of bringing effective educational innovations to scale.
Particular emphasis is placed on "gateway" courses that are typically taught in
the first two years of STEM degree programs and form core pre-requisites to
subsequent coursework. These gateway courses are typically taught as a
foundation for STEM degree programs and include: calculus, physics, and
introductory engineering and computer science
offerings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ASEE team members are collaborating with the
Instructional Team (led by Dr. Karl Smith) to provide textbooks to the workshop
participants and develop the resources that are needed for the face-to-face
workshops. The goal of the workshop is to leverage I-Corps expertise of
traversing the chasm between research/development and commercial implementation
of new products. Corollary to the I-Corps initiative, this project is designed
to fill the gap between educational innovations of proven effectiveness in
enhancing student learning and widespread use of such practices.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has the potential for achieving the elusive
goal of educational transformation through propagation and scale of educational
innovations. Workshop participants leave the program with an expanded set of
skills and knowledge that provide them with the tools necessary to evaluate and
translate their research into applications that can benefit society. This effort
has a strong potential for having a transformative impact on STEM
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER SIGNIFICANCE &lt;br/&gt;The principal
objective of the project is to foster an entrepreneurial mindset within the
education community, so the community has the potential to impact the way
education innovations are designed and implemented. The project is encouraging
other educational enthusiasts to leverage the outcomes of this pilot to create a
broad scale impact. The results of the project can be implemented at many
institutions, having the potential to significantly improve the retention and
graduation of STEM students nationwide. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ASEE is conducting
an evaluation to assess individual sessions within the face-to-face meetings
(e.g., topic appropriateness, quality of topic coverage, knowledge of
presenters, engagement level), overall elements of the workshop (e.g., workshop
design, planning and execution), and handling of meeting logistics (e.g.,
travel, hotel accommodations, meeting rooms, meals). In addition, the
participants are answering formative questions throughout the effort to provide
adequate time for informal interactions, ensure success in meeting workshop
objectives, and properly accommodate all aspects associated with the virtual
sessions. Ultimately, this pilot project is developing a model for conducting
training workshops that result in widespread use of educational innovations that
improve STEM learning.