* 1355668
* Along-isopycnal Salinity Variability: Deducing Horizontal Stirring in the Global Ocean from Argo
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2014,02/28/2019
* Sylvia Cole, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 02/28/2019
* USD 452,074.00

Overview: Diffusion along density surfaces is a significant factor in
determining the distribution of tracers in the ocean. Diffusion is determined by
the eddy field with eddies of all sizes horizontally stirring tracers in the
ocean. One signature of horizontal stirring is fluctuations of temperature and
salinity along density surfaces, a frequently observed but under-analyzed
tracer. Recent fine-scale observations show that these along-density surfaces
fluctuations are organized into regions of elevated fluctuations that are
temporally persistent over several years; this suggests that the underlying
processes of eddy stirring are geographically varied and steady in time with
much to be gained by investigating temperature and salinity fluctuations on a
global scale. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merits: This project will use
Argo float data to investigate salinity variability along density surfaces known
as isopycnals. Mixing length and horizontal diffusivity estimates, as well as an
assessment of the processes that influence horizontal diffusion, will be made
from the surface to 1000-2000 m depth in the near-global ocean. The variance of
along-isopycnal salinity fluctuations will be compared to horizontal and
vertical gradients of mean salinity. A correlation with horizontal gradients in
particular indicates that the gradient available to stir is of primary
importance and a mixing length framework is a valid approach for estimating
horizontal diffusivity. In the near global ocean, horizontal diffusivity will be
estimated using mixing length and velocity fluctuations derived from satellite
altimetry, as well as additional estimates in the mixed layer, western boundary
current regions, and near 1000 m depth (the later utilizing velocity
fluctuations derived from Argo float drifts). Geographic variations in along-
isopycnal salinity fluctuations, mixing length, and horizontal diffusivity will
show how horizontal stirring varies with location, depth, mean velocity and
tracer fields, and other relevant features of the
ocean.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Results from this study will
directly improve our understanding of tracer distributions, ocean circulation,
and earth's climate. The depth structure of mixing length and horizontal
diffusivity will provide an observational estimate of how eddy stirring changes
with depth that can be compared against modeling studies, and used to improve
their parameterization in numerical models. An assessment of which processes
predominantly control the evolution of tracer fluctuations will allow the
methods of other current or future horizontal diffusivity estimates to be
evaluated, especially estimates below the ocean surface. The methods utilized in
this study can be generalized in the future to include additional information
from other tracers. This award will also support an early career oceanographer
in her first independent research project.