* 1355913
* Collaborative Research: Management and Implementation of the US Arctic GEOTRACES Study
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2018
* Gregory Cutter, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 12/31/2018
* USD 690,314.00

In pursuit of its goal "to identify processes and quantify fluxes that control
the distributions of key trace elements and isotopes in the ocean, and to
establish the sensitivity of these distributions to changing environmental
conditions", in 2015 the International GEOTRACES Program will embark on several
years of research in the Arctic Ocean. In a region where climate warming and
general environmental change are occurring at amazing speed, research such as
this is important for understanding the current state of Arctic Ocean
geochemistry and for developing predictive capability as the regional ecosystem
continues to warm and influence global oceanic and climatic conditions. The
three investigators funded on this award, will manage a large team of
U.S.scientists who will compete through the regular NSF proposal process to
contribute their own unique expertise in marine trace metal, isotopic, and
carbon cycle geochemistry to the U.S. effort. The three managers will be
responsible for arranging and overseeing at-sea technical services such as
hydrographic measurements, nutrient analyses, and around-the-clock management of
on-deck sampling activites upon which all participants depend, and for
organizing all pre- and post-cruise technical support and scientific meetings.
The management team will also lead educational outreach activities for the
general public in Nome and Barrow, Alaska, to explain the significance of the
study to these communities and to learn from residents' insights on observed
changes in the marine system. The project itself will provide for the support
and training of a number of pre-doctoral students and post-doctoral researchers.
Inasmuch as the Arctic Ocean is an epicenter of global climate change, findings
of this study are expected to advance present capability to forecast changes in
regional and globlal ecosystem and climate system
functioning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As the United States' contribution to the
International GEOTRACES Arctic Ocean initiative, this project will be part of an
ongoing multi-national effort to further scientific knowledge about trace
elements and isotopes in the world ocean. This U.S. expedition will focus on the
western Arctic Ocean in the boreal summer of 2015. The scientific team will
consist of the management team funded through this award plus a team of
scientists from U.S. academic institutions who will have successfully competed
for and received NSF funds for specific science projects in time to participate
in the final stages of cruise planning. The cruise track segments will include
the Bering Strait, Chukchi shelf, and the deep Canada Basin. Several stations
will be designated as so-called super stations for intense study of atmospheric
aerosols, sea ice, and sediment chemistry as well as water-column processes. In
total, the set of coordinated international expeditions will involve the
deployment of ice-capable research ships from 6 nations (US, Canada, Germany,
Sweden, UK, and Russia) across different parts of the Arctic Ocean, and
application of state-of-the-art methods to unravel the complex dynamics of trace
metals and isotopes that are important as oceanographic and biogeochemical
tracers in the sea.