* 1355693
* Spatial Analyses of Segregation Trends
* SBE,SES
* 06/15/2014,05/31/2017
* John Logan, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Toby Parcel
* 05/31/2017
* USD 246,486.00

SES-1355693 John Logan Brown University

This project analyzes the changes in residential patterns of European immigrants
and African American migrants in ten major Northern and Midwestern cities. For
the case of African Americans it will provide new detailed information about the
trend toward increasing residential segregation that accompanied the Great
Migration from the South. To what extent did individual socioeconomic mobility
translate into living in more integrated or higher status neighborhoods for
blacks? What was the response of whites to growing black population in certain
parts of the city? For the case of European immigrants, the study will shed
light on the process of spatial assimilation that has been documented in prior
research. Were the earlier arriving groups (Germans, Irish, and British) still
segregated from native whites when new groups began to arrive in large numbers?
How long did it take for Italians, Russians, and Scandinavians to begin moving
out of dense ethnic neighborhoods, and what were the characteristics of people
who left or stayed within them? How did these processes vary across cities,
based on group size or composition?

The selection of cities for this study makes it possible to analyze both the
spatial assimilation and segregation of immigrants, who were highly concentrated
in these cities,. With respect to both kinds of minorities the study breaks new
ground by studying segregation at a much higher spatial resolution (the
enumeration district and census tract) than the ward (which is the basis for
most research on segregation). A key comparison is between black-white
segregation (believed to be moderate until after 1920 when blacks began moving
in large numbers in the Great Migration) and immigrant residential enclaves that
are viewed as transitory in nature. This project will offer a critical test of
these conclusions and provide some of the first analyses of trends in class
segregation. In addition, it will answer questions about the processes of
residential change based on spatial analyses of neighborhoods. First, which
group members lived in co-ethnic neighborhoods and how did social mobility and
acculturation translate into living outside of these enclaves for different
groups, in different kinds of cities, and in different decades)? For this
purpose neighborhoods will be defined as combinations of enumeration districts
based on spatial dependence in social composition. Neighborhoods, then, are
expected to vary in location and scale over time as settlement patterns evolve.
Second, how do neighborhoods change, particularly in relation to the
invasion/succession process that has been documented for much of the 20th
Century ? the phenomenon of native (3+ generation) whites deserting
neighborhoods when blacks and immigrants began arriving. Were there tipping
points of racial and ethnic change in the early decades of the century, and if
so did the extent of white native flight differ according to the race and
ethnicity of new arrivals?

Broader Impacts

These questions will be addressed using 100% samples of residents of ten cities
in each decade, aggregated to small areas (enumeration districts) and mapped
within a GIS system. The data and maps will be made available for public use via
a web-based map browser and also shared through direct download. This study is
highly relevant to major contemporary social concerns. Black ghettoization
anchored patterns of racial segregation, and processes of immigrant spatial
assimilation have been renewed as Hispanics and Asians have become the fastest
growing population groups in the nation. It is essential to understand the
precedents for these processes in order to have realistic expectations about the
current situation.