* 1355572
* Potentials for the Shale Gas Monetization: Lessons Learned from the Qatari Experience with Natural Gas
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2014
* Kenneth Hall, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Rorrer
* 09/30/2014
* USD 33,185.00

PI: El-Halwagi, Mahmoud M. &lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
1355572&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Texas Engineering Experiment
Station&lt;br/&gt;Title: Potentials for the Shale Gas Monetization: Lessons
Learned from the Qatari Experience with Natural Gas&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For
biofuel production to become commercially feasible, shale gas is emerging as a
bridge component to smoothen the intermittency of biomass supply and for
upgrading to a drop-in fuel. Rather than "re-inventing the wheel" it would be
beneficial to learn from the economies that have already been monetizing
methane. The goal of this project is to organize a workshop on The Potentials of
Shale Gas Monetization considering the Lessons Learned from Qatar's Natural Gas
Monetization, in March 2014. The PIs will organize this workshop in Texas to
cover research, educational, and best-practice topics in shale gas processing
and monetization and will extract key lessons from the experiences in Qatar
(which has the world?s largest gas-to-liquid (GTL) facilities and is the world?s
largest exporter of liquefied natural gas (LNG)). The workshop will be targeted
at participants from academic and industrial organizations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Methane gas-to-liquid fuel conversion has been expensive
due to the low energy efficiency and need for a high capital investment. This
workshop will focus on highlighting Qatar?s experience in monetizing its natural
gas resources while providing techno-economic assessments of the physical
treatment (Liquefied Natural Gas or LNG) and the chemical conversion (Gas-to-
Liquid or GTL). The workshop will include world's leading experts from industry
and academia, and will offer a wide range of perspectives which will enhance the
intellectual merit of research being carried out by the US researchers. The
workshop will identify the future educational and research opportunities,
directions, and emerging trends in natural gas monetization. Attending US
graduate student and other researchers will benefit from the workshop, as they
could ?leap frog? their technology development. It will also highlight the
importance of collaboration between academia and industry to advance exiting
commercial technologies and to participate in development of new generations.
The workshop will include discussion between academia and industry in
institutionalizing undergraduate and graduate-level curriculum changes to
provide the energy market with skilled engineers and scientists in the field of
natural gas processing.