* 1355643
* STAR Chemistry Program:  Inspiring, Educating, and Preparing Young Science Talent for an American Ready Workforce
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2021
* Neil Walsh, Walsh University
* Continuing Grant
* Kalyn Owens
* 07/31/2021
* USD 593,753.00

Through the STAR Chemistry project the Principle Investigator team at Walsh
University seeks to increase the number of economically disadvantaged students
who complete a degree in chemistry. A cohort model is used to facilitate the
retention of 16 participants. The students participate in activities that
strengthen their self-identity as chemists, live and take classes within a
learning community, and build relationships with faculty mentors. A unique
feature of the project is the innovative chemistry curriculum which integrates
the American Chemical Society (ACS) criteria for a certified degree with
coursework and internships in order to produce graduates with expertise that
fits the workforce needs of the region. In order to attract eligible candidates
and broaden participation, a comprehensive recruitment plan that involves
interacting with students at high schools, on-campus science workshops, and
local and regional science fairs, using student database providers, and hiring a
project-specific Admissions Advisor is initiated.

The S-STEM scholars take part in a redesigned program of study that addresses
the existing gap in skills needed by chemistry graduates and those identified by
local industry. The new curriculum includes a Career Seminar Series, a Chemistry
Internship, and courses in Materials, Environmental, and Fuels and Energy
Chemistry. The academic program is augmented with evidence-based strategies for
retention such as a learning community grounded in five essential topics
(community building, diversity, integration, active-learning, and
reflection/assessment), motivational faculty mentoring, a first year seminar,
and optional undergraduate research. Data generated through assessment and
evaluation support the rationale that employment-motivated students who are
provided with an applied curriculum and co-curricular assistance become self-
identified chemists who are retained through graduation. Formative and summative
evaluation focuses on whether or not the program objectives of (a) identifying
and recruiting a diverse population of academically talented students, (b)
increasing chemistry major retention, and (c) preparing students with skill to
enter the workforce are met. Assessment of students' progress and preparedness
is performed. The students are surveyed about the effectiveness of the project's
components. Dissemination of the project results provides a model for using an
industry-centered curriculum as a means of retaining STEM students. The project
team presents their work through annual meetings of the ACS and the Ohio Academy
of Sciences and through publication of evaluation findings in journals such as
the Journal of Chemical Education and the Journal of College Science Teaching.
Project deliverables include results of summative evaluation and the course
materials developed for the new curriculum.