* 1355238
* AON: Transitioning the Bering Sea Sub-Network to the Community-based Observation Netwrok for Adapatation and Security
* GEO,OPP
* 03/01/2014,02/28/2017
* Lilian Alessa, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* William Ambrose
* 02/28/2017
* USD 549,997.00

Over the past two years members of the Bering Sea Sub-Network (BSSN,
http://www.bssn.net/) have provided input and achieved consensus that BSSN needs
to evolve toward a broader range of data for the purpose of developing more
tangible metrics and guidelines for adaptation. This evolution, entitled the
Community Observing Network for Adaptation and Security (CONAS) requires a
bridging period of approximately one year. The team will build off of the key
elements of the BSSN data collection mechanisms but expand these to include more
variables of interest and place them in a sociocultural context so that arctic
communities and governments will be able to anticipate, plan and respond to
these changes through the development of Adaptive Capacity Indices (ACIs). A
transition year will allow the research team and participating Bering Sea
communities to plan for full implementation of CONAS. CONAS will examine
environmental change and response within a framework of social-ecological system
(SES) science. In an SES context, the ability of a community to respond
successfully to change is referred to as its adaptive capacity. Adaptive
capacity reflects both the sensitivity of community members to their environment
and their ability to institute changes that make them less vulnerable to a given
perturbation (Ensor and Berger 2009, Wilkinson 2012). This framing of adaptive
responses is critical to better enable communities to identify the spectrum of
tradeoffs and their consequences during unusual or rapid change (Alessa et al
2008).