* 1355717
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Role of Sovereignty and Indigeneity Assertions in Claims to Oil Extraction Rights
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2014,11/30/2015
* James Blair, CUNY Graduate School University Center
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 11/30/2015
* USD 17,703.00

CUNY Graduate Center doctoral candidate James J. A. Blair, supervised by Dr.
Marc Edelman, will examine how individuals identified with colonial settlement
assert claims of sovereignty and indigeneity to gain rights to extractable
resources. The research is focused on the British settlers of the Falkland
Islands (in Spanish, Malvinas), as they construct themselves as natives through
new forms of governance over hydrocarbon resources. Thirty years after the 1982
military conflict that cemented the South Atlantic archipelago's British status,
oil has been discovered near the islands, and Argentina has renewed its
sovereignty claim. In response, the island's settlers held a referendum on self-
determination in which 99.8% voted to remain British. The project thus
investigates how the settlers are trying to reinvent themselves as a group of
community-based natural resource managers, through a narrative of indigeneity
that selectively reinforces Western norms and values.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
understand how the settlers are reinventing themselves as natives with resource
rights, Blair will analyze: (1) how debates around infrastructure are forming
new local power relations; (2) how the dispute orients experts assessing
environmental impact; and (3) how the islanders are packaging self-determination
as a sign of stability for oil partners. Research incorporates observations and
interviews with planners, scientists, townspeople, migrants and shepherds in the
islands, as well as defected islanders and protest groups in Argentina. Through
analysis of colonial reports, Blair will consider how the present moment is an
outcome of historical relations of resource governance.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is uniquely positioned to apply an
anthropological approach to geopolitics. Sovereignty disputes over mineral-rich
island chains have intensified during the global energy crisis. But many of
these territories are uninhabited. Blair will contribute an anthropological
perspective to emerging geopolitical constellations, by conducting research on a
disputed archipelago that is populated. Committed to the aims of public
anthropology, Blair has an on-going affiliation with The Economist, which will
allow him to disseminate his findings widely.