* 1355241
* Task Force to Re-envision the Network Office of the Long-term Ecological Research Program
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2014
* Aaron Ellison, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 08/31/2014
* USD 114,009.00

The Long-Term Ecological Research (LTER) program currently supports a network
office that coordinates research across the 26 active research sites, helps to
organize an annual Science Council meeting along with a tri-annual All
Scientists meeting, maintains and develops data maintenance programs to ensure
data availability, and provides training sessions for information management and
data collection. This project will support an effort to gather broad input on
potential future roles and responsibilities of a network office, survey other
research networks that do or do not have coordinating offices, and suggest
potential structures for a future network office. The three goals of the project
are appropriate and sufficiently inclusive to ensure that diverse opinions and
options are considered. An inclusive list of scientific societies, research
communities, and federal agencies will be consulted for input. The task force
assembled to implement these activities consists of leading researchers in the
fields of ecology, environmental biology, and ecosystem science. The results
obtained will contribute significantly to the development of a network office
that ensures communication and cooperation across the diverse LTER community.

The broader impacts of this project are strong. The task force itself is
comprised of 4 female researchers and one male, tipping the normal balance of
scientific activities. The diverse activities planned will ensure that a wide
range of ethnic groups is included along with individuals from very different
sorts of institutions. Finally, the current network office has lead
responsibility for a large number of LTER broader impacts, and these will figure
heavily into the task force discussions.