* 1355892
* Modelling the U.S. Market for Higher Education and Evaluating Public Funding Policies: Theory and Estimation
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2014,03/31/2018
* Dennis Epple, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 03/31/2018
* USD 547,822.00

Current issues related to the funding model for higher education bring to the
forefront striking features of this market in the U.S.: the coexistence of
competing public and private sectors; a high degree of differentiation in
college characteristics within and across sectors; and latitude for charging
differential tuition to students based on place of residence, household income,
and academic qualifications. Surprising little research on the interaction
between colleges, public and private, is available to inform the policy debate.
This research provides a model that characterizes the interaction of providers
of higher education and can be used to evaluate alternative public funding
policies.&lt;br/&gt; This research will advance the research frontier in, at
least, three important dimensions. First, the PIs will provide a new framework
that incorporates important features of competition between private and public
universities. The framework will capture differences in objectives between
public and private institutions, differences in resources, and differences in
constraints on tuition and admission policies. Second, the PIs will undertake
empirical testing of their model. They will assemble a new data set on public
and private universities as well as on parental and student choices. They
propose to develop new estimators that can deal with the complex pricing and
sorting patterns generated by their model. Finally, they propose to explore the
policy implications of their work. They will examine changes in state and
federal financial aid policies, and their impact on student attainment and
achievement, as well as access to higher education by disadvantaged groups of
society.&lt;br/&gt; The research develops, estimates, and applies a new
framework for understanding the market for higher education and for studying
education policy issues. This framework significantly advances the state-of-the
art in research providing a detailed analysis of the differences in objectives
and constraints faced by private and public universities. The proposed research
will provide the first estimated model of public-private competition in higher
education and is thus on the frontier of integrating theory, computation, and
estimation. The general-equilibrium approach is particularly important for study
of changes in state and federal policies and the associated changes in admission
and tuition policies.&lt;br/&gt; The research explores important current public
policy issues. Research findings will be disseminated via conferences, seminars,
and research papers to promote broad access to the results. Ph.D. students will
participate in the research and develop related research, thus contributing both
to their training and to the body of knowledge on the subject matter of this
proposal.