* 1355188
* Integrative biology of social cognition -- avpr1a, memory and alternative male tactics
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2017
* Steven Phelps, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 03/31/2017
* USD 368,000.00

In the proposed research, the researchers use a well-studied model, the
monogamous prairie vole, to understand the links between DNA variation, brain
variation, social cognition and natural selection. Although prairie voles are
monogamous, there is substantial variation in how widely males roam and in how
faithful they are to a partner. Social behavior is widely known to influenced by
the hormone vasopressin through actions on its receptor, V1aR; male mate
fidelity is linked to V1aR abundance in specific parts of the brain known as the
retrosplenial cortex (RSC) which is also critical in spatial memory. The
proposal asks how individual differences in genotype, neuronal gene expression
and social cognition interact with evolutionary forces to explain behavioral
diversity. Specifically, the investigators ask whether individual differences in
genotype, V1aR in the retropsplenial cortex and social cognition are maintained
by density-dependent selection. These experiments will determine whether natural
environments promote diversity in the social brain. The proposed work deepens
and extends a research narrative on prairie vole monogamy that is well covered
in textbooks for introductory biology, animal behavior and behavioral
neuroendocrinology courses. The parallel examination of genetics, neurobiology,
memory and fitness would provide a particularly complete picture of how
evolutionary and mechanistic forces interact to shape animal behavior in the
wild. The researchers will augment ongoing outreach activities with the
development of a blog focused on the integrative study of animal behavior, its
mechanisms and their evolution. The blog will enhance training by providing an
opportunity for graduate students to hone communication skills, and by
generating content accessible to a broad audience. It will deepen participation
of under-represented groups by actively recruiting readers and writers through
existing networks of minority scientists; it will facilitate the dissemination
research findings through social media; and it will provide an infrastructure
for the informal exchange of ideas among scientists and society.