* 1355533
* EAGER:   A Multi-decadal Record of Antarctic Benthos:  Image Analysis to Maximize Data Utilization
* GEO,OPP
* 10/01/2013,03/31/2016
* Paul Dayton, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Christian Fritsen
* 03/31/2016
* USD 95,000.00

Antarctic benthic communities are characterized by many species of sponges
(Phylum Porifera), long thought to exhibit extremely slow demographic patterns
of settlement, growth and reproduction. This project will analyze many hundreds
of diver and remotely operated underwater vehicle photographs documenting a
unique, episodic settlement event that occurred between 2000 and 2010 in McMurdo
Sound that challenges this paradigm of slow growth. Artificial structures were
placed on the seafloor between 1967 and 1974 at several sites, but no sponges
were observed to settle on these structures until 2004. By 2010 some 40 species
of sponges had settled and grown to be surprisingly large. Given the paradigm of
slow settlement and growth supported by the long observation period (37 years,
1967-2004), this extraordinary large-scale settlement and rapid growth over just
a 6-year time span is astonishing. This project utilizes image processing
software (ImageJ) to obtain metrics (linear dimensions to estimate size,
frequency, percent cover) for sponges and other fauna visible in the
photographs. It uses R to conduct multidimensional scaling to ordinate community
data and ANOSIM to test for differences of community data among sites and times
and structures. It will also use SIMPER and ranked species abundances to
discriminate species responsible for any differences.

This work focuses on Antarctic sponges, but the observations of massive episodic
recruitment and growth are important to understanding seafloor communities
worldwide. Ecosystems are composed of populations, and populations are
ecologically described by their distribution and abundance. A little appreciated
fact is that sponges often dominate marine communities, but because sponges are
so hard to study, most workers focus on other groups such as corals, kelps, or
bivalves. Because most sponges settle and grow slowly their life history is
virtually unstudied. The assumption of relative stasis of the Antarctic seafloor
community is common, and this project will shatter this paradigm by documenting
a dramatic episodic event. Finally, the project takes advantage of old transects
from the 1960s and 1970s and compares them with extensive 2010 surveys of the
same habitats and sometimes the same intact transect lines, offering a long-term
perspective of community change. The investigators will publish these results in
peer-reviewed journals, give presentations to the general public and will
involve students from local outreach programs, high schools, and undergraduates
at UCSD to help with the analysis.