* 1355554
* Supporting and Sustaining Achievement in Science &amp; Math
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2019
* Patricia Dwyer, Wesley College
* Continuing Grant
* Andrea Johnson
* 08/31/2019
* USD 600,000.00

Wesley College (Wesley) is implementing a project entitled "Supporting and
Sustaining Achievement in Science &amp; Math" which will provide 136
scholarships to recruit and retain diverse, academically talented, and
financially needy students (Cannon Scholars) who can thrive in robust science,
technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) programs. Targeted majors are
biological chemistry, biology, environmental science and mathematics. The
objectives are to: (1) increase the number of students choosing the Wesley STEM
majors by at least 20%; (2) retain at least 75% of the Cannon Scholars in STEM
majors until the senior year; (3) graduate at least 75% of the Cannon Scholars
with BS degrees in STEM areas (who will then then continue on to graduate
schools in a STEM area or enter the scientific or technical workforce); and (4)
upon graduation, at least 60% of Cannon Scholars will enter graduate or
professional programs. Anticipated broader impacts include an increased ability
to seek out, attract, prepare, and graduate financially needy students,
including minorities who are typically underrepresented in STEM fields. Strong
undergraduate research and education collaborations have been established with
Delaware State University (a Historically Black University), the University of
Delaware (the state's flagship institution), and with Delaware's Community
College System. Scholar graduates will pursue STEM professional careers,
preferably in Delaware, or pursue advanced degrees in their fields. Wesley
programs have a record of successful mentoring underrepresented groups; this
project will maintain this productive work and continue to shape and benefit
students, their careers, and their future impacts on
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Cannon Scholar program is truly a
collaborative effort between STEM-faculty and administrators. It is designed
around the best practice of multi-tiered mentoring and is committed to proven
practices that help support and retain students. The proposed program will
create a nurturing environment where participating undergraduates can team up to
solve problems, develop new knowledge and continuously acquire new skills,
thereby increasing success in the early years and increasing the likelihood that
these Scholars will graduate. Wesley will offer scholars one-on-one counseling,
assessment and review sessions for job readiness, interview skills, and résumé
writing. Hence, in addition to financially supporting students, this program
aims to help foster a community that equips students with the skills and
credentials required to move forward toward a thriving STEM career. The proposed
approaches will significantly enhance well-defined institutional retention
initiatives and will substantially increase student success and retention for
STEM students. The program will be assessed and attainment of its objectives
will be evaluated using common rubrics in courses targeting specific learning
outcomes, surveys, student data (e.g. demographics, grade point average, etc.).
Program outcomes will first be implemented throughout the Wesley's STEM programs
and then will be disseminated through journal publications and presentations at
national conferences.