* 1355091
* How do migrating epithelia change direction?
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Laurel Raftery, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Klein
* 08/31/2019
* USD 514,473.00

LAY ABSTRACT:&lt;br/&gt;Animals build and maintain functional organs throughout
their lives. To build an organ, multiple steps occur as the embryo develops,
both to make all the different types of cells needed for that organ, and to
organize these different cells so that they can work together to perform the
organ's function. A common strategy for organizing cells is through coordinated
cellular movements and shape changes. This project aims to understand how each
different kind of cell obtains the information it needs to move into the correct
places and acquire the needed shape. This process requires that cells recognize
each other, assess their current location in the developing tissue, and finally,
use information from their environment and/or in their DNA blueprint to navigate
through the tissue to the location where they are needed. To understand how
cells manage this intricate dance, the investigator will study an example where
cells organize to create an organlike structure that develops into a fruit fly
egg. A series of precise cellular movements is needed to build the eggshell,
which protects the developing embryo. Fly ovaries will be cultured and cell
movements will be imaged through the microscope, using genetic and antibody
assays to identify the specific proteins that cells use to interact with each
other. These studies will be able to distinguish whether the major source of
information for a cell's movements come from an internal program or from
external environmental cues. The proteins and mechanisms identified will expand
the knowledge of the cellular repertoire available to create organized structure
in the many different types of organs observed across animal phyla. This
research will provide essential scientific training for undergraduate and
graduate students at the University of Nevada, Las Vegas. They will acquire
important skills in teamwork, critical thinking, data management,as well as the
needed skills to perform laboratory research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
ABSTRACT:&lt;br/&gt;The experiments of this proposal will examine the mechanisms
by which a migrating sheet of cells can change its direction of migration. The
work will focus on oogenesis of the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster, to take
advantage of sophisticated tools for genetic manipulations and new technologies
for real-time, time-lapse imaging of cellular movements in ovary explants. Based
on previous research, two models for the mechanisms that induce the change in
direction will be contrasted; these models are not mutually exclusive. One model
is that each cell decides independently to change its direction, through an
intrinsic program of regulated gene expression in response to a bone
morphogenetic protein (BMP) morphogen gradient. Experiments will test specific
candidate transcriptional regulators for their requirements in the onset of
specific phases of the new migration. The second model is that the cells respond
to an extrinsic signal that reorients their direction or otherwise changes their
migration behavior. This aspect of the project follows up on published reports
that the BMP response system may use non-transcriptional mechanisms to induce
changes in cell shape, as well as preliminary data that another signaling system
is modulated in these cells. The investigator predicts that intrinsic gene
regulation initiates the competence for a migration response, and that extrinsic
signals orient the cells' migratory behaviors. This work will identify the
molecular links between developmental gene regulatory networks and the cellular
effectors that create the diverse array of functional architecture seen in
tissues of multicellular organisms. In addition to these research activities,
the investigator is collaboratively organizing a monthly Science Cafe
(www.sciencecafes.org) to provide an interactive venue for local and regional
scientists to discuss current scientific topics with the general Las Vegas
community.