* 1355221
* The Adaptive Significance of an Evolutionary Constraint: from Protein to Organism
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2014,03/31/2020
* Normand Leblanc, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 03/31/2020
* USD 569,936.00

The investigators will determine how the biophysical properties of amino acid
mutations in a specific protein influence various levels of biological
organization, ultimately affecting the capacity of individuals to live in
various communities, and even influencing species interactions at a regional
scale. The model system for this research is the interaction between toxic
Pacific newts (Taricha) and their resistant predatory garter snakes
(Thamnophis). Newts are defended by tetrodotoxin (TTX), one of the most lethal
toxins ever discovered. This neurotoxin binds to the outer pore of voltage-gated
sodium channels, the proteins responsible for propagating electrical impulses in
muscles and nerves, thereby paralyzing muscle and nerve organs. Despite this,
multiple garter snake species feast on newts, in large part due to specific
changes to the sodium channel protein expressed in muscle. However, these
adaptive variants likely bear a high cost; biophysical work on sodium channels
suggests that amino acid mutations that reduce TTX binding to the protein are
likely to reduce sodium channel function. If this tradeoff scales to the
organism, then it may explain why TTX resistant garter snakes are geographically
localized, and have not swept across the landscape. Further, this tradeoff may
explain why resistance-conferring mutations in snakes represent only a small
subset of mutations known to reduce TTX binding to the protein. Nevertheless,
the cost of naturally occurring protein variants remains unexplored, as does any
relationship between this biophysical tradeoff, tissue function, and organismal
performance. Using a truly integrative approach, the investigators will: 1)
quantify the apparent tradeoff in this molecular adaptation; 2) determine how
resistance to prey toxin and biophysical tradeoffs scale up to the tissue; and
3) determine how tissue resistance and performance in different organs (muscle
and nerve) combine to determine the adaptation of the snake. This research will
provide a framework for understanding how a tradeoff at the molecular level can
influence an individual's response to its environment, ultimately impacting
adaptive evolution and species interactions across the landscape. The study
provides a tractable model with a clear ecological context to help determine
when and why adaptive evolution may be limited, as well as the possible
downstream consequences of those constraints on adaptation.

The project will lead to training of two graduate students and several
undergraduates in a highly integrative investigation where they will participate
in molecular data generation, protein analysis, physiological assays, and whole
organism performance trials, all in the context of predator-prey coevolution.
The research themes of this project will be extended to an outdoor education
program for families from Reno, Nevada. This project will sponsor 5 inner-city
families to participate in a weekend-long outdoor program where they stay at a
field station and explore the biodiversity and ecology of forest ecosystems that
exist only 30 minutes from the urban setting in which they live. Applications
will be made available to elementary and middle school children engaged in the
UNR Mathematics, Engineering, and Science Achievement program (MESA). MESA
strives to engage low-income, first-generation students and will be an ideal
conduit for identifying students that have interest in science but with
financial needs that would otherwise preclude attendance of a program like
Family Camp. The PI has chosen a family-based model because he has observed that
exposing an individual child to this nature-based experience has a much higher
and longer-lasting impact if their immediate family participates as well. This
model provides a set of positive, shared family experiences that can be
remembered and reinforced, creating a supportive environment as the child
continues to develop and explore an interest in science. Such educational
opportunities are particularly rare in an EPSCoR state like Nevada but will have
significant impact on promoting biodiversity and organismally-based research and
education in our community.