* 1355018
* Small RNAs as Instructive Signals in Development
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Marja Timmermans, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Continuing Grant
* Kimberly Gallagher
* 07/31/2018
* USD 456,562.00

PI: Marja Timmermans &lt;br/&gt;IOS-1355018&lt;br/&gt;Small RNAs as instructive
signals in development&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Agriculture is facing tremendous
challenges. To keep pace with population growth it is estimated that food
production must double over the next 40 years. This must be achieved in the face
of climate change and an ever-increasing demand for biofuels. Improvement of
plant yield and biomass is therefore critical. Leaf shape is in this regard an
extremely important trait. For instance, the continuing gains in US maize yield
have not come from more grain per plant, but rather from adaptation of hybrids
to continually higher plant densities. Particularly, changes in leaf angle and
size have altered plant architecture, allowing more efficient light capture as
planting density increased. This project investigates how newly initiated leaves
establish top-bottom polarity, a process that drives the flattened outgrowth of
the leaf and optimizes its capacity for light capture and photosynthesis. The
specific mechanism under investigation will also provide insight into gene
regulation by so-called small RNAs. Despite their importance for many
fundamental processes in plants and animals, exactly how small RNAs act to
coordinate development remains poorly understood.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Adaxial-
abaxial patterning of the leaf is an excellent model to study the role of small
RNAs in development; it relies on two opposing mobile small RNA gradients. The
recognition that small RNAs can move from cell to cell has broadened our
thinking on how they are utilized during development, serving as positional,
possibly morphogen-like, signals. Yet, major questions regarding the properties
of mobile small RNAs remain; how do small RNAs move, how is mobility regulated,
and what are their distinguishing patterning properties? This project will
address these questions. Artificial miRNAs directed against visual reporters
will be used to characterize miRNA mobility between key domains in the shoot
apex and establish whether this is dependent solely on small RNA abundance or
regulated developmentally. Similar technologies will also be used to test
mathematical predictions that small RNA gradients are uniquely suited to
generate stable gene expression domains. This question will be addressed using
GFP reporters that act independent of the leaf developmental programs, as well
as using reporters for ARF3 and HD-ZIPIII that monitor the behavior of small
RNAs within the context of leaf polarity. The latter experiments will resolve
the mechanisms via which the miR166 and tasiR-ARF gradients pattern their
targets to yield sharply delineated domains of expression and will reveal how
their opposing gradients interact to create a robust adaxial-abaxial boundary.
Creating sharp expression patterns and robust developmental boundaries present
novel roles for small RNAs. Thus, the findings will have far-reaching
implications for patterning processes in plants, as well as animals. In
addition, the project will make important educational contributions by providing
scientific and professional training for a postdoctoral fellow and research
opportunities for undergraduate and high school students, as well as through
lectures by PI Timmermans in the NSF funded CSHL "Plant Course" and in a summer
training program for high school teachers at the CSHL DNA learning center on
small RNA biology.