* 1355608
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Factors Underlying Animal Domestication
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Natalie Munro, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2016
* USD 25,197.00

Perhaps the most important "revolution" which has occurred in the past ten
millennia and which has affected all populations in all parts of the world is
the domestication of plants and animals. To understand the factors which have
shaped the development of world societies today this factor must be taken into
account. This research examines and has the potential to shed light on the
multiple, complex and interacting forces involved in the domestication of one
species. Under the direction of Dr. Natalie Munro, Jacqueline Meier will
investigate ancient ritual practices through the analysis of animal bones from
the Pre-Pottery Neolithic B (PPNB) archaeological site of Kfar HaHoresh
(KHH)(ca. 8500-6750 cal BC), Israel. KHH served as a rare ritual center in the
PPNB, a period of considerable subsistence change marked by goat domestication
in Southwest Asia. Animal domestication, or the process by which wild animals
became genetically modified and tamed by humans, was a key component of the
transition from foraging to farming, and irreversibly revolutionized how people
interact with animals and with each other. The social, economic and ideological
changes that were involved in the forager-farmer transition are most often
considered separately, despite close interaction between these components in
daily life. When combined, these factors have much greater power to assess the
drivers of the Neolithization process in parts of the Middle East and greater
southwest Asia. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PPNB site of KHH is an ideal setting
to integrate these aspects by exploring ritual practice against a backdrop of
transformative economic change at this pivotal point in human history. This
secluded mortuary site in the Nazareth Hills of the Israeli Galilee region has
yielded provocative evidence of ritual activities involving animals. This
includes human burials with associated animal remains, a large feasting pit
containing the remains of wild cattle, as well as less obvious deposits of small
caches of animal parts and disposal events. This project will contribute to
recent studies focused on exceptional examples of Neolithic ritual practices by
refining methods to detect less obvious types of ritual activities involving
animals. Animal bones will be used to document the types of species and body-
parts used in ritual practices at KHH. Additionally, demographic profiles and
body-size data will be used to determine whether the goats from at KHH were
domestic or wild, because domesticated animals have different symbolic roles and
economic value in rituals than their wild counterparts. By revealing the full
spectrum of rituals practiced at KHH during a period that has been linked to the
dawn of organized religion and animal domestication, this study will investigate
how new ritual practices developed within the context of contemporaneous
economic change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will contribute high-
resolution, faunal subsistence and animal management data to debates that are
central to the origins of agriculture, the function and symbolism of PPN rituals
and the process of goat domestication. The faunal database will be made
available via open internet access following publication so that others studying
domestication in this and surrounding regions can use it for comparison. This
project will also develop criteria for identifying deposits associated with
ritual practice, which will be applicable for an array of archaeological sites
in different times and places. Finally, this study will contribute to the
research exchange between American and Israeli scholars. A long-term data
collection period and continued work with the KHH archaeological field school
will provide graduate and undergraduate student training in animal bone and
teeth identification and curation techniques in the field and lab.