* 1355466
* Innovative and Strategic Program Initiatives for Research and Education-North Dakota (INSPIRE-ND)
* O/D,OIA
* 08/01/2014,06/30/2021
* Philip Boudjouk, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jose Colom
* 06/30/2021
* USD 20,000,000.00

Non-technical Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INnovative and Strategic Program
Initiatives for Research and Education-North Dakota (INSPIRE-ND) will contribute
to the agriculture, energy, and advanced manufacturing economies in North Dakota
through forefront research in regional climate and sustainable materials
sciences. The project will build and diversify the science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) workforce for these industries, enhance
scientific computing infrastructure, and promote innovation and research. The
research, organized through the Center for Regional Climate Studies (CRCS) and
the Center for Sustainable Materials Science (CSMS), will address agricultural
productivity and adaptation to climate variations and develop innovative plant
materials based polymers and composites and associated technologies for the
benefit of society. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INSPIRE-ND is a partnership between
North Dakota State University, the University of North Dakota, and the five
Tribal Colleges in collaboration with Primarily Undergraduate Institutions,
Community Colleges, and state agriculture and manufacturing
partners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research goals are ambitious and potentially transformative. CRCS will study
linkages between regional climate, hydrologic processes, crop production, and
autonomous farmer adaptions. Expected outcomes include improved understanding of
extreme wet and dry events and agricultural production and adaption in response
to climate changes. CSMS will create novel materials that can be programmed to
degrade with photo-triggers by designing and preparing bio-based polymers and
thermosets. The work on novel bio-based materials will span from fundamental
polymer research to commercialization and life cycle assessment. The project
utilizes state of the art research approaches to address problems of regional,
national, and global importance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Investments in workforce
development, STEM education, and diversity will be coordinated through EMerging
PrOgrams for WorkforcE Development, OutReach, Education, and Diversity - ND
(EMPOWERED-ND) - which will include mentoring for students, postdocs and
faculty, Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU), Graduate Assistantship
Programs, and private industry internships, as well as the new Native American
Success in Science and Engineering (NASSE) initiative and an expansion of the
highly successful NATURE program (now NATURE+), which engages Native American
students via Sunday Academies and Summer Camps.