* 1355109
* Collaborative Research: Phylogeny and Floral Evolution of Malpighiaceae
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2019
* Wenheng Zhang, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 03/31/2019
* USD 260,674.00

Malpighiaceae is a large, ancestrally New World flowering plant family that has
dispersed independently to the Old World on seven separate occasions during the
past ~60 Myr. The distinctive floral morphology of New World species includes
oil glands, which provide pollinators with rewards other than pollen or nectar.
The flowers that produce nutrient oils also have a unique bilateral floral
symmetry that has been conserved for millions of years via interactions with
specialist oil-bee pollinators. All Old World species, in contrast, have regular
flowers with radial symmetry. This project will investigate diversification in
plant-pollinator mutualism within the family by producing a morphological and
molecular phylogeny of ~1300 Malpighiaceae species. In addition, the researchers
will investigate the early genetic and developmental basis of bilateral symmetry
in the New World species and establish the genetic and developmental basis for
the convergent evolution of regular flower phenotypes in the Old World species.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study of this large and ecologically important group
of tropical plants will serve as a model to understand whether similar genetic
and developmental mechanisms are driving the parallel evolution of flower shape.
The project will train a post-doctoral researcher, undergraduate and graduate
students, including individuals from under-represented groups. Research results
will be disseminated through an online monograph on the Malphigiaceae, and
through targeted short-courses for elementary and high school students within
Cambridge, MA.