* 1355960
* Phenomenological Studies of Cool-Season Extreme Weather Events over Central and Eastern North America on Intraseasonal Time Scales
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2019
* Lance Bosart, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Ming Cai
* 03/31/2019
* USD 729,846.00

The goal of this project is to investigate extreme weather events (EWEs),
defined here as a category of high-impact weather events that are societally
disruptive, geographically widespread, exceptionally prolonged, and
climatologically infrequent, from a phenomenological perspective. It is
hypothesized that planetary-scale wave amplification and breaking are necessary
for the occurrence of EWEs, because the resulting high-amplitude flow patterns
may lead to intense cyclogenesis and anticyclogenesis, and subsequently to
downstream ridge amplification and blocking, that can modulate the positions of
storm tracks and atmospheric rivers and establish synoptic-scale environments
favorable for the occurrence of EWEs.

The proposed research extends the ongoing NSF-supported investigation by the PI
and Co-PI of high-impact weather events occurring over the eastern North Pacific
and North America that are linked dynamically to western North Pacific tropical
cyclones (TCs) through Rossby wave dispersion along the North Pacific jet stream
(NPJ) by: (i) narrowing the focus on high-impact weather events occurring over
the eastern North Pacific and North America to noteworthy cool-season EWEs
occurring over central and eastern North America since 1979, and (ii) broadening
the dynamical linkages between TCs and high-impact weather events to include
antecedent disturbances of tropical, midlatitude, and polar origin that modulate
the evolution of the NPJ on 10-20 day time scales prior to and during the
occurrence of the class of EWEs specified in (i). The proposed extensions will
be accomplished by: (i) determining the role of planetary-scale wave
amplification and breaking in the subsequent occurrence of the aforementioned
class of EWEs; (ii) investigating how cyclogenesis and anticyclogenesis, and
subsequent downstream ridge amplification and blocking, establish synoptic-scale
environments conducive to the occurrence of the aforementioned class of EWEs.
These goals will be addressed by conducting multiscale investigations of EWEs
using state-of-the-art global gridded reanalyses and, in conjunction with these
multiscale investigations, identifying factors limiting predictability through
the synoptic evaluation of the skill of several operational global models,
including ensemble forecast products, for selected "hard-to-predict" cool-season
EWEs occurring over central and eastern North America.