* 1355211
* Integrating biogeochemistry and physics to understand hot spots and hot moments for nitrogen transformation in lakes and reservoirs
* BIO,DEB
* 04/15/2014,03/31/2019
* John Harrison, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 03/31/2019
* USD 574,997.00

In many waterways around the world, over-enrichment with the nutrient nitrogen
is a major and growing concern. In addition to degrading drinking water, high
levels damage ecosystems by reducing biodiversity, increasing the frequency of
harmful algal blooms, and contributing to low oxygen ("dead zones"). Nitrogen-
related problems would be substantially worse if not for the aquatic microbes
that live in aquatic ecosystems and remove harmful nitrogen by converting it
from a nutrient to a dissolved gas that can return to the atmosphere. This
removal process, called denitrification, is important for pollution management,
but the conditions that result in high rates of denitrification are not well
known in complex systems such as lakes and reservoirs. Progress in understanding
has been hampered by the fact that denitrification rates are challenging to
measure, and vary greatly in space and time. This project addresses these
challenges by combining state-of-the-art physical and biogeochemical techniques
in a new way to measure denitrification in lakes. The new flux-gradient
measurement technique that will be refined and applied in this project has
potential to resolve spatial and temporal variation in denitrification, and will
be used to shed new light on the human activities and natural hydrologic
processes that probably control denitrification rates. It is expected that this
project will improve the ability to measure, explain, predict, and perhaps even
control denitrification so that lakes and the rivers draining them will have
improved water quality.

The proposed research is designed not only to advance fundamental scientific
understanding, but also to provide management-relevant results that help address
pressing societal concerns. For example, it is hoped that new insights into
reservoir nutrient processing will allow managers to improve their management of
water resources and associated ecosystems. To help researchers and managers
apply the flux-gradient technique, a multi-media website will be developed,
explaining the approach and providing detail on important practical and
methodological considerations. This project will also have an educational
impact: at least 2 doctoral students and 3 undergraduates will be directly
supported.