* 1355306
* I-Corps:  Epigenetic Profiling of DNA Methylation: Detection &amp; Diagnostics
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2013,06/30/2014
* Adam Marsh, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 06/30/2014
* USD 50,000.00

Researchers are using a diagnostic technology to pursue linkages between shifts
in gene expression patterns mediated by epigenetic DNA modifications and the
early onset of a disease etiology. The eventual result is that molecular,
biochemical and physiological activities will diverge from a normative state and
overtly express the disease symptom progression. If shifts in gene expression
could be detected early, a diagnosis could be made before symptoms were
significant. Better yet, detecting pre-symptomatic changes in regulatory
controls over gene expression events (like epigenetic DNA methylation) would
make it possible to diagnosis the pre-onset of an impending disease or disease
risk. Early intervention prior to the onset of any disease could potentially
reduce the progression of the disease and perhaps reduce the severity of the
symptoms. The team proposes to apply an epigenetic profiling technology to the
characterization of human lung cancer tumors. Once a tumor is large enough to
spot on an x-ray it usually has already metastasized to nearby lymph nodes.
Consequently, there is a large unmet need for tests that can diagnose certain
types of cancer at an early stage, when the cancer is more likely to respond to
treatment. The team is pursuing technical proof of concept work for the
epigenetic profiling platform. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team's quantitative
algorithms are combined with statistical pattern recognition technology that can
enable rapid and cost-effective screening of billions of base pairs of sequence
data in a biopsy or tissue sample, producing a sophisticated and statistically
rigorous report to an attending physician, clinic or submitting laboratory. This
information can be critical for the development of effective personalized
medicine strategies for a broad range of disease detection and treatment needs.
With genome sequencing rapidly becoming cost-effective, there is an increasing
requirement for profiling DNA methylation sites within a patient's genome to
provide an individual fingerprint profile of abnormal gene activities. This
project may solve this need for rapid, high-throughput, low-cost, computational
modeling and statistical pattern recognition to identify how a patient's DNA
methylation profile varies from a normative population state.