* 1355677
* CAREER: Rational Design of Perfluoroalkylated N- and S-Containing Heteroaromatics for Engineering High Performance Air-stable OFET Materials with Lamellar pi-pi Stacked Structure
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2020
* Haoran Sun, University of South Dakota Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 03/31/2020
* USD 600,000.00

With the support from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics &amp; Mechanisms B
program in the Chemistry Division and the Solid State and Materials Chemistry
program in the Division of Materials Research, Professor Haoran Sun at the
University of South Dakota will lead this CAREER project aiming to 1) design,
synthesize, and characterize perfluoroalkylated N- and S-containing
heteroaromatic supramolecular synthons to prepare organic semiconductor
materials with lamellar pi-pi stacked structure; 2) advance fundamental
understanding of the correlation between molecular structure, weak
intermolecular non-covalent interactions, solid-state structures, and device
function; and 3) train students to solve complex problems in materials sciences.
Professor Sun's research focuses on the synthesis and assembly of these
perfluoroalkylated supramolecular synthons for low cost and high performance
organic semiconductor devices for next generation electronics. The research team
expects to identify these supramolecular synthons through both synthetic and
computational approaches. During the project period, students at different
levels will also be trained to learn skills for solving problems in materials
sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses one of the fundamental
questions in developing next generation high performance organic semiconductor
materials: how to design supramolecular synthons that can assemble into desired
functional materials. A fundamental understanding of weak non-covalent
intermolecular interactions is expected to have substantial impact on new
organic functional materials design and to assist new drug designs. The
multidisciplinary nature of this project will provide excellent training to
students for solving complex problems important to today's materials chemistry.
In addition to these exciting research activities, Professor Sun will continue
to integrate cutting-edge research projects into undergraduate teaching for
advanced chemistry major courses. The research group will work with local
schools to organize educational outreach activities including "Coyote Science
Education for Kids" and "Renewable Energy Workshop" for general public in local
areas. The successful integration of research and education will provide the
necessary workforce development and prepare students at all levels to develop
skills for solving societal problems related to materials sciences.