* 1355119
* mRNA Translation and Germline Evolution in Caenorhabditis
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2014,03/31/2019
* Eric Haag, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Klein
* 03/31/2019
* USD 645,000.00

One of the grand challenges of evolutionary biology is to understand how new
anatomical features emerge without disrupting the overall coherence of
development. Because many genes that control development are widely conserved,
the process must blend both ancient components and new features, such as
species-specific genes or regulatory connections between genes. This research
examines an ecologically important novelty that has evolved repeatedly in
Caenorhabditis nematodes--self-fertile hermaphroditism. A key step in the
evolution of self-fertility was the ability of otherwise female worms to produce
a limited number of sperm, which turned them into hermaphrodites. Hermaphrodite
sperm production is regulated by messenger RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) present
in the germ cells (the precursors of gametes). One of these RBPs, GLD-1, is an
ancient, slow-evolving protein that regulates hundreds of target mRNAs. GLD-1
was coopted into hermaphrodite germ line sex determination independently in two
different species, C. elegans and C. briggsae. However, in C. elegans GLD-1
promotes sperm fate, whereas in C. briggsae GLD-1 represses it. This paradox is
explained by the species-specific evolution of GLD-1 protein cofactors and by
changes in the sequences of the mRNA molecules that GLD-1 binds. This project
will work with several Caenorhabditis species to systematically examine how both
cofactors and mRNA sequence changes alter the context of GLD-1 activity to allow
the emergence of a new reproductive strategy. More generally, this research will
help reveal how old molecules can take on new roles, thereby linking evolution
at the molecular and organismal scales of biological organization. We will use
this project to help local high school teachers understand the excitment of
scientific research so they can convey these lessons to their classes.