* 1355381
* Collaborative Research: Exploring Adaptive Social Networks in the  Face of Geographic Adversity
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2014,02/28/2018
* Jeffery Clark, Archaeology Southwest
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/28/2018
* USD 145,692.00

The fundamental goal of this research is an understanding of how traditional
groups maintain and adapt social ties over time and across large geographic
areas in spite of their low population density and changing natural environment.
The research is focused in the United States Southwest where significant long-
term environmental changes set the scene for observing societal network changes
over time. Improved understanding of how historic societies adapted provides
insight into how modern-day traditional societies might adapt and maintain their
own social networks.

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Barbara Mills and Dr. Jeffery
Clark will collaborate with a team of researchers to look at the dynamics of
social and spatial networks in the archaeology of the Chaco region of the U.S.
Southwest. The research team will combine social network analysis and geographic
information systems to analyze ceramic, lithic, and architectural data in the
Chaco region. Chaco Canyon World Heritage Site is at the spatial center of what
has been called the "Chaco World" during the 10th to early 12th centuries, and
contains a concentration of architectural features known as great houses and
great kivas. How it came to prominence and the social relationship of the
central canyon to contemporaneous communities are enduring archaeological
questions of broad interest.

The research builds on a considerable amount of past research in the Chaco
region by compiling a new dataset integrating architectural and material culture
data from within and outside Chaco Canyon. The database will add to the Chaco
World database at the Chaco Research Archive and ceramic and lithic data for the
post-A.D. 1200 period from the Southwest Social Networks Project. New ceramic
analyses of existing collections and obsidian provenance analyses will augment
data from published and unpublished reports. These data will be used to address
the following questions: (1) How were Chaco great houses related to each other?
(2) Were Pueblo Bonito and other Chaco Canyon great houses socially central in
the regional network? (3) How did trajectories of great house and great kiva
social networks change over time? And (4) how did great houses and great kivas
relate to their surrounding communities of small houses? Recent research has
suggested the need to analyze data from throughout the region, without assuming
it was an integrated system, to better understand the ways in which great house
communities were connected to each other and the central canyon. The research
has the potential to resolve several questions currently being raised in many
archaeological regions, not just Chaco. These include the relationship of
hierarchy and centrality, and the role of specific historical processes such as
migration, social diversification, and inequality in non-state societies.

The broader impacts of this research include: (1) collaboration with the Chaco
Research Archive to provide updates to the Chaco World Database; (2) creation of
a new database that integrates artifact data on great houses, great kivas, and
selected outlier communities; (3) public talks to interested audiences
throughout the region; (4) a special issue of the magazine, Archaeology
Southwest, which is widely used for public outreach and in classrooms; (5) a
series of journal articles; and (6) training of graduate students in the
application of social network analysis to archaeological datasets.