* 1356792
* ABI Innovation: Computational Methods for Bioacoustic Avian Species Monitoring
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Xiaoli Fern, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2018
* USD 790,858.00

This project focuses on the development of a computational framework for
intelligent monitoring of avian species from in situ audio recordings. The
system will gather audio from a collection of microphones to automatically and
adaptively infer spatio-temporal presence/absence and abundance for different
bird species. The system will adaptively seek, request, and incorporate expert
feedback to improve the ability to adjust to a new environment. By enabling the
automatic collection of bird data at extremely fine temporal resolutions over
relatively large spatial scales, we will address two questions of fundamental
ecological and conservation importance (1) Can animal behavior buffer species
against the effects of environmental changes? Specifically, do birds have the
capacity to shift breeding territories in instances of rapid or extreme
environmental changes (e.g., weather)? (2) How does loss and fragmentation of
tropical forest alter the distributions of bird
species?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will build upon the recently
developed Multi-Instance Multi-Label framework from machine learning, and seek
to adaptively and actively train species presence/absence and abundance
estimation models with the goal of maximizing the learning efficiency while
minimizing the human labeling efforts. The system's unique ability to actively
identify and adapt to new species (and environments) will greatly reduce the
overhead required to deploy and update the bioacoustic monitoring system. This
project will provide computational innovations for studying biodiversity as a
function of global habitat loss and climate change, contributing significant
scientific knowledge about ecosystems and their responses to human activities.
The project will also provide a new technology standard for collecting bird
population data that could be deployed worldwide for monitoring a diverse and
evolving set of species. Research-based education and training opportunities
offered by this project will help prepare a new generation of researchers in the
emerging area of Ecosystem Informatics at Oregon State University. Outreach
activities will 1) involve high school educators in workshops organized by the
Oregon Natural Resources Education (ONRE) program, 2) organize annual data
challenges/competitions in association with international conferences and
workshops, 3)recruit female undergraduates and K-12 students from under-
represented groups to careers in computer science and engineering through REU
programs. Further information on this project can be found at
http://eecs.oregonstate.edu/research/bioacoustics/.