* 1356684
* Pitzer College Mentors Enable, Connect, Help, Advocate, Nurture, Intervene, Sustain, and Motivate (MECHANISM) for Success in the Molecular Sciences
* EHR,DUE
* 04/15/2014,03/31/2020
* Kathleen Purvis-Roberts, Pitzer College
* Standard Grant
* Michael Ferrara
* 03/31/2020
* USD 602,422.00

Through the Mentors Enable, Connect, Help, Advocate, Nurture, Intervene,
Sustain, and Motivate (MECHANISM) project a team of faculty and administrators
at Pitzer College is increasing the number of academically talented students
with demonstrated financial need who earn baccalaureate degrees in chemistry,
biochemistry, or molecular biology. The project is recruiting sixteen first-year
students with the goal of retaining them to graduation in the selected STEM
fields through a comprehensive program of student development that emphasizes
the value of utilizing academic resources. In providing increased access to
these majors, the project is contributing to the enlargement of the STEM
workforce that can help meet regional and national needs. In addition, to
broaden participation, students from groups that are under-represented in the
sciences - African American, Latino(a) American, Asian American/Pacific
Islander, and Native American (ALANA) - are actively being recruited.

Technical features of the project implementation involve students in an array of
opportunities including (a) learning from peer mentors (tutoring and
supplemental instruction), (b) improving written communication skills (Writing
Center), (c) experiencing other cultures (Study Abroad), (d) creating peer
networks and practicing high-level reasoning skills (Howard Hughes Medical
Institute Summer Immersion Program), (d) contributing to cutting-edge research,
and (e) participating in internships. Data generated through assessment and
evaluation is expected to support the rationale that high retention of students
in STEM fields is achievable through cultivation of "cultural capital," (e.g.
dispositions, attitudes, and beliefs related to students' academic success
throughout their academic careers). Project evaluation focuses on student
academic engagement and use of support services, student content knowledge, and
faculty feedback. Moreover, the project expects to track its students after
graduation and interview them about the project's ongoing impact. Dissemination
of the project results is expected to provide a model for how helping STEM
students develop cultural capital can be used as a means of retaining them
through graduation. The project team plans to present its work through Teaching
and Learning Centers in the Claremont Colleges Consortium as well as through
national meetings of the American Chemical Society.