* 1356666
* Motivating Engineers to Achieve (META)
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2019
* Dan Dimitriu, San Antonio College
* Continuing Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 06/30/2019
* USD 585,472.00

The San Antonio College (SAC) Motivating Engineers to Achieve (META)
Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (S-STEM)
program is providing scholarships and support services to talented engineering
students who demonstrate financial need. The program is enhancing retention
rates, timely associate's degree completion and transfer to four-year
institutions for these SAC engineering students. Thus, the project is increasing
the numbers of well-educated and skilled engineers in the workforce, addressing
the growing regional need for petroleum, materials, marine and mining
engineering professionals to support the Texas oil and gas industry. Because SAC
is an Hispanic-Serving Institution, the META program is also increasing the
number of engineering degrees awarded to students from this historically-
underrepresented group.

META's overarching goal is to enhance the quantity and quality of SAC
engineering majors who earn degrees, enabling these students to enter the
engineering workforce, or continue their formal education in engineering or
related fields. In addition to awarding 20 scholarships per year to
academically-talented engineering students with financial need, META is
accomplishing its goals by providing model academic support services and cohort-
building activities that are designed to engage engineering majors with each
other and their discipline. Key support activities include recruitment and
transition initiatives through the summer Early Development of General
Engineering (EDGE) summer program for high school students; opportunities to
work on student-led, faculty-guided undergraduate research; dedicated spaces for
study, support services and student interaction; and opportunities for students
to learn about engineering careers through site visits, guest speakers and
internships. Program evaluation, which includes documentation of scholar
participation, perceptions, and outcomes, is advancing knowledge and
understanding regarding the effects of financial, academic, and social supports
on low-income engineering student success.