* 1356196
* CheM Scholars: A team based approach to educating mathematics and chemistry majors
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2020
* Don Fujito, La Roche College
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Lewis
* 07/31/2020
* USD 607,000.00

Through the CheM Scholars project the team at La Roche College seeks to increase
the number of economically disadvantaged students who complete chemistry and
mathematics degrees by supporting for 14 chemistry and mathematics B.S. majors.
A unique feature of the project is the S-STEM scholar participation in the
Chemsolve 2.0 program which exposes high school students to spectroscopy.
Through Chemsolve, interdisciplinary teams of scholars design and develop hands-
on activities and analyze products for their younger peers. The Chemsolve
experience provides the S-STEM student with an opportunity to graduate from
novice lab assistance to quality control directors over the course of four
years. Moreover, participants are provided with opportunities to be mentored by
a team of faculty, alumni, and corporate guides and to participate in
professional societies and internships. In order to broaden participation the
project recruits students from groups that are under-represented in STEM (women
and African American).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical merit of this project
lies in the establishment of an innovative, interdisciplinary team-based
methodology for delivering academic, social, and financial supports. The
objectives of the CheM scholars project are to: (a) double the enrollment in
undergraduate chemistry and mathematics B.S. programs by 2016, (b) retain and
graduate 100% of CheM scholars by 2020, and (c) increase entry to STEM workforce
or graduate study. Data generated through assessment and evaluation is expected
to support the rationale that a multi-disciplinary, team-based approach to the
student's academic and social development will lead to the high retention and
graduation rates. Formative and summative evaluation will focus on assessment of
the effect of the team-based initiatives on student learning, retention and
job/graduate program placement. Every aspect of the project including
recruitment and enrollment benchmarks, course performance, and student-developed
outreach materials is evaluated. The students are tracked after graduation and
interviewed about the project's impact. Dissemination of the project results
provides a model for using teamwork as a means of retaining STEM students. The
project team plans to present their work locally, to other STEM departments at
LaRoche College and nationally through websites and meetings of the American
Chemical Society and the American Mathematical Society. Project deliverables
include results of summative evaluation and the student-developed Chemsolve 2.0
learning materials.