* 1356653
* Focus on Physics
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2020
* S. James Gates, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Pushpa Ramakrishna
* 05/31/2020
* USD 491,200.00

The Focus on Physics program at the University of Maryland (UMD), College Park,
aims to increase the retention and academic success of its undergraduate physics
majors. The President's Council of Advisors in Science and Technology (PCAST)
report asserts that increasing the retention of STEM majors is "the lowest cost,
fastest policy option" for meeting the country's need for STEM-educated
professionals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Physics Department at UMD Focus on
Physics program was successfully implemented in 2012. This project supports 24
scholars (3 two-year cohorts of 8 students each) in attaining a baccalaureate
degree. The project is unique in that the program is designed to explore
retention. The critical purpose of this project is to equip and enhance the
original program by providing academic and financial support to students with
both academic merit and financial need while they are completing upper-level
requirements for the physics major. The Focus on Physics project builds on
current new courses and seminars aimed at retaining incoming physics majors. The
project promises to significantly improve overall retention for students
graduating with physics bachelor's degrees. The program provides: strong
academic support and a cohesive community of entering freshman and transfer
students, financial support for students who have successfully completed the
introductory sequence (usually by end of second year), clear expectations of
what it takes to successfully complete an undergraduate degree in physics, and
career planning information and advice to assist students in finding jobs or
applying to graduate school after completing their degrees. Scholarships allow
students to "focus on physics."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These retention efforts
draw on research and are modeled in part on other successful undergraduate STEM
retention programs, de-emphasize remediation and emphasize collaborative group
work on challenging problems, early research opportunities, mentoring, and
community building. In addition, careful evaluation by the Physics Education
Research Group (PERG) of the methods implemented in this program will provide
insight into the efficacy of various retention methods. The results of a
thorough evaluation of how retention rates change in response to the innovations
and scholarships made possible by this project at the University of Maryland,
one of the largest and most diverse physics departments with over 300
undergraduate majors, are disseminated to other STEM departments at the
university and in other physics departments nationwide.