* 1356253
* Graduate Scholars in Mathematics at the University of Kentucky
* EHR,DUE
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2021
* Peter Perry, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 07/31/2021
* USD 627,601.00

Women and minorities are underrepresented in mathematics, particularly in the
professoriate. The Mathematics Department at the University of Kentucky has a
strong track record of preparing its graduates to become faculty members and
academic leaders. The department also has a long history of outreach to
Appalachian K-12 programs and to public and private universities in Appalachia.
The Graduate Scholars in Mathematics (GSM) program at the University of Kentucky
will support incoming Mathematics graduate students who are from
underrepresented groups for the first two years of doctoral study. The goal is
to increase the participation of female, minority, and Appalachian students in
the Mathematical Sciences and to develop a new generation of academic leaders
and role models for these underrepresented groups. This program will provide
rigorous pre-professional training in advanced mathematics, provides an early
introduction to research in Mathematics, and develops academic leadership
skills. GSM Fellows will begin their careers with extensive pre-service training
in effective teaching methods, established connections with the national
mathematical community, and the experience of doing original mathematical work
with a nationally recognized research faculty member in mathematics. By
connecting GSM fellows with mathematics professionals, it will inform and expand
their career interests and help them focus their preparation for careers as
educators and practitioners of Mathematics.

The program will recruit 5-6 new GSM fellows each year, supporting 28 doctoral
students over the course of the project. In addition to the scholarship, each
GSM fellow will receive supplementary academic preparation and pre-professional
training; a summer research fellowship and support for travel to professional
meetings to present the results of their research and network with professionals
in the Mathematical sciences. These supports will help GSM fellows complete the
required preliminary examinations in Mathematics by the end of the second year,
reducing time-to-degree, give GSM fellows an early introduction to research and
advanced teaching methods, and help them become a part of the national
mathematical community. Formative assessment of the GSM program will consistent
of surveys and interviews by an external evaluator. To assess the long-term
success of the program, the achievements of the GSM scholars will be compared,
using both quantitative and qualitative data with other mathematics PhD
candidates both locally and nationally