* 1356306
* Collaborative Research: ABI Innovation: Algorithms And Tools For Modeling Macromolecular Assemblies
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2017
* Steven Ludtke, Baylor College of Medicine
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 12/31/2017
* USD 288,315.00

This research seeks to develop novel methods and software tools for mining
structures of large molecular assemblies from imaging data. Macromolecular
assemblies, such as ribosomes and viruses, are responsible for driving nearly
all cellular events. How these assemblies function, in turn, is closely related
with their 3D&lt;br/&gt;structures, which are analogous to interlocking puzzles
consisting of tens to hundreds of proteins, each having its own unique shape.
The ability to model the structure of individual proteins as well as their
architecture in an assembly is therefore critically important for understanding
how the cell, and more broadly the biological system, function. While state-of-
art imaging methods have been developed to capture macromolecular assemblies as
3D density volumes, such as X-ray crystallography and electron cryo-microscopy,
creating structural models from such imagery remains a time-consuming and highly
manual process in part due to the limited resolution of the data. The goal of
the project is to streamline the image-to-structure pipeline by designing novel
computational algorithms and developing a comprehensive modeling platform. The
algorithms seek to leverage the advance in computer graphics and vision while
combining image data, sequence data, and expert knowledge to improve the
efficiency and accuracy of common modeling tasks. The modeling platform will
integrate the investigator's methods with third-party modeling packages to
provide an easy-to-use one-stop-shop for creating and validating structures of
macromolecular assemblies all the way from raw images and individual protein
sequences. The platform will be built upon the existing Gorgon software
(http://gorgon.wustl.edu) and distributed together with the popular EMAN2
software for image analysis of density maps. The outcome of the project will
have a direct impact on reducing the time and effort that biologists spend on
translating experimental results to knowledge, discoveries, and
treatments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, the project will focus on
algorithmic development on three modeling tasks that currently either rely on
manual labor or are computationally expensive. These problems include detecting
secondary structure elements (e.g., alpha-helices and beta-sheets) at various
non-atomic resolutions, tracing protein backbones in the density volume, and
flexibly fitting probe structures into the volume. The algorithms will build
upon successful techniques from computer graphics and vision, including mesh
deformation using differential coordinates and spectral feature matching. To
transform Gorgon into a modeling "hub", the software architecture and interface
of Gorgon will be redesigned in this project to improve inter-operability,
scalability, and usability. Plug-ins will also be developed for third-party
tools that provide complementary modeling capability such as comparative
modeling and protein folding.