* 1356192
* Eco-DAS 2.0:   Ecological Dissertations in the Aquatic Sciences
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2014,12/31/2021
* Paul Kemp, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 12/31/2021
* USD 550,629.00

The Eco-DAS (Ecological Dissertations in the Aquatic Sciences) symposia bring
together individuals within 1 year of receiving their PhD in the aquatic
sciences. Previous symposia were held&amp;#8232;in 2008, 2010 and 2012. To date,
this award has supported 107 participants and 10 mentors.&lt;br/&gt;This project
will continue the Eco-DAS series with three new symposia to be held in
2014,&amp;#8232; 2016 and 2018. Each symposium will support approximately 35
participants and up to 5 mentors, and will result in publication of a formal
proceedings volume. The project will pay &amp;#8232;the direct costs of the
symposia (travel, accomodations, food, event coordination), for
preparation&amp;#8232; of the symposium proceedings, and for
evaluation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit :&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
symposia will:&amp;#8232; &lt;br/&gt;1. Foster sustained, cross-disciplinary
interactions among top new researchers in ecological oceanography and
limnology.&amp;#8232; &lt;br/&gt;2. Help to build a trusted network of
colleagues with diverse backgrounds, perspectives and&amp;#8232;
expertise.&amp;#8232; &lt;br/&gt;3. Challenge participants to explore new ideas
with self-organized author teams of their peers.&amp;#8232; &lt;br/&gt;4.
Familiarize new researchers with the diversity of research funding, and
introduce them&amp;#8232; to representatives of funding agencies with whom they
will interact in future.&amp;#8232; &lt;br/&gt;5. Foster mentor relationships
with more established scientists. &amp;#8232;&lt;br/&gt;6. Address the
requirements for professional success of new researchers through targeted
discussions. &lt;br/&gt;7. Provide valuable feedback to the funding agencies by
identifying needs and recommending directions for future
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts :&lt;br/&gt;Formal evaluations
indicate that the Eco-DAS symposia significantly increase career confidence of
the participants. Eco-DAS dramatically increases participants? access to a
network of&amp;#8232;trusted expertise, including their peer group as well as
senior and near-peer mentors. This trusted network also enables participants to
investigate alternative possibilities for a productive science career.
Participants meet NSF program managers and have the opportunity to ask direct
questions regarding funding opportunities and the funding process. They engage
in discussion of emerging issues in the aquatic sciences, and provide feedback
to NSF. Participants receive training in team leadership, and instruction and
practical experience with collaboration tools.&lt;br/&gt;For many, this is their
first experience with leading or even working in a collaborative
team&amp;#8232;of equals. Interdisciplinary collaborations are actively
encouraged through the publication &amp;#8232;of a formal proceedings volume for
each symposium. The proceedings chapters are not merely tools to encourage
collaboration: they are a substantive contribution to science, and benefit
&amp;#8232;the participants by disseminating their creative ideas. The three
additional symposia are very likely to have a significant positive impact on
more than 100 new aquatic scientists.