* 1356961
* Understanding the Development of Hierarchical Social Organization
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2014,08/31/2020
* Neill Wallis, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2020
* USD 222,903.00

The fundamental goal of this research is to better understand the processes and
mechanisms by which small scale traditional societies merged into larger social
units and developed hierarchical social organization. The investigators believe
that religious ritual and shared beliefs can play a role in this process as
throughout history religious rituals have been documented occurring alongside
such development. This research has current day relevance given the importance
of religion as both an integrative and divisive force as evidenced in much of
the developing world. With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Neill Wallis
and Dr. John Krigbaum will investigate the development, spread, and impact of
extensive religious rituals among Florida populations ca. A.D. 200 to 600 using
a variety of analytical tools and archival research. The mortuary practices of
this Middle Woodland period, referred to as "Weeden Island", show widespread and
conspicuous uniformity that is characteristic of a religious movement. The
proliferation of these practices was apparently coincident with increasingly
integrated social networks and emergent high status for some individuals. Given
these associations, the project examines the role of Weeden Island rituality in
the initiation of emergent social inequality through investigation of human
diet, mobility, social interaction, and community formation. In the context of
conspicuous religious parity, this research endeavors to identify exactly how
disparate communities interacted with one another, how integrated they were, and
how these trends inflected social and political histories in the region. Drawing
on collections and archived field notes from 13 Middle Woodland mound sites
distributed across peninsular Florida and curated at the Florida Museum of
Natural History (FLMNH), this research will integrate (1) multiple lines of
isotopic analysis of skeletal populations to generate data pertaining to diet
and mobility, (2) osteological analysis to collect basic demographic and life
history information on individual interments, (3) geochemical and petrographic
analysis on Weeden Island mortuary wares to determine their ultimate provenance,
and (4) technofunctional analysis to outline form and function of vessels and
the potential for craft specialization. In addition, the uniformity of Weeden
Island ritual practices will be evaluated through investigation of archived
notes. These data and the correlation of variables will reveal specific
historical trends in the practice and spread of Weeden Island rituality and its
sociopolitical implications. The broader impacts of the study include
contributions to archaeological method and social theory, the training of
students, and public outreach and education. In terms of method, the analytical
protocol builds on established techniques and combines them in innovative ways.
These data lend a rare multidimensional robustness to the investigation of the
complex region-wide phenomenon of Weeden Island, permitting more nuanced and
potentially transformative understandings of the movement and life histories of
Middle Woodland people and objects. At a theoretical level, through its focus on
mobility and intergroup interactions, the project redirects the search for
causes of social inequality toward a historical investigation of the process of
community formation at regional scales, and has anthropological implications for
explaining the intersections of religion, identity, and political conflict. The
project provides advanced training and research experience for at least two
Ph.D. students and several undergraduate museum and laboratory interns, and will
form the basis for Ph.D. dissertations, and M.A. and honors theses. Results will
be disseminated broadly and showcased through an Explore Research exhibit at the
FLMNH and a companion website. In addition to scientific publications, archived
data will be made freely available online.