* 1356383
* Wave processes along 26N
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2014,02/29/2020
* Zoltan Szuts, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 02/29/2020
* USD 568,550.00

Despite our firm understanding of large-scale and long-period waves in the ocean
from theoretical and numerical studies, many paradigms of planetary propagation
have not yet been tested in the real ocean for lack of suitable data that
resolve the long temporal and large spatial scales involved. The simplifying
assumptions necessary for theoretical and numerical treatment (e.g. vertical
side-walls, idealized stratification, and constrained temporal responses) all
reduce the range of allowable motion and so are incomplete descriptions of the
real ocean. However, nearly the entire wave spectrum across a subtropical gyre
can now be examined using extensive and prolonged measurements from the Atlantic
Meridional Overturning Circulation (AMOC) moored array located at 26Â°N (the
MOCHA/WBTS/RAPID project). Seven years of AMOC array data extend the previous
satellite observational basis below the surface and over long periods and allows
testing of hypotheses about wave signals and pathways in a subtropical basin.
Through the analysis of subsurface observations, this study will investigate
wave energies and wave patterns over a broad frequency range. Particular
attention will be given to planetary waves (Kelvin and Rossby) and internal
waves (tidal and inertial), resolving waves with periods ranging from 2 hours to
2 years using reprocessed high-frequency full-depth measurements of dynamic
height and bottom pressure at 8 moorings across the basin and horizontal
velocity at the 4 western moorings. With diagnosis of potential energy (dynamic
height) and kinetic energy (velocity), the energy equation can be partially
diagnosed as a function of frequency at the western boundary. Inferences about
energy transfer between frequencies and between moorings can be made by
examining spectral slopes in depth- and mode-space. Decomposition of pressure
and velocity into mode-space allows the calculation of energy flux and the
array's linear geometry enables a 2D estimate of energy flux divergence, lending
insight into the propagation and possible dissipation of these waves. A
particularly salient aspect of the energy flux decomposition is the ability to
examine the low-frequency variability of wind and tidal internal waves, which is
not well understood due to a lack of long term subsurface data.

Though there have been clear observations of cross-basin Rossby wave propagation
in the open ocean, their fate upon reaching the western boundaries remains
unclear. These fates might include local dissipation, reflection or even
transformation to Kelvin waves that radiate southward along the western
boundary. Due to the long time and large spatial scales, previous observational
studies have not resolved these processes. Utilizing the temporal and spatial
resolution of the array and applying theoretical relations (ratios of kinetic to
potential energy, polarization relations and dispersion equations), will help
identify the variance contained by these signals, and quantify the energy
pathways for these classes of waves at the western boundary. To complement the
subsurface sampling, a high frequency satellite altimetry product will be
investigated in collaboration to examine horizontal scales and propagation. At
any frequency the sources, pathways, and sinks of large-scale waves are largely
unknown, and this study is a first step toward quantifying their roles in the
western subtropical Atlantic.

Intellectual Merit: This project will characterize a broad spectrum of wave
motion and elucidate pathways of waves, increasing our understanding of both
large-scale, low-frequency planetary waves and tidal and wind-generated internal
waves. These analyses provide added benefit to the data already collected by the
AMOC array.

Broader Impacts: This project supports two junior scientists in establishing
their research careers. Scientific results will develop methods for
investigating large-scale waves and will greatly extend the observational basis
of waves that participate in meridional coherence, ocean predictability, and
ocean-atmosphere feedback patterns. Educational components consist of training
an undergraduate student and of disseminating results through a web-based
outreach program.