* 1356118
* Exploring the Effects of Schooling on Changes in Behavioral and Neurological Indices of Children's Executive Functioning
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Jennie Grammer, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Chalandra Bryant
* 06/30/2018
* USD 625,000.00

The transition from preschool to early elementary school represents a critical
developmental transition for young children. The shift to a formal, structured
classroom environment places new demands on children that require increased
self-regulation, including better control of attention and better impulse
control. Children's self-regulation contributes directly to their school and
later life success. The present project will integrate neurobiological,
developmental and educational perspectives, examining the impact of schooling on
brain and behavioral measures of different aspects of self-regulation.
&lt;br/&gt;The project will utilize relatively new, portable
electrophysiological equipment that will permit the study of children's brains
as well as their behaviors while in their schools, greatly amplifying the range
and representativeness of the participants. To directly study the effects of
schooling while controlling for chronological age, the study will employ the
school cut-off method, comparing children who just make vs. miss the arbitrary
birth date for Kindergarten entry. Following the children over the course of the
school year will permit investigation of the impact of schooling experiences on
brain and behavioral development of self-regulation. Findings from this project
will greatly enhance the field's understanding of the brain mechanisms
underlying development of self-regulation as well as the extent to which self-
regulation can be modified though schooling practices.