* 1356895
* Ultraslow crustal accretion at the Mid-Cayman Spreading Center: Mantle exhumation or magmatism?
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2014,02/28/2018
* Nicholas Hayman, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Brian Midson
* 02/28/2018
* USD 699,076.00

The seismic structure of the Mid-Cayman Spreading Center (MCSC) will be
investigated to determine the extent to which magmatism contributes to crustal
structure of an ultra-slow oceanic rift segment. As part of a larger
international project, seismic data will be acquired along five profiles, from
the ridge axis to ~10 Myr old flank, and from the spreading segment center to
the transform walls. Two main ideas will be addressed: (1) Whether the MCSC
hosts oceanic core complexes of exhumed crustal or mantle materials; (2) Whether
crustal thickness variations in the MCSC reflect inhibition of magmatism as the
spreading-segment ends are approached. Ocean bottom seismograph data will
constrain tomographic models of velocity structure, from which crustal
thickness, its variability, and/or mantle properties can be inferred. Recently
acquired bathymetry and gravity data will be combined with prior trackline data
and used as the basis for integrated seismic, gravity, and morphologic
interpretation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Up to 20-30% of the world's oceanic
spreading centers rift at ultraslow rates of less than 20 mm/yr, and expose a
range of lower-crustal and upper mantle rock. These ultraslow systems host
hydrothermal fields with chemical and biological activity that are distinct from
faster spreading chemosynthetic systems, and have relevance for understanding
the development of early life on Earth. This joint US-German-UK project
strengthens international collaboration on studies of seafloor spreading. A
graduate student will participate in all phases of the US portion of the study,
receiving training in a range of marine geophysical techniques.