* 1356544
* Mathematics, Engineering, & Physics Scholars
* EHR,DUE
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2020
* Lee Ann Clements, Jacksonville University
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 06/30/2020
* USD 625,673.00

The Mathematics, Engineering, and Physics (MEP) Scholars program at Jacksonville
University is contributing well-prepared individuals to the science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) workforce by providing an educational
experience that emphasizes student discovery. This program is designed to
increase enrollment of students, including those from underrepresented groups,
and improve retention of scholars through graduation or transfer to an
affiliated institution in engineering-related disciplines. The project can serve
as a model for similar institutions, particularly those that utilize a 3 + 2
program with affiliated universities for students to earn an engineering degree.

The project is recruiting annual cohorts of students based on academic ability
and financial need and supporting them by the development of a Residential
Learning Community (RLC), faculty mentors, tutoring, peer study groups, college
survival skills training, and career development. The program is collecting
information on how an RLC works as well as how the systemic implementation of
the numerous support structures impacts the retention and graduation of STEM
majors. Women and underrepresented minorities are being targeted in recruitment
and retained via the social and academic support structures of an RLC. The
program is being assessed based on enrollment, mid-term and final grades,
attendance at extracurricular functions, career plans, resiliency, engagement of
faculty and students, learning motivation, and learning strategies. Outcomes and
knowledge gained are being broadly disseminated.

The participation by scholars in project-based courses, mathematical modeling
contests, and enrollment in paired courses enables them to discover the
connections between physics and mathematics. The scholars are being encouraged
to participate in an annual mathematical modeling competition, undergraduate
research, and internships with local government and industry partners. Support
structures are scheduled within the targeted majors to deliver maximum impact to
each student and to equip each student to succeed. Mentoring provides feedback
and guidance and grounds students in their chosen disciplines. Undergraduate
research, internships, and career development solidifies their learning and
prepares them professionally. To ensure best practices in STEM teaching, a
Learning Community (LC) is being created for the MEP faculty and tutors. Faculty
and tutors are participating in workshops and regular meetings to discuss best
practices in STEM education, teaching strategies, and the progress of the
program.