* 1356747
* The Biogeochemistry of Dissolved Iron-ligands in Marine Cyanobacteria and Seawater
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2014,02/28/2018
* Daniel Repeta, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 02/28/2018
* USD 672,744.00

Micronutrient trace metals, such as iron and cobalt, are critical to all life on
earth, and their availability in the environment can regulate the primary
productivity in a region. In the ocean, up to 99.9% of dissolved iron, and to a
lesser extent cobalt, are bound by strong organic binding molecules, known as
ligands which control what fraction of these metals is available to organisms.
To understand carbon and nutrient cycling in many remote areas of the ocean
where trace metals limit primary production, it is important to understand the
distribution and cycling of ligands. In this study, a researcher at the Woods
Hole Oceanographic Institute will use novel techniques to assess the diversity
and composition of natural iron and cobalt binding ligands in laboratory
cultures of the globally abundant marine cyanobacteria Prochlorococcus and in
seawater samples from the South Pacific Subtropical Gyre. This study will add
significantly to the interpretation of iron and cobalt availability, and help to
link measurements of elemental metal distributions, ligand concentrations and
binding strengths, and assessments of the microbial community.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Results from the project would be
incorporated into graduate level organic geochemistry classes taught by the
proponent and be made publically available through the Massachusetts Institute
of Technology and Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution websites. One graduate
student would be supported and trained as part of this project. It is
anticipated that undergraduate students would also have the opportunity to
participate in the study during the summer months and learn about organic
geochemistry, microbial biogeochemistry, and modeling.