* 1356539
* Idaho Scholars in Engineering and Computer Science
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2014,12/31/2019
* Janet Callahan, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Johnson
* 12/31/2019
* USD 626,375.00

This project improves retention and graduate rates in STEM fields at Boise State
University. A goal of a six-year graduation rate of seventy percent has been
established. To achieve this, the project recruits academically excellent and
diverse recipients, establishes cohorts, and offers 13-15 scholarships and other
academic programming annually to civil engineering, computer science, electrical
engineering, materials science, and mechanical engineering undergraduates. The
project provides scholarships and support for at least two years, and smaller
transitional scholarships for up to two additional years. Outcomes are monitored
throughout the course of the project. Funding and cohort participation enables
students receiving scholarships both to graduate more quickly and in greater
numbers. Boise State University serves the third-largest metropolitan area in
the American Northwest and has a particular responsibility in supporting
workforce and economic development. This project helps to meet demands created
by both increasing enrollments as well as regional economic development. The
project helps to increase the number of students that continue education after
high school and complete four-year college degrees. This S-STEM project provides
a critical component needed to improve college completion rates and increase the
state and regional STEM workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given Federal and
regional imperatives to increase STEM graduates, there is merit in promoting
educational and research programs that are successful in retaining and
graduating students in STEM fields. This project offers detailed assessment,
recruitment, and retention data to help establish effective practices in STEM
retention. Such data are particularly beneficial in offering insight on serving
groups currently underrepresented in STEM disciplines including Hispanics, first
generation college students, and non-traditional students who often must balance
studies with substantive family responsibilities. The project utilizes
experienced, multidisciplinary personnel to help advise students and carryout
the project plan. Particular areas of expertise include student selection,
coordination, assessment and career placement. Furthermore, the identification
and dissemination of the project's effective practices offers information useful
to other institutions seeking to increase graduation rates and retention in STEM
fields.