* 1356562
* ABI: Development: Parallel Computing for Phylogenetics: Grid, Public and GPU Computing
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Michael Cummings, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 07/31/2018
* USD 1,008,831.00

The University of Maryland College Park is awarded a grant to support the
development of cyberinfrastructure that will facilitate, accelerate, and improve
the ability to infer evolutionary relationships among organisms through the use
of several types of parallel computing methods. The central idea is to build
upon and extend previous work at multiple different levels of parallel computing
to better take advantage of a diversity of computing resources, particularly
existing desktop processing capacity available through volunteer computing. The
main product will be an enhanced grid computing system, customized for
phylogenetic tree search and accessible through a user-friendly web interface,
that links thousands of individual computers worldwide. The project will improve
use of a second underutilized resource inside desktop computers, namely graphics
cards and other types of processors not usually used for normal data processing,
which can do many scientific calculations faster than the central processing
unit (cpu). A free, open-source library for parallelized maximum likelihood
calculations will be extended.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Public computing provides a
mechanism for meaningful public involvement in scientific research. Almost
17,000 people in 143 countries have volunteered use of their computers and have
run evolutionary analyses through the current system. With additional project
development effort, the number of volunteers is expected to increase. This model
of computing not only increases the speed and quality of scientific research,
but is also more energy efficient. Furthermore, the project provides
opportunities to involve students and others in parallel and public computing
research. Results of this project will be accessible via the PI's websites at
http://openevolution.org and http://lattice.umiacs.umd.edu.