* 1356157
* Workshop: World War II Anthropology: Austrians and Germans in Poland, Japanese in Asia, and the Search for Survivors (AAAS, Pacific Division Mtg., U Cal-Riverside, June 2014)
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2014,03/31/2015
* Alan Bain, Southern Oregon University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 03/31/2015
* USD 20,066.00

Roger Christianson of Southern Oregon University will oversee an international
symposium on the role of German, Austrian, and Japanese anthropologists in
annexed territories (in Eastern Europe and Asia) during the first half of the
twentieth century through the Second World War. The research will aid in our
understanding of the role that anthropological science played in colonial and
wartime Europe and Asia. They will discuss the roles these anthropologists
played in consigning Polish people from immediate death to mindless labor, the
records they created, how the records were used to find Polish survivors after
the war, and what transpired once survivors were found. Also to be discussed
will be research relating to the investigations of Japanese anthropologists in
Asia, beginning with the colonization of Taiwan in 1895 through military
expansion during World War II. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This anthropological
research documents little known information about the role of anthropologists
during wartime, how their services were used to support German and Japanese
ambitions, and how anthropologists today search for
survivors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This symposium will be conducted before
scientists, graduate students, and high school students at a meeting of the
American Association for the Advancement of Science, Pacific Division, annual
conference at the University of California, Riverside. Abstracts of the
presentations will be published.