* 1356904
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: An Anthropological Examination of the Reorganization of Urban Space in Food Security and Redevelopment Efforts
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2014,11/30/2015
* Kristin Monroe, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 11/30/2015
* USD 11,385.00

University of Kentucky doctoral student Megan Maurer, under the supervision of
Dr. Kristin Monroe, will conduct this study of redevelopment. By understanding
and assessing the efforts of community members, civic organizations, and local
governments to transform their urban environments, this research will help
identify strategies for more inclusive urban redevelopment. The research takes
place in Southeast Michigan, an area characterized by crumbling urban
infrastructures and bankrupt municipalities. Social scientists find
socioeconomically devastated areas of the U.S. such as this particularly useful
for studying the social and cultural impediments to redevelopment efforts.

The purpose of this project is to investigate the strategies used by individuals
from diverse socioeconomic backgrounds to improve their food security. This
project also asks how community efforts to transform urban space for productive
ends are shaped by different socioeconomic experiences. This research will be
conducted in a small city in Southeast Michigan. Using data from semi-structured
interviews with local community stewards the researcher will explore four
community food production efforts for case study. These case studies will use
surveys, maps, in-depth interviews, and participant observations, to identify
the connections between ideas about urban land use and their civic engagements.
These methods will also be used to determine the role demographics and
relationships to others play in shaping these connections. A group of
individuals from the four case study neighborhoods that are not part of the
organized food production efforts will be included as a comparison group.

This project also advances scholarship on the ways working people and socially
disadvantaged individuals engage with food security and other challenges in
their daily lives. Finally, this study furthers anthropological and other
scientific research on the connections between urban space, citizenship, and
social change.