* 1356576
* Tampa Bay Scholarships for Education &amp; Employment Development in STEM (SEEDS)
* EHR,DUE
* 08/15/2014,12/31/2020
* Bradley Jenkins, St. Petersburg College
* Standard Grant
* Pushpa Ramakrishna
* 12/31/2020
* USD 623,740.00

St. Petersburg College is providing scholarship support to help increase the
number of economically disadvantaged students who complete STEM degrees and
proceed to join the scientific workforce. The project will help 80 participants
to take part in an employment-centered curriculum that includes job shadowing
and internships, while at the same time providing them with integrated academic
and career advising, access to tutoring centers, a project-specific orientation,
and career mentoring. A unique feature of the project is a "road map to
graduation" plan that each student makes in concert with Campus Faculty
Champions who will also act as recruiters, mentors, and activity coordinators.
The road map will help students to identify curricular goals, determine when and
if they should use academic support services, and make plans to investigate STEM
careers. In order to broaden participation, students are recruited through local
high schools and the Pinellas Education Foundation with an emphasis on inclusion
of women, students from under-represented racial/ethnic groups, and
veterans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data generated through assessment and evaluation
is expected to support the rationale that when students participate in faculty-
guided decision-making and have substantive industrial experiences they are
retained in STEM majors and are more likely to matriculate into four-year
college or choose STEM careers. Formative and summative evaluation focuses on
measurable outcomes (% retention and graduation), the impact on curricular
changes, and the extent of industry/faculty/student interactions. Student
enrollment records, placement test scores, course grades, graduation and
demographic information are tracked. Dissemination of the project results
provides a model for improving retention through multidisciplinary support and
intensive planning. The project team plans to present their work at meetings of
the Florida Academy of Science, the Florida Chapter of Mathematics Association
of America, and the League for Innovation in the Community College among others.
Project deliverables include the results of summative evaluation and initiatives
to address the local STEM industry workforce needs by educating and training a
skilled STEM workforce.