* 1356753
* PEEPS - Program for Engineering Excellence for Partner Schools
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2020
* Katherine Chen, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Medina-Borja
* 04/30/2020
* USD 618,815.00

This project presents an institutional approach towards recruiting, retaining,
and graduating engineering students from disadvantaged backgrounds. Targeted
students come from high schools that have large percentages of students who
qualify for the National School Lunch Program. Data suggests that these students
are not only more likely to have low socioeconomic status, but also be first
generation college students and/or underrepresented minorities (URM).
Scholarships of up to $10,000 for four years are extended to engineering
students with high financial need. The first cohort is expected to include six
Mechanical Engineering (ME) students and the second cohort is a mix of six
College of Engineering students starting the second year. A long-term benefit of
the project is that is increasing the ability of the California Polytechnic
State University to improve educational opportunities for disadvantaged students
effectively and efficiently. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical merit of the
project rests on research that has suggested that reasons for the lack of
comparative success of disadvantaged students include feelings of isolation,
lack of self-efficacy, financial pressures, and the lack of appropriate academic
support. The project meets those identified needs, and the evaluation and
assessment of the program measures the impact of the combined support mechanisms
on the students' academic success. Specific features of the project's
implementation include the formation of cohorts of student learning communities
to support one another and create a sense of belonging and to build community.
The cohorts also take several engineering support courses together, and are
automatically enrolled in supplemental workshops in Science and Mathematics and
the Engineering Success courses. The project removes obstacles and integrates
several proven student success strategies to help students develop their
personal academic and professional goals. Thus, project components not only
include financial support, but also block scheduling of gateway engineering
support courses with supplemental workshops, frequent advising, individualized
coaching and mentoring of personal academic and professional goals, professional
development opportunities, and STEM outreach activities. The proposed activities
help strengthen student identities as an engineer increase self-efficacy.
Assessment and evaluation of the project contributes to the knowledge of how
engineering students succeed, and how the learning community model may be
expanded to more students.