* 1356529
* ABI Innovation: A Novel Framework for Detecting Genomic Structural Variation
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2018
* Paul Medvedev, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 05/31/2018
* USD 733,316.00

Genomic structural variation has been identified as a significant contributor to
phenotype diversity across a wide phylogenetic spectrum, including humans,
vertebrates, nematodes, insects, and plants. These variants are large
polymorphic regions of chromosomes that contain rearrangement of DNA. While
numerous tools exist for detecting these variants from sequencing data, they are
not able to accurately resolve regions with a high repetitive content or
variants with a complex structure. This project addresses the algorithmic
limitations of current approaches and develops tools to enable the
identification of these complex and repetitive variants. It also develops a
computational platform to facilitate the development of advanced tools by other
members of the research community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the role
that genomic variation plays is one of the major scientific challenges and
opportunities facing society today. The improved detection of these variants
will have an impact across a wide range of biological areas, including
population genetics, evolutionary developmental biology, and plant genomics. It
will also lead to better understanding of the mechanisms behind devastating
diseases such as cancer, where complex and repetitive elements have been shown
to play an important role. To educate future leaders in this important field,
the project will develop graduate and undergraduate classes to train future
generations of scientists and engineers and to advance the collaborative
frontiers of biology and computer science. Strong efforts will be made to
promote diversity through recruitment of students from under-represented groups.