* 1356735
* Focus on Retention in Cohorts of Engineering Students - Plus (FORCES+)
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Lynn Peterson, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Tom Higgins
* 08/31/2019
* USD 638,572.00

This project will pursue a promising approach towards recruiting, retaining, and
graduating engineering students who transfer from a community college into a
four-year degree program. The University of Texas at Arlington (UTA) College of
Engineering (COE) will implement a program called: FORCES+ (Focus On Retention
in Cohorts of Engineering Students to Provide Lasting University Success). The
program will provide scholarships and support activities to incoming freshman
and new transfer students in engineering majors. The objectives of FORCES+ are
to increase educational opportunities for financially needy, talented
undergraduate engineering students; improve retention of freshman and transfer
students; and increase participation in internships, cooperative education,
research experiences or service opportunities related to their majors.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project at this Hispanic Serving Institution focuses
on building cohorts that of students that enter with comparable levels of
readiness to purse an engineering major. Cohorts of incoming students will be
formed based on the extent of completion and success in pre-engineering courses
such as calculus and physics. The project then utilizes a university-wide
required college success course to group transfer students into the same section
of the course. This course will then form the foundation for building a cohort
for the transfer students. The approach will enable the course to address issues
specific to the needs of transfer students. This model is based on an approach
that was found to be successful for first year students at this institution.
Academic success will also be fostered through support provided for career
development and career transitions through optional collaborative research with
faculty or industry-based internships with local industry partners.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The FORCES project will carry out formative and summative
evaluations of the project through placement exams, surveys, focus groups and
exit interviews. These will be used in the context of both baseline data and
longitudinal evaluation. Expected improvements in retention of freshman and
transfer students in coursework leading up to the engineering professional
programs will be measured along with graduation rates and participation in
internships, cooperative education, research experiences and/or service
opportunities.