* 1356406
* Support Through Robotics for Underserved Talented Students (STRUTS)
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2020
* Robert Nichols, Kettering University
* Standard Grant
* Pushpa Ramakrishna
* 06/30/2020
* USD 597,955.00

The need to increase the number and quality of STEM graduates in the workforce
both nationally and in Michigan is well documented. A 2010 state-level analysis
study by the Georgetown University Center on Education and the Workforce
(http://cew.georgetown.edu/jobs2018/states) projects that by 2018 45 percent of
STEM jobs in Michigan will be in Engineering and Technicians Occupations and 94
percent of these jobs require postsecondary education.

Kettering University, Support Through Robotics for Underserved Talented Students
(STRUTS) enrolls full-time, 10 academically talented but financially
disadvantaged students in their pursuit to become leaders in a high quality
scientific and technical workforce. The number of scholars is optimal for
creating camaraderie within a cohort which is large enough to be diverse but not
too large to marginalize students. Kettering University attracts students
interested in computer and technical fields who have financial need. STRUTS
funding bridges the gap between available financial support and the cost of
tuition so removing financial barriers which result in attrition of students
with financial need. Academic support through experiential learning, leadership
opportunities, FIRST Robotics, multi-level mentorship, and rigorous academics
ensures the success of scholars and is centered around Kettering's new FIRST
Community Center (FCC), which houses high school FIRST Robotics teams on campus.
Scholars receive targeted academic support, have a strong cohort and a cadre of
peer mentors who have completed a class in mentoring. In addition they are
provided with challenging paid co-op work assignments to prepare them for
professional success and workplace leadership. STRUTS Scholars acquire essential
leadership skills when they mentor the FIRST Robotics participants working in
the FCC. Simultaneously, STRUTS Scholars are mentored by an extensive pool of
committed Kettering faculty from a variety of disciplines. A required research-
based thesis is focused on professional practice with an interdisciplinary focus
which provides an opportunity to apply academic and co-op experience with
research to solve a real problem at a pre-selected organization.

A comprehensive, culturally responsive assessment plan for continuous
improvement and overall success will be implemented. At least 90% of STRUTS
Scholars are retained and graduate. Programmatic successes are documented to
insure sustainability at Kettering and replication at other elite technology
schools. Results are disseminated to enhance the benefit of need-based support,
FIRST Robotics, and mentorship on STEM higher education. The STRUTS project is a
showcase to potential donors with a view to sustaining matriculation and
graduation of talented students who have financial need.