* 1356531
* Scholarships to Enhance Excellence in the Chemical and Biological Research Based Workforce (STEER)
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2022
* Marcelo Tolmasky, CSU Fullerton Auxiliary Services Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 07/31/2022
* USD 617,139.00

This National Science Foundation (NSF) Scholarships in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics (S-STEM) project at California State University at
Fullerton (CSUF) is providing scholarships and support services to academically-
talented students majoring in biology, chemistry, and biochemistry who
demonstrate financial need. Abundant jobs are available for biology, chemistry,
and biochemistry graduates in the bioscience industry, but a gap exists between
the available, qualified talent and the burgeoning need for such personnel.
CSUF's Scholarships To Enhance Excellence in the Chemical and Biological
Research-Based Workforce (STEER) project is addressing this critical shortage by
supplying highly-qualified graduates who are capable of functioning in the
multidisciplinary, team-based environment that characterizes industry. In
addition, a link to CSUF's NSF Noyce Teaching as a Primary Profession in Biology
and Biochemistry project invites STEM teachers in preparation to STEER
activities, which impacts the bioscience career awareness of future high school
teachers and their students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;STEER's overarching goal is to
enhance the quantity and quality of CSUF STEM undergraduates who will join the
biological and chemical research-based industry workforce. In addition to
providing scholarships for at least 80 students, it is integrating new and
existing campus activities for students in the targeted majors who wish to enter
the biosciences workforce. STEER provides scholarships, support services, and
opportunities to ensure students academic and personal support, as well as
enrichment activities that enable them to learn, study, socialize, and work
together from their scientific perspectives, improving retention, graduation
rates, and job prospects. The project is adapting the curriculum to enable
students to acquire knowledge, skills, and habits that are specifically tailored
to industry careers and needs. Thus, it is establishing programs that will
contribute to the knowledge base about ways to effectively educate a robust STEM
industry workforce and about the educational practices and experiences that
foster retention in STEM majors, completion of degrees, preparation for the
workplace environment, and the habits of mind that lead to success in the
industry workforce, particularly among underrepresented minorities.