* 1356481
* Chemistry, Mathematics, and Physics Scholarships (CMaPS) at Howard University
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2021
* Daniel Williams, Howard University
* Continuing Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 07/31/2021
* USD 617,497.00

The goal of the Chemistry, Mathematics, and Physics Scholarships (CMaPS) S-STEM
scholarship program at Howard University is to increase student graduation rates
while improving academic performance. The program is enhancing the academic
environment for S-STEM scholars as they complete undergraduate degrees in
Chemistry, Mathematics, or Physics. The project provides approximately 18
scholarships for first-year or second-year students. All of the first year
S-STEM scholars and some of the second year students live in one of Howard's
Living and Learning Communities, which has the theme of "Technology:
Interdisciplinary Usage." The mission of the living-learning communities is to
extend student learning opportunities outside of the classroom to heighten
student intellectual and personal growth. These living environments foster
faculty and resident interactions that build a strong sense of community for the
students. In addition, a one credit hour course is being developed around this
theme. All S-STEM scholars take this course, which is also available to other
Howard students. S-STEM scholars also have the opportunity to take a summer
research course. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The S-STEM program recruits scholars from
underrepresented groups through high school admission counselors, fair visits,
and outreach programs offered by the participating departments. S-STEM scholars
are connected to the career/advising/mentoring services of the university and
the support structures designed specifically forthem. The project builds strong
ties between the S-STEM faculty and the scholars through the living and learning
communities, a structured mentoring program, and the research opportunities. The
success of the project will be evaluated based on a comparison study between a
matched control cohort and the S-STEM scholars using surveys, focus groups and
observational studies.