* 1356966
* Collaborative Research: Turbulence-spurred settlement: Deciphering a newly recognized class of larval response
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/2014,01/31/2018
* Brian Gaylord, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 01/31/2018
* USD 305,067.00

Overview: With this award the investigators will explore a habitat-scale
oceanographic process that has the potential to integrate studies of larval
delivery with an understanding of how larvae respond to substrate-associated
cues. This work will build on published and preliminary data indicating that
turbulent shear characteristic of high-energy near shore environments primes
larvae to initiate settlement and to transform into the juvenile stage. These
prior findings suggest that: 1) Because turbulence intensity varies predictably
as a function of the strength of wave breaking and other factors, turbulence
could operate as an indicator for larvae of their approach to suitable habitat,
providing a link between larger-scale dispersal phenomena, and near-bottom
search and selection behaviors; and. 2) The larval response to turbulence acts
in an unprecedented fashion. In contrast to typical cues, turbulence does not
induce settlement directly, but rather spurs otherwise "pre-competent" larvae
that are refractory to chemical cues to become "competent", thereby causing them
to acquire responsiveness to such cues and undergo settlement. The
interdisciplinary team has combined expertise in larval biology, sensory
ecology, and organism-flow interactions necessary to address this topic. They
will employ a phylogenetically robust approach to explore the scope and adaptive
significance of the turbulence response in a widespread and ecologically
important class of organisms (echinoids; sea urchins and their relatives), and
will determine whether the response is aligned with environmental conditions
characteristic of these organisms' adult habitat. They will also test for
ecologically important functional consequences of precocious, turbulence-induced
settlement. This work will provide a detailed look at an entirely new class of
settlement inducer, one with strong potential for changing current
conceptualizations of dispersing larval stages, their ability to detect
signatures of habitat across multiple scales, and the ways in which organism-
level traits might influence population connectivity.

Intellectual Merit : How organisms with dispersing life stages find their way
back to adult habitat is a fundamental question in marine ecology. Considerable
research has explored links between transport, delivery, settlement, and
recruitment, with important advances in knowledge. However, a complete
understanding of the larval recruitment process remains elusive. Standard tools
for estimating dispersal (e.g., numerical circulation models) have limited
spatial resolution, which prevents them from predicting at scales below a few
hundred meters how larvae will interact with the shore. Studies investigating
larval attachment have focused on chemical, tactile, or near-bottom hydrodynamic
cues active across microns to centimeters. The novelty of the present project is
that it will focus on processes at habitat scales -- between transport and
settlement -- where there is a gap in the understanding of processes.

Broader Impacts: This project will provide a framework for integrating key
concepts of propagule dispersal and settlement, two fundamental but largely
disjunct themes in marine science. The understanding that will come from this
study will provide key information for ecosystem based management of coastal
marine resources. The findings of the study will be communicated via
publications and conference presentations. There will also be a robust education
and public outreach effort. The investigators will develop a "Surfing to
Settlement" virtual lab activity based on their research that will be
incorporated into the VirtualUrchin web platform, a widely exploited educational
resource at Stanford that gets thousands of unique users per month. Through
connections to the San Francisco Bay National Estuarine Research Reserve, they
will integrate the "Surfing to Settlement" activity into one of NERRs
professional development workshops for central California educators, thus
disseminating this resource to and gaining valuable feedback from dozens of
teachers and thousands of students. The project will also continue an existing
partnership with a local community college (Santa Rosa Community College) that
provides a means for undergraduates who would otherwise get little exposure to
the research enterprise to receive training and mentorship in the scientific
process via extended internships. In addition, the investigators will expand
development of a high-quality video/photo resource that documents early
development, larval morphology and behavior in a phylogenetically broad array of
animal phyla, and will disseminate this resource to the public via an existing
collaboration with the internationally known Monterey Bay Aquarium.