* 1356060
* Bottom Stress and the Generation of Vertical Vorticity Over the Inner Shelf
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2018
* Malcolm Scully, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 03/31/2018
* USD 729,670.00

Small, kilometers-scale eddies play a critical role in the exchange of water
between the shallows adjacent to the coast and the deeper ocean. These eddies
are largely controlled by the friction at the sea floor, which itself depends on
many parameters ranging from the roughness of the bottom topography to the
density distribution in the water column. Recent evidence shows that simple,
tunable formulations for bottom stress perform better in numerical models than
more sophisticated ones based on physical mechanisms. Better understanding of
the small-scale physics leading to bottom stress is needed for more accurate
numerical models that do not need tuning with observations. This study will make
detailed and extensive measurements near the sea floor to develop the needed
understanding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current models describe the dependence of
the bottom stress on the near-bottom current, near-bottom velocities produced by
surface and internal waves, seabed composition, bedforms, and stratification
caused by heat, salt and suspended sediment. However, recent regional-scale
simulations suggest that use of these stress models degrades regional-scale
simulations of currents relative to those based on simpler drag laws. Recent
measurements and large-eddy simulations suggest that Langmuir Circulations might
penetrate to the seafloor and disrupt the near-bottom flow and drag
relationships, and recent stress measurements and particle-image velocimetry
suggest that the longstanding models might over-predict the dependence of the
bottom stress on surface gravity waves and over-simplify the near-bottom flow
over large wave-formed sand ripples. This observational study will combine
direct-covariance measurements of the bottom stress with corresponding
measurements of the quantities that have been hypothesized to influence the
bottom drag law. It capitalizes on a separately funded, concurrent, co-located
study of exchange and dispersion across the inner shelf that will include
measurements of surface currents by high-resolution high-frequency radar, water-
column measurements of currents and stratification, measurements of wind
forcing, and regional-scale simulations. Analysis of the resulting combined
measurements and simulations will produce new insights into the dynamics of the
bottom stress and its role in the vorticity dynamics that govern kilometer-scale
eddies and transport across the inner shelf.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit :&lt;br/&gt;This study will produce a comprehensive data set with
measurements of the bottom stress and all of the quantities that have been
hypothesized to influence the bottom drag law. Analysis of the data set will
produce new insights into the mechanics of the bottom stress, an evaluation of
longstanding models and the role of processes such as Langmuir Circulations that
have not yet been incorporated into bottom stress models, and ultimately an
improvement of the physics of bottom stress models. The measurements and
analysis of bottom stress will contribute an important new element to the
separately funded concurrent regional-scale measurements and simulations of
surface velocities, water-column currents and stratification, and wind forcing,
which will lead to a new understanding of the generation and damping of vertical
vorticity over the inner shelf.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts
:&lt;br/&gt;This research will lead to improved models of the bottom stress,
which will improve predictions of eddies and other motions that control the
movement of water masses and water-borne substances, including sediments, larvae
and nutrients, from shallows adjacent to the coast to the larger mid- and outer
shelf regions. Improved predictions will enhance the ability of coastal
scientists, engineers and planners to address societally important applications
including harmful algal blooms, transport and fate of pollutants, and search and
rescue operations. The PIs have a history of mentoring at WHOI and USGS as well
as interacting with coastal managers and planners. The study will support a
recent doctoral graduate in the WHOI-USGS Postdoctoral Scholar Program and
provide training and experience in a wide range of coastal oceanographic
problems, methods, and applications.