* 1356975
* Physical Oceanography Dissertation Symposium VIII and IX
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2014,11/30/2018
* Amy Nye, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 11/30/2018
* USD 279,184.00

The VIIIth and IXth Physical Oceanography Dissertation Symposium (PODS)
conferences will take place in Honolulu, Hawaii from 5-9 October 2014 and 2-6
October 2016, respectively. These symposia were established in 2002 to bring
together, for the purposes of scientific discussion and interactions, recent PhD
graduates in physical oceanography. The goal of these meetings is to provide
these individuals with an opportunity to present their dissertation research in
front of their professional peers and to forge professional relationships
between the participants that would facilitate their future research and
academic careers. This program is modeled after the highly successful
Dissertations Symposium in Chemical Oceanography (DISCO) meetings, which first
met in 1978, and is formatted in a similar manner. The DISCO symposia are held
in parallel with the PODS symposia so that there will be interaction between the
participants in both of these meetings, broadening the perspectives of all
participants. A broad international announcement of the PODS symposia will be
made to physical oceanographers working at academic institutions in both the US
and other countries to develop an applicant pool. From this pool, the sponsoring
agencies will select invitees. The meeting will consist of a series of sessions
grouped by research subject area that are chaired by selected invitees and will
also include student-led discussion periods. In addition to an initial
presentation by an invited senior scientist in the field, there will also be
presentations by and discussion with agency program managers explaining funding
mechanisms and strategies. Participants will form break-out groups to discuss
current issues in research, as well as obstacles and opportunities to career
paths in the field, and then provide feedback to agency personnel through formal
presentations. By bringing the two separate symposia invitees together in
evening discussion sessions revolving around specific topics, the goal is to
broaden the disciplinary expertise of the participants, promote future
collaborations, and to make connections between their research and the education
of future generations of scientists. Logistical support for these symposia will
be provided by the University of Hawaii's Conference Center, as well as from two
faculty members from the Department of Oceanography.

Intellectual Merit: The PODS symposia will produce a cohort group of early
career professionals in the field of physical oceanography from widely differing
backgrounds and geographical origins, serving to create a peer-mentoring group
that will last throughout their careers. In addition, the cross-disciplinary
contacts arising from the combination of the DISCO and PODS meetings will foster
future inter-disciplinary understanding and collaborations. Thus, the PODS
participants will be uniquely situated to take advantage of networking between
individuals and groups, which is of great importance to foster advances in our
scientific knowledge and preparedness to meet upcoming environmental challenges.

Broader Impacts: These PODS attendees play a critical role in improving our
understanding of Ocean and Earth Science processes, which provide the scientific
framework vital for developing rational climate-related policies. In addition,
as a minority institution, the University of Hawaii fosters interactions between
traditionally under-represented groups and minorities. Planned meeting
activities include interactions between meeting participants and students,
particularly undergraduates in the Department of Oceanography's Global
Environmental Sciences program.