* 1356972
* Dissertations Symposium in Chemical Oceanography XXIV and XXV
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/2014,11/30/2018
* Amy Nye, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 11/30/2018
* USD 279,184.00

The University of Hawaii's Outreach College will continue management of the 24th
and 25th Dissertations Symposium in Chemical Oceanography (DISCO), a conference
originally begun in 1978. These symposia provide recently graduated or soon to
graduate, PhD level chemical oceanographers with an opportunity to present their
dissertation research in front of their peers, and to forge professional
relationships that will facilitate their future research and academic careers.
The meeting will also offer the opportunity to interact with their peers in
physical oceanography given the Physical Oceanography Dissertation Symposium
will run concurrently with DISCO, as well as engage in discussions with agency
personnel to better understand funding mechanisms and strategies. DISCO XXIV and
DISCO XXV will be held in Honolulu, Hawaii from October 5-9, 2014 and October
2-6, 2016, respectively. Applicants eligible for participation in a given DISCO
meeting are those individuals who have received their doctoral degrees in ocean
chemistry within one year preceding that symposium or who are certified by the
degree-granting institution as graduating within one year after that symposium.
An applicant pool will be developed for the meetings from a broad international
announcement to chemical oceanographers at academic institutions in the US and
other countries, as well as an announcement in EOS magazine. From this pool,
agency personnel will select invitees. This symposium is jointly sponsored by
the National Science Foundation and the National Oceanographic and Atmospheric
Administration.

Broader Impacts: As in previous years, these Symposia will aid in furthering the
professional development of early career chemical oceanographers, both U.S. and
international, who will play a critical role in improving our understanding of
ocean and earth science processes. Because the worldwide marine chemistry
research community is relatively small and spread out, these Symposia offer an
important opportunity for early-career U.S. and non-U.S scientists to meet and
develop life-long associations. The meeting location in the Hawaiian Islands
provides an important opportunity for the majority of participants to arrange
time to witness marine basaltic volcanism first-hand, visit the acclaimed
Hawaiian Ocean Time-Series locale, and see the iconic site of atmospheric carbon
dioxide monitoring on Mauna Loa.