* 1356474
* Scholarship fund for excellence in Computer Science and Mathematics
* EHR,DUE
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2020
* Luis Medina, University of Puerto Rico-Rio Piedras
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 06/30/2020
* USD 630,217.00

This project provides a total of 120 scholarships to high-achieving financially
disadvantaged undergraduate and masters students enrolled in computer science
and mathematics at the University of Puerto Rico-Rio Piedras (UPR-RP). Since 98%
of all students at UPR-RP receive some form of financial assistance, and 56% of
undergraduates receive Pell grants, the need for these scholarships is great.
Scholarship amounts range from $2,500 in the first year of study to $4,800 in
the last year. The project is a model program which can be replicated to support
financially disadvantaged students from underrepresented groups in different
regions. Students will be recruited in the program through a series of
presentations by the PIs and S-STEM Scholars. The PIs, with help from the S-STEM
scholars, will host an event for middle and high school students that will
highlight the impact of CS/Math in society. Graduate students will be recruited
from within UPR-RP and at national meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to
scholarship support, the project sponsors activities 1) to increase the
awareness of scholars about opportunities for further studies and careers in
industry, 2) to strengthen academic and professional skills of scholars, 3) to
build a sense of community, 4) to highlight the social and applied aspect of
computer science and mathematics, and 5) to support student learning through
tutoring and mentoring. The overall goals of the project are to improve
recruitment, retention, and preparation for employment or graduate school. The
project prepares Puerto Rican students to work in two high demand disciplines,
which helps meet the expanding need for computer science and mathematics
professionals both locally and nationally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The evaluation
of this project will look at the retention to graduation rate, time to degree
completion, and student progress after graduation. This data will be collected
for recent graduates, current students (non- S-STEM Scholars), and S-STEM
scholars. The rates will be compared for each group of students each year of the
project to determine whether or not the program is effective.