* 1356193
* ABI Development: Linking  enzyme superfamilies to nature's repertoire of reactions
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2017
* Patricia Babbitt, University of California-San Francisco
* Continuing Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 06/30/2017
* USD 1,741,910.00

The University of California, San Francisco (San Francisco, CA) has received
this ABI development award to generate new interactive tools to enhance our
understanding of the relationship between the chemistry and biology of enzymes.
Enzymes form the basis of nature's toolkit, performing the chemical reactions
essential for life. While sophisticated computational tools and resources exist
to probe the relationships between enzyme sequences and their structures
(bioinformatics and computational biology), the resources to describe the
chemistry of enzymes (cheminformatics) are significantly less mature. As a
result, our ability to understand on a large scale how enzyme sequences and
structures enable the chemistry of life is severely hampered. As sequence data
continues to expand at a rate of tens of millions of sequences per year, huge
numbers of new enzymes have been identified whose chemical reactions are
unknown. Discovery of their chemical functions will open up new opportunities
for understanding biology, ecology, and for guiding experiments that include
enzyme engineering to produce new chemicals or to create enzymes capable of
degrading toxic pollutants. To achieve this promise, this project will develop
new tools needed to compare enzyme reactions and effectively link them to the
sequence and structural features of the proteins that perform them. The results
will be incorporated into a new database infrastructure, MEERCat (Mechanism and
Evolution in Enzyme Reaction Catalysis), that will integrate chemical
information with sequence and structural information for a large number of
enzyme superfamilies.

MEERCat will use as a foundation two databases separately developed to capture
these chemical and protein data, respectively. MACiE, which stands for
"Mechanism, Annotation and Classification in Enzymes", is an electronic database
of the chemical reaction mechanisms of enzymes. It captures chemical steps and
overall reactions, along with a web-based search tool to enable users to explore
these mechanisms. The Structure-Function Linkage Database (SFLD), is an
electronic database that classifies enzymes into evolutionarily related sets
called superfamilies and then associates specific sequence and structural
features of each superfamily with the chemical capabilities of its member
reaction families. It provides web-based browse, search, and analysis tools
including sequence similarity networks (SSNs). SSNs enable facile mapping of
chemical and other functional properties to sequences, a technology that will be
used extensively in this project.

To achieve broad impact and benefit researchers worldwide, all data will be
freely available for download. A user-friendly web-based interface will
disseminate the results accompanied by browse, search and analysis tools. The
MEERCAT infrastructure will provide online and YouTube type tutorials to train
researchers in using the resource and aid others in using it for teaching. The
new resource will be incorporated into current graduate coursework in
bioinformatics at UCSF and in workshops held at UCSF and at other institutions
to train researchers with generating and interpreting analyses performed using
MEERCat tools.