* 1356977
* Research Initiation Awards: Spatial-temporal Information Fusion and Real-time Sensor Data Assimilation Using Sequential Monte Carlo Methods
* EHR,HRD
* 08/15/2013,03/31/2017
* Feng Gu, CUNY College of Staten Island
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 03/31/2017
* USD 160,448.00

The Research Initiation Award project entitled - Spatial-temporal Information
Fusion and Real-time Sensor Data Assimilation Using Sequential Monte Carlo
Methods - has the overarching goal to develop tractable approaches for spatial-
temporal information fusion and real time sensor data assimilation using state
of the art probabilistic techniques based on sequential Monte Carlo (SMC)
methods. New algorithms and methods will be developed to enhance the
effectiveness and efficiency of information fusion and data assimilation for
large-scale spatial temporal systems. A special focus is to effectively use
real-time information and sensor data from geographically distributed data
sources for more accurate state inference using SMC methods. Specific objectives
of this project include: developing innovative algorithms to exploit the
spatial-temporal state of a system for more effective sampling/resampling and
convergence of SMC methods; developing advanced data integration methods to
support assimilating real-time information and sensor data from distributed data
sources; and developing new computing methods and infrastructure based on
parallel environment to enhance performance of large-scale information fusion
and data assimilation.

The project promises to have an impact on both theoretical and practical aspects
of spatial-temporal information fusion and real time sensor data assimilation.
The newly developed methods will increase the capability of seamlessly
integrating real time data streams to support better analysis and prediction and
real time decision making. The project involves undergraduate students by
training them to conduct research in a stepwise manner, broadening their
network, and preparing them for graduate studies or the workforce. The project
will enhance the teaching of computer science classes on campus of Voorhees
College by remotely accessing the cluster system at Georgia State University on
which students can run parallel and distributed programs.