* 1356432
* Manufacturing, Engineering Technology, and Energy Ready (METER) Scholars
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2021
* Pamela Mazur, Northeast Wisconsin Technical College
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 06/30/2021
* USD 616,357.00

The METER (Manufacturing, Engineering Technology, and Energy Ready) Scholars
Program at Northeast Wisconsin Technical College (NWTC) addresses the important
issue of supplying well-qualified graduates of STEM programs in areas of high
demand in the Wisconsin workforce. The program enhances the diversity of the
STEM workforce by encouraging the participation of female students and other
underrepresented students in STEM programs. For example, through a partnership
with the Oneida Tribe of Wisconsin, the project team is disseminating
information about the METER Scholars program and is recruiting METERS Scholars
from the American Indian population in the service area of NWTC. Through the
development and implementation of innovative educational and career preparation
activities, the METER Scholars program is addressing the national imperative to
retain undergraduates in STEM disciplines. The combined cohort-building
activities, noteworthy involvement of local industry and academic support
structures incorporated into the METER Scholars Program provide a model for
other similar institutions to adapt and implement to facilitate graduation of
technical and community college STEM majors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The METER
Scholars Program provides S-STEM scholarships to 92 students. METER Scholars are
pursuing associate's degrees in Electro-Mechanical Technology, Automation
Engineering Technology, Utilities Engineering Technology, Solar Energy
Technology, and Energy Management Technology. Complementing the financial
assistance provided through the scholarships, academic and career-readiness
support mechanisms are available to the METER Scholars. Examples of support
include cohorted sections of General Education courses, supplemental instruction
and coaching, mentoring by NWTC faculty and industry professionals and
networking opportunities through campus student organizations and industry
tours.