* 1356610
* Collaborative Research: Melting in the Off-Axis Environment - Interdisciplinary Field and Modeling Studies of the 8 20'N Seamount Chain, EPR
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* Patricia Gregg, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah K. Smith
* 07/31/2019
* USD 222,027.00

Understanding how melts are generated and focused across hundreds of kilometers
through the upper mantle to the narrow mid-ocean ridge (MOR) axis is fundamental
to understanding how Earth's ocean crust is formed and how elements and heat are
exchanged between the interior of our planet and its surface. Significant
advancements have been made in the use of computer models to investigate mantle
melting and melt transport. However, the lack of complementary geophysical and
geochemical data from the same area is a critical information gap that needs to
be filled before progress can be made in refining present models. This research
entails a multidisciplinary geophysical and geochemical program to map, sample,
and analyze samples from the 8Â°20'N Seamount Chain that extends 200 km westward
from the East Pacific Rise Siqueiros ridge-transform intersection in the Pacific
Ocean. Seamounts provide a unique opportunity to test hypotheses of melt
distribution and source variation that occur away from spreading centers. Melts
that build these seamounts provide geochemical windows into the upper mantle.

The research includes an oceanographic cruise to map and sample the targeted
region. This will be followed by geophysical data processing and petrographic,
petrologic, and geochemical analyses of samples collected by both using ALVIN, a
manned deep submersible, and dredging. Goals of the research are to develop new,
integrated models for upper lithosphere structure, deformation, and melt
distribution at a fast-spreading center and investigate the dynamics of off-axis
melting. The approach is interdisciplinary and includes analysis of geophysical
and geochemical data and geodynamic modeling. Rock samples will be analyzed for
all major and trace elements and radiogenic isotopes of Nd, Sr, and Pb will also
be analyzed. Broader impacts of the project include creation of a marine geology
curricular unit targeted at the middle school level and compliant with Next
Generation Sciences Standards that have currently been adopted by 45 states. The
project involves working closely with teachers and administrators of Pipkin
Middle School, a nationally ranked Title I school that serves 580 students in
the low-income center-city of Springfield, MO (poverty index of 78%). The
teachers will work closely with the reserachers and both parties will jointly
create the educational materials. Emphasis will be placed on inquiry learning
and connecting fundamental science processes with current research. The pilot
implementation will coincide with the proposed field program. The developed unit
will be made broadly available via the web on curricular resource sites.