* 1356708
* Collaborative Research:  Holocene Tropical Cyclone Variability in the Western North Atlantic
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2014,02/28/2018
* Jeffrey Donnelly, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Candace Major
* 02/28/2018
* USD 355,411.00

Damage from hurricanes has increased markedly over the last century, largely the
result of increased coastal population, urbanization and wealth. The recent
impacts of hurricanes Katrina, Irene, and Sandy highlight the vulnerability of
the United States to tropical cyclones. Unfortunately, the short instrumental
record of hurricane occurrence (~160 years) in the western North Atlantic
significantly hampers efforts to understand the driving mechanisms responsible
for modulating hurricane activity. Additionally, the relative rarity of
hurricane landfalls at any particular region further limits the extraction of
meaningful patterns from an already limited data set. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
collaborative project, conducted by researchers at the Woods Hole Oceanographic
Institution and Texas A&amp;M University at Galveston, is aimed at extending the
record of hurricane activity back thousands of years with sedimentary evidence
of hurricane passage preserved in coastal sink holes and blue holes. During an
intense hurricane strike, storm surge and waves mobilize and transport coarse
sediment such as sand and gravel. Some of this coarse sediment is preserved as a
layer in the finer grained sediments normally deposited in sink holes and blue
holes. These coarse grained layers can be used to reconstruct prehistoric storm
events over the thousands of years, throughout the time sink holes and blue
holes have been collecting sediments. This current work is focused on developing
these long-term records of past tropical cyclone activity from sites in the
Bahamas and Jamaica. These records will complement existing records from the
panhandle of Florida and the Northeastern US and will help elucidate spatial and
temporal patterns in tropical cyclone activity and allow for the examination of
the climatic drivers of this variability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts
of the work include a more comprehensive understanding of the array of climate
factors that influence hurricane activity over the past several millennia. This
improved insight into natural variability is essential to inform modeling
efforts and assess future risks from these storms. The project will also provide
a platform for training the next generation of geoscientists through practical,
hands-on interdisciplinary research experiences at the undergraduate and
graduate level.