* 1356453
* Biopolymers as carrier phases for selected natural radionuclides (of Th, Pa, Pb, Po, Be) in diatoms and coccolithophores
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2014,02/28/2018
* Chen Xu, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 02/28/2018
* USD 506,849.00

Particle-associated natural radioisotopes are transported to the ocean floor
mostly via silica and carbonate ballasted particles, allowing their use as
tracers for particle transport. Th(IV), Pa (IV,V), Po(IV), Pb(II) and Be(II)
radionuclides are important proxies in oceanographic investigations, used for
tracing particle and colloid cycling, estimating export fluxes of particulate
organic carbon, tracing air-sea exchange, paleoproductivity, and/or ocean
circulation in paleoceanographic studies. Even though tracer approaches are
considered routine, there are cases where data interpretation or validity has
become controversial, largely due to uncertainties about inorganic proxies and
organic carrier molecules. Recent studies showed that cleaned diatom frustules
and pure silica particles, sorb natural radionuclides to a much lower extent (by
1-2 orders of magnitude) than whole diatom cells (with or without shells).
Phytoplankton that build siliceous or calcareous shells, such as the diatoms and
coccolithophores, are assembled via bio-mineralization processes using
biopolymers as nanoscale templates. These templates could serve as possible
carriers for radionuclides and stable metals.

In this project, a research team at the Texas A & M University at Galveston
hypothesize that radionuclide sorption is controlled by selective biopolymers
that are associated with biogenic opal (diatoms), CaCO3 (coccolithophores) and
the attached exopolymeric substances (EPS), rather than to pure mineral phase.
To pursue this idea, the major objectives of their research will include
separation, identification and molecular-level characterization of the
individual biopolymers (e.g., polysaccharides, uronic acids, proteins,
hydroquinones, hydroxamate siderophores, etc.) that are responsible for binding
different radionuclides (Th, Pa, Pb, Po and Be) attached to cells or in the
matrix of biogenic opal or CaCO3 as well as attached EPS mixture, in laboratory
grown diatom and coccolithophore cultures. Laboratory-scale radiolabeling
experiments will be conducted, and different separation techniques and
characterization techniques will be applied.

Intellectual Merit : It is expected that this study will help elucidate the
molecular basis of the templated growth of diatoms and coccoliths, EPS and their
role in scavenging natural radionuclides in the ocean, and help resolve debates
on the oceanographic tracer applications of different natural radioisotopes
(230,234Th, 231Pa, 210Po, 210Pb and 7,10Be). The proposed interdisciplinary
research project will require instrumental approaches for molecular-level
characterization of these radionuclides associated carrier molecules.

Broader Impacts: The results of this study will be relevant for understanding
biologically mediated ocean scavenging of radionuclides by diatoms and
coccoliths which is important for carbon cycling in the ocean, and will
contribute to improved interpretation of data obtained by field studies
especially through the GEOTRACES program. This new program will enhance training
programs at TAMUG for postdocs, graduate and undergraduate students. Lastly,
results will be integrated in college courses and out-reach activities at Texas
A&M University, including NSF-REU, Sea Camp, Elder Hostel and exhibits at the
local science fair and interaction with its after-school program engaging Grade
9-12 students from groups traditionally underrepresented.