* 1356400
* Pathway for Adult-learners, Community college and non-Traditional Students (PACTS)
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/2014,05/31/2020
* Mark Reeves, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 05/31/2020
* USD 611,191.00

The Pathway for Adult-learners, Community college and non-Traditional Students
(PACTS) Scholarship program, at The George Washington University, is supporting
bachelor's degree completion in STEM fields for cohorts of talented non-
traditional students, community college graduates and adult learners This is a
demographic for which the impact of having a structured program with mentoring
and role modeling has been proven to be effective and, in some cases, a game-
changer for students. In addition to their core quantitative coursework, the
students learn principles of ethics, civic engagement, entrepreneurship,
business, and regulatory affairs. All this, combined with a strong emphasis on
verbal and written communication, is creating a cadre of STEM professionals who
will contribute to the local and national workforce as leaders for years to
come.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An essential aspect of this project is keeping the
students focused on rewarding careers in the STEM fields, and helping them
explore their options after graduation. With strong ties to the local technology
sector and through industry partnerships, the program is taking the students to
the workplace and bringing representatives from industry to seminars and
workshops. These exposures increase the students' interest in their STEM courses
by placing what they learn in a real-world context. Students are provided with
guidance that prepares them for continuing their education at a graduate
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is broadening the participation of non-
traditional students in the field of information technology by providing the
PACTS scholars with an array of opportunities to finish their degree, enter the
workforce or continue their studies at the graduate level. By enhancing the
education, mentoring, and employment opportunities, the program creates a STEM
workforce that is more diverse and inclusive. In addition, the project addresses
the need to increase the number of STEM graduates among non-traditional students
who are comprised mostly of underrepresented populations in STEM fields: first
generation college goers and financially needy students. A small cohort model at
George Washington University has demonstrated that a greater than 90%, on-time
graduation rate can be achieved for STEM majors with community college
backgrounds. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The evaluation plan for this project includes
both formative and sumative components to ensure the success of individual
students and the overall achievement of program goals. Students receive
continuous support and feedback throughout the program. Data is being collected
and analyzed on the progress of each student, the effectiveness of program
activities, graduate school admission statistics and job placement/advancement
trends for the PACTS scholars, as well as the overall program performance.