* 1356398
* SUCCESS: Stimulating Undergraduates: Creating Contributors in Engineering and Science for Society
* EHR,DUE
* 03/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Joanne Kehlbeck, Union College
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 08/31/2019
* USD 614,749.00

The Union College SUCCESS Scholars program is further broadening Union's
inclusive recruiting strategy by building relationships with small, rural under-
resourced public high schools in order to attract and retain talented students
to STEM fields. SUCCESS scholars are selected from all science and engineering
disciplines, with four-year scholarship support for two cohorts of ten students.
The project is helping participants achieve success by meeting the educational
and financial needs unique to their situations and backgrounds. The overall
goals of the project are to: 1) increase the number of applications and
admissions of academically-talented students from under-resourced rural high
schools; 2) improve retention and success of these students in STEM fields at
Union by specifically addressing the challenges faced by students from small,
rural high schools with limited academic opportunities; 3) increase the number
of women in engineering, physics, mathematics and computer science, and
underrepresented groups in all disciplines; 4) provide students with
opportunities to enhance their education through early introduction to research
opportunities, internships, study abroad, and leadership training; and 5)
improve recruiting and undergraduate educational experiences and promote
professional advancement by facilitating fruitful mentoring relationships.
Intellectual merits of the project are reflected in the comprehensive nature of
the program specifically targeting under-resourced rural high schools. Broader
impacts are two-fold: (1) The SUCCESS Scholars program is designed to produce
talented, energetic STEM professionals from diverse backgrounds and the approach
will be transferable to educational institutions across the country. (2) SUCCESS
scholars trained as leaders and capable of propagating transformative mentoring
skills will positively impact this nation's workforce.