* 1356716
* Strengthening Outcomes for Students in Computer Science and Engineering through Leadership, Engagement, Academic Mentoring, and Preparation (LEAP)
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2021
* Reza Kamali-Sarvestani, Utah Valley University
* Continuing Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 09/30/2021
* USD 617,395.00

The LEAP (Leadership, Engagement, Academic Mentoring and Preparation)
scholarship program aims to increase the graduation rate of students in Computer
Science and Engineering at Utah Valley University (UVU) in order to better
prepare them for continued education and success in the STEM workforce. The
program is designed to meet the needs of talented students with financial need
in a comprehensive, open-enrollment university. The student population pool
includes high school students who starting their college education, college
students who are just declaring majors, first-generation college students, and
nontraditional students who may be returning after an absence from education.
Twenty-one scholarships per year will be awarded to academically talented but
financially needy students, including women and
minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;LEAP will be providing leadership training and
opportunities for students within a student chapter of IEEE through
multidisciplinary projects and peer-to-peer mentoring. The program will provide
additional engaged learning opportunities through course projects at the
freshman level and a required capstone project. Faculty mentors will receive
training in effective student mentoring, and will be assigned to two or three
scholarship recipients. Students will gain a sense of community, especially
important in a commuter school, through LEAP monthly meetings, peer-to-peer
mentoring, and team projects. The program will increase the graduation rates of
participating students in Computer Science and Engineering (or the transfer rate
of students in the 2-year Pre-Engineering program to accredited 4-year
programs). LEAP has potential to increase the enrollment and completion of
underrepresented populations, especially women who are greatly underrepresented
in UVU's Computer Science and Engineering programs.