* 1356811
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Alternative Forms of Regulated Social Provisioning in American Cities
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2014,10/31/2015
* Jeffrey Albanese, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 10/31/2015
* USD 18,698.00

University of Michigan doctoral candidate Jeff Albanese, advised by Dr. Damani
Partridge, will undertake research on alternative forms of regulated social
provisioning in times of economic hardship. Because of diminishing resources for
public services, self-managed homeless encampments in cities across the United
States are increasingly seeking legal approval. His research will focus on two
such self-managed homeless encampments in Oregon, one of which has obtained such
approval and the other of which has not. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mr. Albanese's
research addresses two overarching questions: &lt;br/&gt;1) How do self-managed
homeless encampments emerge and even persist despite urban development
strategies, regulatory practices, and social service approaches that may not
support their incorporation into the urban landscape? &lt;br/&gt;2) How does the
pursuit and achievement of legal recognition affect the social organization,
material infrastructure, and long-term resiliency of the homeless encampments
themselves? &lt;br/&gt;To answer these questions, the researcher will employ a
combination of ethnographic methods, including: observation of encampment
meetings and local government proceedings; participant-observation at encampment
building and maintenance projects; semi-structured interviews with encampment
residents, community members, and public officials; both researcher and resident
mappings of encampments; and archival investigations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research is important because it will extend scientific understanding of the
effects of contemporary urban law and governance practices on social
provisioning by highlighting the co-existence of multiple orders of jurisdiction
(including federal, municipal, and administrative). Recent scholarship has
highlighted the exclusionary effects of emergent urban development strategies as
diverse cities adopt similar practices to regulate behavior in public space. By
focusing instead on the paradoxical proliferation of organized and regulated
homeless encampments, and the variety of ways that legal recognition might
potentially be conferred, this research expands understanding of the
relationship between urban law and marginalized groups. Supporting this research
also contributes to the education of a graduate student.