* 1356218
* ACES: A scholarship program for atmospheric and computer science exploratory scholars
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2021
* Christopher Hennon, University of North Carolina at Asheville
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 07/31/2021
* USD 613,609.00

ACES: A Scholarship Program for Atmospheric and Computer Science Exploratory
Scholars will provide scholarship and academic support for thirty four
undergraduate students majoring in the Atmospheric and Computer Sciences
(A&amp;CS) over five years while enrolled at University of North Carolina at
Asheville (UNCA). ACES will add to the knowledge of the effectiveness of
community-based A&amp;CS undergraduate learning experiences by building cohorts
for A&amp;CS students to establish support groups designed to encourage early
academic success, monitoring student progress through a student management team,
offering help to struggling students by providing peer tutors to assist in low-
and mid-level A&amp;CS science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
courses, enlisting peer and faculty mentors to help resolve issues inside and
outside the classroom, and providing opportunities for students to engage in
activities in three discipline areas (research, teaching, and operations) to
expand the types of A&amp;CS STEM career options under consideration by
undergraduates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ACES objectives are to (1) motivate high
school and transfer students demonstrating both strong academic potential and
financial need to seriously consider majors in the atmospheric or computer
sciences, (2) pique and maintain the interest of students while they are
enrolled in the challenging curriculum of their major as undergraduates,
particularly during their first and second years, when their curriculum is
focused primarily on completing the liberal arts general education requirements,
(3) expose students to a variety of discipline areas and career paths within the
major, (4) prepare students for their chosen career path, and (5) make ACES
sustainable beyond the initial support provided by the NSF. Student data (e.g.
grade point averages, comprehensive examination scores, etc.) and surveys will
be used to assess the effectiveness of program components and evaluate the
overall success of the project. The results will be shared with other
departments within the institution to serve as a model for other programs.
Dissemination to the broader STEM community will occur through disciplinary
conference presentations and papers published in educational journals that
specifically target the atmospheric and computer sciences.