* 1356615
* Scholarship Program in Science and Mathematics: Supporting the Academic Achievements of Disadvantaged Students
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2021
* Ronald Matson, Kennesaw State University Research and Service Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Susan Carson
* 06/30/2021
* USD 611,507.00

Kennesaw State University (KSU), through its project entitled "Scholarship
Program in Science and Mathematics: Supporting the Academic Achievements of
Disadvantaged Students," will provide scholarships for 50 students over five
years. The scholarship recipients will be full-time students majoring in
biochemistry, biology, biotechnology, chemistry, computer science and
mathematics. The broader impacts lie in the project's ability to enhance
students' learning experiences through the program's interdisciplinary and
cohort nature; attract and retain academically talented, underrepresented, or
first generation college students; reduce loan packages and work hours for
scholarship recipients, allowing them to pursue a full course load and a
rigorous curriculum; decrease time-to-degree completion for project
participants; and strengthen the technical and scientific workforce necessary
for sustained economic growth locally, regionally, and
nationally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Closely aligned with the expected broader
impacts, the project's objectives are to: (1) improve the efforts to recruit
more high school students into STEM disciplines at KSU; (2) increase
participation, retention and completion of an undergraduate degree in one of the
STEM disciplines by academically talented, but financially needy students; (3)
provide opportunities to attract more academically talented, underrepresented
(minority and women) or first-generation students; (4) increase the number of
students enrolling in STEM graduate programs and to help students enter
workplace after graduation; and (5) broaden the student academic experience
through participation in STEM related cohorts, mentoring and research
activities, internships and conference presentations. Implementation plans
include activities that are proven to improve student outcomes such a targeted
first-year seminar, strategic course placement, tutoring, advising, mentoring,
seminars, and opportunities to engage in research projects and internships. The
project will be evaluated using data from new and existing databases and student
surveys to determine the degree to which objectives have been met. The results
will be used to further inform the broader education community of efforts that
effect increase in the recruitment, retention and graduation of STEM majors in
the targeted disciplines.