* 1356732
* Collaborative Research: ABI Development: Transforming Biodiversity Analysis with Landscapes, Automation, and Provenance
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* James Beach, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 06/30/2018
* USD 798,568.00

Where wild species live, and why, are basic questions for researchers who study
biogeography. Understanding the geographical patterns of plant and animal
species' ranges reveals much about the ecology of a species and its preferred
habitat and climate. Knowing where the ranges of multiple species overlap and
where "hot spots" of high species diversity exist, help to explain larger
geographic and evolutionary factors which have influenced or determined modern
day species occurrence patterns as well as species composition of natural
communities. The Lifemapper Project maintains a species distribution database
and publishes online maps documenting the occurrence of Earth's terrestrial
species. The Lifemapper Project also creates models of the potential
distribution of species based on correlations with present day or predicted
future climates.

A goal of this project is to make computer generated models of species
distributions (based on natural history museum specimen data) more realistic by
including in research and computational methods, the properties of the
landscapes. Landscape features influence species preferred habitat choice and
also can present barriers to species migration into new areas. For example very
small patches of preferred habitat may not be large enough to support a
population of a species, or even adequate to support its temporary use as a
migration path to other preferred habitat locations. A second project objective
will transform research practices associated with biodiversity pattern modeling
by automating the creation and assembly of multi-species data sets, for
different climate scenarios, which will greatly accelerate research on global
biodiversity patterns. Third, this project will create internet software tools
which allow species occurrence data providers such as natural history museums,
biological specimen repositories, and citizen scientists who observe species, to
track how their species occurrence data is being used in biodiversity models.
This data usage feedback information will be useful for U.S. providers of
species information to evaluate the utility and document the re-use of their
curated species data. Knowledge of patterns of biological diversity are often
used to support conservation decisions and policy. Modeling the potential impact
of climate change on species diversity of natural plant and animal communities
is important for understanding potential future patterns and changes to species
diversity in the U.S. and globally. Sustaining the biological diversity is an
important factor in our ability to maintain healthy natural ecosystems and their
services to human society, as well as to sustain wild sources of genetic
diversity for deriving new crops, crop traits, and human medicines. MOre
information can be found at: http://www.lifemapper.org