* 1356504
* Discovery Within Community
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2014,05/31/2020
* Jerry Kiefer, Saint Bonaventure University
* Standard Grant
* Pushpa Ramakrishna
* 05/31/2020
* USD 594,287.00

The need to increase the number and quality of STEM graduates in the workforce
both nationally and in New York State is well-documented. A 2010 state-level
analysis study by the Georgetown University Center on Education and the
Workforce (http://cew.georgetown.edu/jobs2018/states) projects that by 2018
there will be a need to fill 359,000 STEM jobs in New York State. The Alliance
for Science and Technology Research (ASTRA) projects that 68% of these STEM
positions will require a bachelor's degree or higher. &lt;br/&gt;The Discovery
Within Community (DWC) Program is St. Bonaventure University (SBU)'s proposal to
enhance the quality of STEM education and increase the number of STEM graduates
either entering the workforce or STEM graduate programs. The DWC Steering
Committee conducts a thorough applicant-review process to select 25 talented
students (Fellows) with financial need in Biology, Chemistry, Computer Sciences,
Mathematics and Physics programs. Effective recruitment processes and outreach
are used to increase public awareness about STEM and encourage high school
students to further their STEM education by applying to the
university.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Built on SBU's already strong community
structure, the elements of the DWC Program improve student learning in STEM by
reinforcing classroom education via symposia involving interaction with STEM
faculty and STEM business professionals and tutoring sessions (both receiving
and giving) that foster retention of knowledge and research opportunities. STEM
student support services are enhanced through the formation of an
interdisciplinary cohort sharing a common residency and taking core courses
together to improve academic performance and increase retention rates. To ensure
that 90% of S-STEM fellows graduate in four years DWC promotes collaboration
among STEM faculty and students. Interdisciplinary exploration which is fully
supported by faculty mentors allows S-STEM fellows to engage in internships and
professional conferences throughout all four years and have opportunities to
present research results. Partnerships with STEM businesses are consolidated and
extend beyond the grant period to continue to address the need for a highly
qualified regional STEM workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Evaluation metrics
include appropriate increases in inquiries, applications, acceptances, and
matriculations, with a goal of a 15% overall growth in enrollment in all STEM
majors. Program-specific measures are used to gain objective feedback from
fellows, their teachers and tutors and from employers on the number and quality
of internships and jobs obtained. Feedback from mentors and fellows are used to
evaluate and improve these relationships during the grant period. The completion
of research projects, the number of conferences attended, presentations given,
and articles published, along with feedback from business professionals are used
to assess the quality of these components, with a goal that 90% of S-STEM
fellows who graduate immediately secure employment with a STEM employer or enter
a STEM graduate program.