* 1356705
* Preparing Computer Science Students for Global Challenges of the Twenty-first Century
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2020
* Shou-Hsuan Huang, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 08/31/2020
* USD 583,597.00

This project is directly responding to the need of the nation for more computer
science (CS) graduates, and especially the need for more women and
underrepresented minorities in CS. Towards these ends the Computer Science (CS)
Department of the University of Houston's main campus (UH) is providing
scholarships of up to $10,000 per year to academically meritorious,
professionally talented and financially deserving computer science majors from
diverse backgrounds and with diverse goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of
this project are to: attract talented high school and community college students
to CS, build a diverse community of well-qualified scholars who are leaders,
increase undergraduate participation in CS research, increase retention and
graduation rates, and aggressively disseminate the implemented model and other
exemplary models. One unique aspect of the project is a focus on preparing
students for global challenges of the 21st century by enriching the academic
preparation of the students with: (i) workshops on effective communication and
ethics, (ii) presentations on leadership, creativity, adaptation and innovation,
(iii) exposure to multiple cultures, and (iv) a course on entrepreneurship and
intellectual property. Another unique aspect of this project is the use of
gaming and animated story-telling as a community building and peer mentoring
activity. In addition the project includes mentoring through peers and faculty,
and outreach efforts, accomplished through workshops at high schools and
community colleges. CS students are projected to be in demand for the next
decade and this project seeks to graduate well-trained CS professionals who will
become leaders in this field. Through formative and summative evaluation the
investigators will seek to broaden the knowledge base regarding how the student
activities addressing global challenges of the 21st century contribute to the
goals of increasing retention and graduation rates, and the circumstances under
which success occurs.