* 1356524
* ABI Innovation: Computational Analysis of microRNA Binding
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2019
* Haiyan Hu, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 05/31/2019
* USD 416,456.00

The project aims to develop novel computational methods and tools to study
microRNA binding interactions and microRNAs' role in gene regulation. Small (~22
nucleotide), non-coding RNAs called microRNAs have been known to regulate genes
involved in key aspects of animal development and physiology through binding-
interactions with their mRNA targets. Since the first discovery of microRNAs in
C. elegans in 1993, a large number of microRNAs have been discovered in
metazoan, plants and viruses. Today, microRNAs are known to express ubiquitously
in almost all cell types, evolutionarily conserved in most of metazoan and plant
species, and potentially regulate more than 30% of mammalian gene products.
Understanding of microRNAs' regulatory functions in the fundamental biological
processes is thus essential towards gaining a global view of gene regulation,
but still at its early stages despite the rapid advances in microRNA biology.
The project to study microRNA gene regulation and phenotype development seeks to
generate many computational algorithms, which will be converted into software
tools. These tools will be subsequently released as open-source and freely
available software packages to the scientific community. The research is
expected to have great impact on education at all levels.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be incorporated into graduate,
undergraduate and K-12 education. The research will also be disseminated to the
research community, informal science education, and the public to enhance
scientific understanding through freely distributed computational tools and web
dissemination. In addition, mentoring and outreach for women and girls is
planned to help attract more women into interdisciplinary
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;RNA is emerging as an important part of gene
regulatory mechanisms under various phenotypic conditions. With the current
unprecedented availability of genome-scale RNA genomics and transcriptomics
data, the project seeks to create a set of computational algorithms and
statistical methods to model microRNA binding interactions and discover microRNA
interaction patterns that will help elucidate many functional roles of microRNAs
in gene regulation. The advanced probabilistic model of microRNA binding
activities promises to greatly benefit mRNA target recognition under specific
phenotypic conditions, lay the foundation for further study of inter-microRNA
interactions, and provide insight into microRNAs' functional mechanisms in gene
regulation and phenotype formulation. The research is expected to not only
advance scientific understanding of microRNAs' role in global gene regulation
and phenotype development, but also stimulate interest in developing and
advancing efficient computational modeling and data integration methods in the
informatics research field. The research information and products will be made
available through the project website
(http://hulab.ucf.edu/research/projects/miRNA/).