* 1356340
* Seeing the forest for the trees:  Interpreting and quantifying emergent catchment hydrology behavior
* GEO,EAR
* 06/06/2013,05/31/2015
* Brian McGlynn, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 05/31/2015
* USD 83,122.00

A unifying theory describing primary controls on mountain catchment hydrologic
response continues to elude hydrologists despite valuable advances in
quantitative modeling and process understanding from overland flow, to
throughflow, to variables source area dynamics. This may be attributed to the
near infinite complexities of natural systems, our inability to measure
necessary variables adequately in space and time, and difficulties in
quantifying non-linear watershed processes and threshold mediated runoff
generation. We acknowledge the advances to date in catchment process
understanding and modeling and are engaged in activities focused on both
expanding the limits of our system behavior understanding and developing hybrid
conceptual (mathematical) models internally validated and tested with
synthesized process observations. We are conducting a suite of empirical and
modeling studies performed iteratively at the Tenderfoot Creek Experimental
Forest (TCEF) in the Little Belt Mountains of central Montana, across seven
adjacent diverse watersheds and more than five years of variable climatic
forcings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We specifically address the following challenges
in catchment hydrology:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) What is the role of landscape
structure (shape) in headwater mountain catchment hydrologic response and source
water contributions? Follow-on: Does the relative importance of structure change
across variable forcing (climatic variability)?&lt;br/&gt;2) Can we develop new
quantifications (models) of watershed behavior based on hypotheses about the
role of landscape structure in watershed response? Follow-on: How do field
observations help infer specific model structures and parameters, and constrain
predictive uncertainty?&lt;br/&gt;3) Does the effectiveness of catchment models
based on landscape structure vary across multiple watersheds or under different
climatic forcing? Follow-on: How do we compare the transferability of new model
conceptualizations to traditional models based on topographic controls, variable
source area concepts, or simple water balance
representations?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address these challenges we are working
to build tools and infrastructure for research and education. We focus on themes
critical to watershed science to improve transferability of watershed
understanding and predictability of watershed response via new process
conceptualizations and model structures.