* 1356831
* Student Travel Support for 2012-2014 ASME Student Mechanism and Robot Design Competitions
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2016
* David Cappelleri, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Rich Malak
* 07/31/2016
* USD 35,343.00

This award provides travel funding for students (undergraduate and graduate)
participating as finalists in the 2012, 2013, and 2014 ASME Student Mechanism
Design Competition. The competition is featured at the Mechanisms and Robotics
Conferences, which is part of the ASME International Design Engineering
Technical Conferences (IDETC) and Computers and Information in Engineering
Conference (CIE). ASME IDETC/CIE is the premier international meeting in the
fields of Design Engineering and Computers and Information in Engineering. This
event is designed to showcase cutting edge research and accomplishments, and to
enrich the educational experience in these fields. The purpose of the Mechanisms
and Robotics conference is to advance the understanding of the base of knowledge
in mechanism design and robotics that all researchers and educators will
collectively draw upon in the years ahead to meet the challenges and realize the
opportunities of a globally competitive economy.

Mechanism design has been and will continue be one of the fundamental techniques
that are widely used and needed in industry. The objective of the ASME Student
Mechanism Design Competition is (1) to stimulate students' interests in
mechanism design and research and (2) to promote advances in research and
education in the theory, design and application of mechanisms. Finalists are
invited to present their work at IDETC each of the years of this grant.
Finalists are judged on the basis of creativity, practicality, integrity of
analysis and design methodology, quality of the fabricated prototype, quality of
the final report and the conference presentation.