* 1356726
* STEM Pathways Program
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Ann Billetz, Massachusetts College of Liberal Arts
* Standard Grant
* Tom Higgins
* 07/31/2019
* USD 639,826.00

The STEM Pathways Program at the Massachusetts College of Liberal Arts (MCLA)
provides scholarships for academically talented students in financial need who
are pursing bachelor's degrees in STEM disciplines at MCLA. The scholarship
program supports full-time students majoring in biology, physics, chemistry,
environmental studies, computer science, or mathematics. The program awards
annual scholarships to students who meet financial need and academic merit
criteria. A total of 32 scholarships are planned over a five-year period in The
STEM Pathways Program. The STEM Pathways Program allows MCLA to offer
scholarships to directly address an area of national concern: the shortage of US
graduates trained in STEM related fields. Scholarships for academically strong
STEM students, who may not otherwise be able to afford college, have an impact
on the number of STEM graduates prepared to help national, regional, and local
companies. Talented STEM graduates help US industries to compete and innovate in
a global economy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The STEM Pathways Program builds on
resources available at the Center for Science and Innovation at MCLA. The Center
includes an incubator laboratory providing opportunities for students to achieve
experience working with local life science companies. The STEM Pathways Program
recruits applicants through open house events, activities for accepted students,
partnerships with regional schools, and collaborations with admissions
counselors. The STEM Pathways Program includes a range of program activities
intended to insure that scholarship recipients complete their STEM degree
programs and are able to succeed in joining the STEM workforce. Scholarship
awardees are co-located within the dorms during their first year, allowing them
to build a strong support network from the beginning of their college
experience. STEM faculty host an introductory meeting at the start of each
semester to welcome students back and announce program opportunities. Students
meet monthly with a peer mentor to discuss program challenges, strategies, and
opportunities. STEM departments host a social event on the last Friday of each
month allowing STEM faculty to interact informally with students. STEM student
support includes tutors and interaction with associates in the Writing Center
trained to assist with technical writing assignments and reports. STEM students
at MCLA have optional research opportunities supervised by MCLA faculty, and the
possibility of internships with regional industries.