* 1356001
* REU Site: PATHWAYS - Preparing Aspiring Teachers to Hypothesize Ways to Assist Young Students
* EHR,DRL
* 04/15/2014,03/31/2018
* Randall Groth, Salisbury University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Reed
* 03/31/2018
* USD 260,606.00

PATHWAYS has two primary objectives: (1) To develop mathematics teachers who
approach classrooms with a researcher's mindset, making instructional decisions
based on empirical data; (2) To engage aspiring mathematics teachers in
systematic formal mathematics education research, thereby providing foundations
for participation in mathematics education graduate programs. This REU site
involves undergraduates in the design and testing of instructional sessions for
K-12 students where each summer, eight undergraduates from Salisbury University
(SU), University of Maryland Eastern Shore, and Wor-Wic Community College work
in pairs under the guidance of SU faculty mentors. Each pair meets with a group
of four K-12 students once per week to give summer mathematics instructional
sessions. SU faculty mentors help undergraduates analyze the instructional
effectiveness of each session. Each week's analysis sets the mathematical
learning goals and instructional methods for the next week. Undergraduates
submit weekly reports describing K-12 students' learning and a cumulative report
describing the trajectory of K-12 students' learning under the instructional
interventions they designed. The cumulative reports help test, extend, and
refine current mathematics education research on learning
trajectories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Various qualitative data sources used during
this project's duration include transcripts of participants' conversations about
assigned readings and their scores on online training modules content
assessments, video recordings of diagnostic interviews with K-12 students as
well as all teaching sessions, and undergraduates' weekly and final summary
reports on the progress of the K-12 students. The Undergraduate Research Student
Self-Assessment (URSSA) is used at the end of the intensive summer experience to
quantitatively analyze the impact of PATHWAYS on undergraduates' development as
researchers. Opinion surveys are administered to PATHWAYS undergraduates, the
K-12 students they instruct, and the parents of K-12 students to ascertain
perceived strengths and weaknesses of the program. The long-term impact of the
project is assessed through follow-up surveys inquiring about the graduation
status and career goals of those who have completed the PATHWAYS
experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PATHWAYS reaches multiple communities. The
structured manner in which undergraduates work with K-12 students provides
experience with formal mathematics education research to encourage future
graduate study. The project provides the field of mathematics education student-
level data to both support and challenge existing published learning
progressions. PATHWAYS serves the local community by providing summer
mathematics instruction for children in grades K-12. Project findings aim to
provide a more robust understanding of how teachers may help develop children's
mathematical thinking under the Common Core State Standards and their
dissemination by undergraduates and their SU mentors via conferences and peer-
reviewed publications reaches the community of scholars at large.