* 1356855
* Collaborative Research: Large-scale Laboratory Investigation and Numerical Modeling of Sheet Flow Sediment Transport Dynamics across a Surf Zone Sand Bar
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2014,02/28/2018
* Tian-Jian (Tom) Hsu, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 02/28/2018
* USD 470,055.00

Currently model predictions of beach erosion events are not very reliable
because they do not account for all the complex physical processes that occur in
the nearshore environment. Further study of nearshore physics will lead to
improvements in coastal models. This study will investigate mechanisms that
drive sediment transport across sand bars using a combination of laboratory
experiments and numerical models. Previous studies have shown that movement of
sediment in the surf zone is caused by breaking waves that stir up sediment on
the seafloor and near-breaking waves that drive water near the bed offshore. As
this water moves offshore, it takes sediment with it. Further study is required
to determine the relative importance of these mechanisms under various wave
conditions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: This three-year project
will investigate the detailed sediment transport processes associated with a
surf-zone sand bar. Experiments will be conducted in a large-scale wave flume
with a fixed beach form and two sand pits. Several novel sensors will be
employed to measure velocity, pressure, and sediment concentration in the water.
The combined laboratory and numerical experiments will lead to improvements in
understanding and model prediction. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The
project team will conduct two educational outreach efforts. The first effort
will use a portable wave flume to demonstrate storm and sea level rise response
of the beach profile to middle school students, impacting approximate 350
students per year. The second effort will involve developing a permanent
educational display on coastal erosion for the general public at the Hatfield
Marine Science Center. Three PhD students will be trained in state-of-the-art
laboratory and numerical approaches to near-shore dynamics in this project, and
two to three undergraduate students per year will gain hands-on research
experience in conducting laboratory experiments. This project will foster
international exchange by including two researchers from The Netherlands and
Japan. Graduate students will be given the opportunity to visit laboratories in
both countries.