* 1356569
* ABI Innovation: Towards Recovery of Biological Information
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Olivier Lichtarge, Baylor College of Medicine
* Continuing Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2017
* USD 1,216,838.00

Baylor College of Medicine is awarded a grant to develop novel techniques of
network analysis, rooted on the evolutionary principle of continuity, to tackle
the fundamental problems of biological data integration and analysis. A problem
in biology is that experimental information accumulates far faster than it can
be analyzed. These data are complicated, incomplete, and noisy, slowing down
their interpretation, but a major difficulty is that because they arise from
different experiments they are analyzed separately, or in small groups. This
project aims instead to tie all biological data into one network so that each
bit of information is understood in light of all other data. To make this
approach feasible we propose a new, efficient use of evolutionary relationships
to coalesce experimental results arising from hundreds of species into a single
network that, although massive, is still easy to compute over. Another insight
is that neighboring regions of the network are likely to carry out related
biological functions. This hypothesis translates into precise mathematical rules
to spread information across the entire network and, as much as possible,
resolve contradictions. In practice, these network and computational tools will
predict various aspects of protein function that will then be tested
experimentally across a broad range of applications (p53, a central gene in
animal biology; in proteins that regulate stress adaptation in bacteria; and in
malarial proteins). Together computation and experiments will assess the value
and limitations of this novel and versatile network approach to discover the
molecular origin of function in any organism. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will fulfill many goals of broader societal significance. First, it will
validate novel techniques of biological network analysis that can be used in any
area touched by research in molecular biology; this includes biotechnology,
bioengineering, nanotechnology, agriculture, renewable energy production, and
synthetic biology applications for industrial processes. Second, it is also
important to note that the scientific results fall in the area of BIG DATA
analytics, which cuts across science, finance, social and national defense areas
of interest. In that light, third, we note that the projects will train both
postdoctoral scientists, graduate students, and offer summer internships to
undergraduate students, including some from programs supporting minority
education and research, who will therefore be able later to contribute their
skills in Big Data analytics to many fields of national interest.