* 1356220
* RU-NextGen: Preparing the Next Generation of Leaders in Science, Technology and Mathematics
* EDU,DUE
* 04/15/2014,03/31/2019
* J. Orion Rogers, Radford University
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 03/31/2019
* USD 602,101.00

This Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (S-STEM)
project at Radford University is providing scholarships and support services to
academically-talented students majoring in science, technology, and mathematics
who demonstrate financial need. The project recruits students with a broad range
of backgrounds from both high schools and community colleges, and effectively
educates and supports them to succeed as future STEM researchers, teachers, and
leaders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Radford University's Preparing the Next Generation
of Leaders in Science, Technology and Mathematics' (RU-NextGen's) primary aims
are to provide students with scholarships, focused activities, and strong
support mechanisms to acquire skills that will help them succeed academically;
procure science, technology, engineering, or mathematics-related internships or
research opportunities during their college years; and ultimately transition
into future careers in STEM. RU-NextGen's Emerging Leaders in Science,
Technology and Mathematics [Elites] program serves as an umbrella of activities
with focus areas of research, communication, and career development. Examples of
Elites activities include participation in summer research, active engagement in
classes undergirded by signing honors or leadership contracts, peer mentoring
and participation in career development, and networking events. The Elites
program also includes strong support mechanisms such as individual intrusive
pro-active mentoring, peer mentoring, and cohort-building social and academic
activities.