* 1356010
* High Resolution Linkages Between DOC Turnover and Bacterioplankton in a Coastal Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2017
* I. Jonathan Amster, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 12/31/2017
* USD 998,701.00

Long-standing questions regarding the fate of dissolved organic carbon (DOC) in
coastal oceans require a better understanding of the network that links
bacterioplankton metabolism with carbon transformation. These questions address
uncertainties about the composition of the bioreactive DOC components
transformed in ocean margins, and the role of bacterial taxonomic and genetic
composition in determining the fate of DOC.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;This project will infuse a new type of data into coastal carbon
cycle research based on high-resolution chemical analysis coupled with bacterial
gene expression measures. It will extend DOC process studies down to the single-
compound level and bacterial activity studies down to the single-gene level, and
integrate this information into existing bioinformatic resources for
biogeochemical and modeling applications.&lt;br/&gt;The specific goals of the
project are: 1) To reconstruct major components of the network linking DOC
composition, DOC turnover, and bacterial heterotrophy in the coastal ocean (the
composition of the DOC pool, the major bioreactive components, the
bacterioplankton taxa mediating transformations, and the bacterial genes and
pathways responsible). 2) To test hypothesized network links for selected DOC
compounds using a simplified system that queries individual DOC compounds
against a complex natural microbial community. 3) To test hypothesized network
links for marine bacteria using a simplified system that queries a single
generalist heterotrophic bacteria against a complex natural DOC pool. 4) To
verify predicted DOC-gene linkages that are most informative about heterotrophic
activities of bacterioplankton.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;This research addresses fundamental questions on bacterial
mediation of organic carbon fate in the ocean and atmosphere. As such, these
investigations linking the chemical changes in dissolved organic carbon with
patterns of gene expression in coastal bacterioplankton communities will be of
interest to scientists across several disciplines. The project will train
graduate students and postdoctoral associates in the departments of Marine
Sciences, Microbiology, Chemistry, and Ecology at the University of Georgia, and
provide research opportunities and mentoring for undergraduate students.
Students will obtain interdisciplinary training in microbial ecology, carbon
biogeochemistry, marine chemistry, and bioinformatics.&lt;br/&gt;An outreach
program will enhance understanding of the ecological roles of marine
microorganisms for several cohorts of promising high school students. PIs will
collaborate each summer with an Advanced Placement Biology teacher at a racially
diverse Athens, GA, high school to develop laboratory exercises that accomplish
experiential learning goals of the revamped AP Biology curriculum. Exercises
will be designed around bacterial strains isolated by each high school student
from coastal Georgia seawater, and PIs will collaborate in the testing and
evaluation of the laboratory exercises during the school year. Publications in
educational journals and web sites will make the exercises widely available.