* 1356350
* Chemistry and Physics Scholarship Progra
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2020
* John Kenney, East Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 04/30/2020
* USD 620,884.00

This project building on successes in NSF scholarship programs in biology and
engineering at the university and is designed to support twenty-four students in
chemistry and physics. The project is fills a need to improve the success rate
of chemistry and physics students at the university and bridges a gap between
biology and engineering. The project is adopting a multidisciplinary approach by
recruiting chemistry and physics majors and placing them in a combined living
learning community (LLC) that is housed in the same residence hall as the LLC
Honors and Bio-Excellence students. The combined chemistry and physics LLC was
chosen due to the large overlap in the disciplines and because these two
disciplines are already utilizing an integrated approach that is facilitated
through the coordination of the Offices of Undergraduate Studies for double
majors in chemistry and physics. The overall goals of the project are increased
retention in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM), shorter
average time to graduation, and higher grade point averages (GPAs).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;Despite the large number of
students who explore STEM disciplines in their freshman year, high numbers of
these students do not persist in STEM disciplines as they are either not
prepared for the rigor or engaged in the courses. Early engagement of these
students is essential to retain students in STEM disciplines. Further, academic
success is significantly enhanced by financial aid and through social support
from advisors and peers. Scholars are co-enrolled into the same sections of many
classes to foster the community spirit of the LLC. The presence of these
scholars is having a positive impact on the rest of their classmates. As the
overall student confidence increases, class discussions are richer. Other
students are more encouraged to ask questions in an environment they might
otherwise find intimidating. The project is also collecting data to determine
the effect of the LLC on GPA and retention in STEM
majors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;With the support of
faculty, advisors and other campus support staff, this project is offering
students who have solid academic preparation and the potential to succeed in
STEM disciplines access access to higher education. The majority of these
students are from groups that are underrepresented in STEM disciplines or are
first generation students from an economically stressed region. The scholars are
serving as messengers for science by disseminating their experiences as STEM
majors, while also encouraging talented students to follow in their path.
Additionally, the close interaction with other STEM scholars is providing the
scholarship students with a unique perspective on the role of other STEM
disciplines. Scholars are being given opportunities and encouragement to
demonstrate a commitment to local and regional science activities, thereby
instilling a sense of civic responsibility and awareness within them. This
experience is providing the scholars with a strong foundation to help improve
innovation and economic development on both a regional and national scale.