* 1356737
* Collaborative Research: ABI Innovation: A Bayesian Evolutionary Tree Analysis Database
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2019
* Brian Moore, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 06/30/2019
* USD 304,169.00

This collaborative grant seeks to develop a prototype Bayesian Evolutionary Tree
Analysis Database (BETAbase), an interactive repository for the output of
Bayesian phylogenetic studies. Phylogenies-estimates of the genealogical
relationships among species-provide an explicit historical perspective that
critically informs research in a vast and growing number of scienti c
disciplines. Increasingly, phylogenies are inferred in a Bayesian statistical
framework, as it permits estimation under more complex and realistic statistical
models from larger and increasingly complex datasets, and allows uncertainty in
the resulting estimates to be clearly identified and accommodated.
Implementation of BETAbase will substantially advance the field of Bayesian
phylogenetic inference and, by extension, the myriad fields of biological
sciences (including conservation, medicine, and agriculture) that rely on
phylogenetic information. It will promote more rigorous and consistent
evaluation of published phylogenetic studies thereby improving the quality of
decisions based upon those studies. BETAbase will also provide unique training
opportunities by developing a web-based educational environment where
researchers can gain experience and develop the skills to identify and address
problems encountered in the course of Bayesian phylogenetic analysis.

The output of Bayesian phylogenetic studies typically includes both log files
with sampled trees and the other parameters of the phylogenetic model. The
output accumulated over the last decade constitutes an untapped source of
information with the potential to transform the field of Bayesian phylogenetics
and associated areas of biological research. The BETAbase prototype attempts to
harness this potential to: (1) promote more rigorous evaluation of empirical
phylogenetic studies; (2) focus theoretical e^fforts on areas where existing
phylogenetic methods are de ficient; and (3) implement software tools that
enable solicitation of empirically based informative priors that appropriately
reflect our accumulated knowledge regarding model parameters, providing an
alternative to the vague `uninformative' priors that are currently used as the
default settings in existing Bayesian phylogenetic inference software. The
project will involve the participation and training of two postdoctoral scholars
as well as graduate and undergraduate students. Finally, BETAbase will safeguard
the substantial computational investment that the systematic community has made
toward understanding the Tree of Life. The prototype BETAbase archive and
associated tools will be distributed and discussed at http://beta-base.org.