* 1356455
* Growing the Community College Pipeline for Careers in Civil, Chemical, and Ocean Engineering through the FITS-STEM Program
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2022
* Ashok Pandit, Florida Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* John Jackman
* 07/31/2022
* USD 612,795.00

The Florida Institute of Technology (FIT) is supporting 26 academically talented
transfer students with financial need who are majoring in chemical, civil, and
ocean engineering through this S-STEM project. Three cohorts of transfer
students from community colleges and four-year state colleges that do not offer
engineering degrees are supported through scholarships, early mentoring, and
other academic and career support activities. FIT is leveraging partnerships
with five colleges (Eastern Florida State College - formerly Brevard Community
College, Indian River State College, Daytona State College, Hillsborough
Community College, and Miami Dade College) to provide students opportunities to
transfer to FIT and pursue engineering degrees to address workforce needs in the
state of Florida. The project outcomes include increasing the number of transfer
students from low income groups to enter STEM fields, improving opportunities
for underrepresented minority students to obtain STEM degrees, helping partner
schools recruit more students in STEM fields, and disseminating the lessons
learned and evaluation results of the project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;FIT is
implementing a comprehensive set of evidence-based practices to support the
successful transfer, retention, and graduation of its transfer students. The
project includes a focused recruitment plan at the partner colleges. The early
mentoring and transition support provided while students are at the community
and state colleges aims to smooth the transition process. Established
articulation agreements between FIT and the partner community colleges and four-
year institutions are leveraged as well. While enrolled at FIT, students
participate in multiple cohort building and professional development activities,
including hands-on activities with student engineering professional
organizations, sustainability-related design and research seminars, and also
have opportunities to engage in regional and national student competitions and
use services provided by the Enhanced Academic Support Center. In addition,
career advising activities assist the students' transition into the engineering
workforce. The project includes an evaluation plan with both formative and
summative evaluation via mixed methods (such as surveys and interviews) to
identify improvements to the FITS-STEM scholarship program, as well as multiple
metrics to track success in meeting project outcomes.