* 1356790
* Berkeley Science Network Leadership Program
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2021
* Philip Stark, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Mary Crowe
* 07/31/2021
* USD 607,446.00

The objective of this program is to provide a combination of financial support,
academic enrichment, mentoring, professional development resources, and
leadership preparation to twenty-six talented students with financial need so
that they can navigate successfully through their undergraduate years in science
or mathematics at the institution. To support student achievement at the highest
academic level, scholarship recipients are embedded in a mentoring network of
peers, near peers, faculty, professional scientists and alumni who are further
advanced on the academic pathway. The financial support relieves talented
students with financial need of the obligation to work and take out loans while
they make their way through a first class education in the mathematical or
physical sciences to graduate school or the scientific
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project opens the door for academically talented students from diverse
backgrounds with demonstrated financial need to key fields of modern science. By
focusing on potential for leadership and success, the program encourages the
scholarship recipients to envision, plan for, and prepare for graduate school or
productive and competitive careers in the scientific workforce. Priority is
being given to supporting the preparation and advancement of students with
interest, academic merit, and indicators of determination to succeed in the
fields of Astronomy, Chemistry, Geology, Geophysics, Earth and Planetary
Science, Mathematics, Applied Mathematics, Physics, and Statistics. During the
freshman and sophomore years, scholars become members of and benefit directly
from the formal networked community of scientists. Leadership and talent
development opportunities are being introduced during the junior and senior
years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
prioritizes the recruitment and retention of diversity students, using the legal
California post-Proposition 209 definition to include historically
underrepresented minorities, women, students with disabilities, and students who
are the first generation in their families to go to college. To achieve this,
the project works closely with the Office of Admissions and the Financial Aid
Office to identify eligible students who also increase diversity in the
mathematical and physical sciences. The project team then engages in active
partnership with programs that focus on the recruitment and advancement of
students from groups underrepresented in science and are administered by the
Mathematical and Physical Sciences Diversity and Education Center. These include
the Berkeley Science Network and the NSF-Berkeley Science Connections, both of
which are designed to facilitate the advancement of underrepresented minorities
in the mathematical, physical and computer sciences from high school through
post-doctoral levels; The Compass Project, which fosters an inclusive community
in the physical sciences at the undergraduate level; and the Society for Women
in the Physical Sciences, a university supported program run by female graduate
students in Physics, Astronomy, Earth and Planetary Sciences and Biophysics,
whose goals are to encourage women and minorities to study the physical sciences
and to create a friendly and supportive environment in these departments for all
students.