* 1356358
* Pathways to Environmental Science and Sustainability
* EHR,DUE
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2020
* John Moore, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 04/30/2020
* USD 608,165.00

This project focuses on the study of environmental change and solutions to the
consequences of these changes to society. The program is built on a
collaborative interdisciplinary research history at the Natural Resource Ecology
Laboratory (NREL) and the newly established Department of Ecosystem Science and
Sustainability (ESS) within the Warner College of Natural Resources. Degree
options in the department include a BS in Ecosystem Science and Sustainability
and a BS in Watershed Science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
&lt;br/&gt;NREL and ESS have developed a mature and productive community of
scholars who are committed to undergraduate education and experienced in
mentoring low income students and students underrepresented in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM). Through the education
initiatives at the university, there is a recruitment pipeline from partner high
schools. What has been missing is a concerted effort to connect the recruitment
pipeline and retention activities operated through the student affairs side of
campus directly to the research community. This project is making these
connections by having researchers work with the student affairs staff to attract
and prepare prospective students while they are still in high school.
Scholarship recipients are participating in three university programs: 1) the
Summer Bridge Program for recent HS graduates, 2) the university Key Freshmen
Learning Communities that include students taking common courses and living in
the same dormitory, coupled with courses and seminars that foster professional
development and bridge science-to-societal issues, and 3) the BS degree programs
in the Department of Ecosystem Science and Sustainability that stress content
knowledge through coursework, research and internships, and opportunities to
communicate findings at professional conferences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The six
program goals are to: (1) recruit and retain 4 cohorts from 23 partner high
schools resulting in a total of 57 lower and upper classmen students over 4
years, from low-income backgrounds, into the BS programs in either Ecosystem
Science and Sustainability or Watershed Science; (2) provide the scholars with a
multi-year educational experience that includes courses, seminars, research and
internship opportunities, and career advising. (3) create a scholarly
environment that supports academic success and promotes research skills and
intellectual development; (4) provide an environment in which scholars explore
environmental questions and discuss solutions to environmental challenges; (5)
create a professional development environment that addresses the personal and
social needs of the scholars to enable them to pursue a career in ecology or in
an ecosystem or watershed science-related field; and (6) institutionalize key
elements of the program to sustain it after NSF funding is
completed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;Students are being
exposed to relevant questions such as: a) climate variability and biological
diversity; b) state-of-the-art field and laboratory approaches, instrumentation,
and techniques that include molecular techniques, stable isotopes, and modeling;
c) essential professional skills (e.g., analytical, writing and presentation);
and d) multiple career options and the pathways through which the students can
achieve them (e.g., academia, government, and the private sector). The greatest
impact comes from the efforts to connect the recruitment pipeline and support
networks operated through the student affairs side of campus directly to the
curricula and scholarship practiced by the academic affairs side of campus.