* 1356635
* IRES: U.S.-European International Research Experience-Particle Astrophysics for Undergraduates
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Madsen Jim, University of Wisconsin-River Falls
* Standard Grant
* Mangala Sharma
* 06/30/2018
* USD 249,701.00

Over three summers, this International Research Experience for Students (IRES)
effort, led by the University of Wisconsin-River Falls, will provide a total of
18 ten-week research experiences for U.S. undergraduates in science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) fields at partner universities in Belgium,
Sweden, and Germany. The European host universities are members of the IceCube
Collaboration, which consists of 42 institutions and organizations that work
together on the scientific aspects of the IceCube Neutrino Observatory located
in Antarctica the South Pole. This observatory is a cubic kilometer of
instrumented ice between 1450 and 2450 meters below the surface of the ice
sheet. Together, students' guided research experiences will contribute to the
broader study of particle astrophysics. At the same time, each participant will
gain a beneficial professional introduction to leveraged, large scale, virtual
and direct international cooperative research and instrumentation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The U.S. students selected by the University of Wisconsin-
River Falls to participate in this IRES will have access to significant European
experimental and theoretical expertise and be able to utilize hardware and
software resources located at designated IceCube Collaboration member
universities in Brussels, Stockholm, Bonn or Bochum. Prior to research abroad,
students first participate in a science and software boot camp at the University
of Wisconsin-Madison to ensure appropriate knowledge of IceCube Neutrino
Observatory topics and data protocols. Identified topics for further exploration
at the European labs include multimessenger astronomy, high-energy cosmic-ray
composition and energy spectrum, neutrino oscillations, cosmic-ray anisotropy,
point source searches, and indirect searches for dark matter, among others. For
broader impact, targeted recruiting efforts and existing institutional networks
will ensure that at least one third of the students (six) come from two-year
colleges or are participants in the well-established McNair program, which
prepares low-income, first-generation and/or underrepresented U.S. undergraduate
students for success in doctoral STEM programs. Complementing their early career
international research experience, participants will receive mentoring on
effective public presentations, including understanding and explaining the
interdependence of science and technology and how fundamental research results
can lead to innovations while opening new avenues of scientific discovery.