* 1356548
* ABI Innovation: Identifying phylogenetically informative data from next-generation sequencing
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Sudhir Kumar, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 07/31/2018
* USD 686,240.00

Knowledge of evolutionary relationships among species forms the fundamental
basis for research in fields ranging from agriculture to ecology to medicine.
This project aims to develop new methods and software to rapidly process large
genomic datasets and extract information that helps improve our understanding of
these relationships. This project will provide extensive bioinformatics training
for 3-6undergraduates; computer exercises will be developed to engage hundreds
of additional undergraduates in college courses. Research updates and
explanations will be provided to the scientific community at annual conferences,
and to the general public through the popular science weblog, The Panda?s Thumb
(http://www.pandasthumb.org/).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research seeks to
develop software that will facilitate numerous projects in the field of
evolution, including research on non-model organisms and emerging infectious
diseases. First, this research will produce a method to identify regions of the
genome that are similar enough that they can be compared among diverse groups.
Second, new statistical models will be developed to accurately determine the
sequence for each species for these regions given the error in current methods
of genome sequencing. Third, methods will be developed to automate the
identification of data that is useful to determine both recent and ancient
evolutionary events. The resulting data can be used in established analytical
software platforms. The methods developed by this project will be made available
to the scientific community as robust, easy-to-use software at
https://github.com/rachelss/SISRS.