* 1356655
* ABI Innovation: An Integrative Approach to Identifying Highly Heritable Subtypes of Complex Phenotypes
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2020
* Jinbo Bi, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 06/30/2020
* USD 605,717.00

Identifying genetic variation underlying complex phenotypes aids the
understanding of their biology. Complex phenotypes characterized by a variety of
features are often associated with substantial phenotypic variation. Current
statistical methods are ineffective to address this phenotypic heterogeneity,
and hence lack of power to associate genetic variants with the phenotype. This
project aims to design new algorithms that differentiate homogenous subtypes of
a complex phenotype that are most informative in genetic analysis, and identify
genetic variants that are associated with the subtypes but cannot be detected by
the non-differentiated phenotype. The validity of the subtypes will be proved in
multiple scales including the evidence from genomic structure and phenotypic
features. The new algorithms will be validated in the areas of genetic selection
for complex traits of agriculturally-important animals and plants. This project
serves a vehicle to train graduate students in the multidisciplinary methods
involving computer science and biology, and allow them to apply the methods in a
variety of biological fields. A new course in the bioinformatics field will be
developed for senior undergraduate students. High school educational materials
will also be developed to educate high school students about how to
mathematically model biological data so it solves biological
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will derive novel analytics based on
quantitative genetics theory and machine learning theory to refine complex
phenotypes for enhanced discovery of genotype-phenotype correlations. Using
empirical and statistically rigorous methods, this project will derive composite
traits, as functions of multiple phenotypic features, that are optimized with
respect to narrow-sense heritability, and that map readily to specific genomic
regions. Two statistical models for estimating narrow-sense heritability will be
considered: one based on sample pedigrees, and the other directly uses the
whole-genome markers. To identify multi-scale evidence of a subtype that is
characterized by a composite trait, a new machine learning framework will be
derived to jointly analyze genotypes and phenotypes. By testing the algorithms
in the analysis of large-scale biological databases, the new algorithms will
derive highly heritable composite traits for feed efficiency of dairy cattle and
adaptive traits of soybean to improve their genetic selection. The algorithms
developed in this project will also advance the machine learning field by
defining and addressing new research problems, such as the joint model inference
using data from multiple sources, probabilistic clustering based on matrix
decomposition, and quadratic optimization for heritability estimation. This
project will yield user-friendly software tools that can be broadly deployed to
biological research areas that study genetics of complex phenotypes. The
validated methods and software will be disseminated through the PI?s laboratory
website http://www.labhealthinfo.uconn.edu/home/ which provides more information
of this project.