* 1356630
* Following the Trail of Fukushima Tracers: Transport Pathways, Spreading and Mixing in the North Pacific
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2014,02/28/2019
* Steven Jayne, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 02/28/2019
* USD 1,099,945.00

The goal of this project is to use the information provided by the one-time,
2011 release of radio isotopes, and in particular, cesium (137Cs, ~30-year half-
life and 134Cs, ~2-year half-life) and strontium (90Sr, 29-year half-life) from
the Dai-ichi Fukushima nuclear power plants in northern Japan to better
understand the pathways, mixing and transport of water in the North Pacific
Ocean. The PIs will analyze surface &amp; profile samples from the 2013 zonal
CLIVAR 30°N transect for strontium; and obtain and analyze upper water column
cesium (Cs) and strontium (Sr) profiles along the 2015 meridional CLIVAR line at
150°W. These observations, along with ocean cesium and iodine data collected
over the last two and a half years, will be combined with satellite, drifter and
float observations, an ocean model analysis and atmospheric modeling results to
illuminate the details of the horizontal spread and vertical mixing that will
have taken place over the 4 year period since the release of the isotopes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The Cs and Sr observations and
analysis, particularly when combined with other observed properties and
numerical models, will provide a unique window from which to view water mass
formation and the temporal scale of transformation within the North Pacific.
This investigation seeks to better understand the fate of Fukushima
radioisotopes released and deposited in the North Pacific -- how far and how
deeply they range 2 to 4 years after being introduced. Although levels of this
radioactivity in the ocean are not considered dangerous, the questions of where
it is, and exactly how much there is, remain topics of particular interest to
those who live on North Pacific shores and fish in its waters. At the same time
it is asked what this unique tracer can say about ocean advection and diffusion
processes. The PIs intend to use the results from the observations to improve
their own model simulation and to validate disparate community modeling efforts
forecasting radioisotope contamination of waters off the US west coast.
Conclusions drawn concerning the variability in the mixing and spreading of
Fukushima isotopes will be relevant to those seeking to understand the role of
physical processes on biological production, nutrient cycling and CO2 uptake as
this truly unique set of decadal-scale tracers will reveal the rates and
patterns of basin-scale upper-ocean mixing and advective
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: To maximize the scientific
benefit of the proposed samples through multi-tracer analysis, as well as to
develop stronger ties with other labs working with Fukushima derived isotopes,
and support the education of a young researcher, a graduate student from P.
Masque's University of Barcelona lab will be invited to spend two semesters at
WHOI to measure 90Sr activities in the North Pacific hydrographic samples.
During the 1st summer of the project, a WHOI summer student fellow (3rd year
undergraduate) will be invited to participate in the observational component of
the project through analyses of hydrography, float profiles or altimetry. To
further international collaboration with Japanese colleagues and assist in the
development of new methods for reducing detection limits M. Aoyama will be
invited to visit the WHOI isotope lab from Tokyo. In addition, a public website
will be created on which results will be posted. All members of the group intend
to engage in outreach at various levels through their continued work with the
following programs: mentoring of local middle and high school students using
cruise observations for science fair projects, classroom visits and public
outreach presentations, interviews and talks.