* 1356717
* Increasing Diversity in Mathematics
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2022
* Jennifer McNulty, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Elise Lockwood
* 06/30/2022
* USD 610,296.00

This project at the University of Montana (UM) is improving undergraduate and
graduate mathematics education by providing a learning environment that gives
students the financial means, professional guidance, and community support they
need to pursue degrees in the mathematical sciences. In addition the project
seeks to develop a diverse student body whose composition reflects that of the
state of Montana. Many students at UM are first-generation college students;
many more face financial challenges. Thus, the largest part of the budget
provides scholarships; however, scholarships are not enough so the project is
creating pathways to draw students from all segments of the population into the
mathematical disciplines and strengthen existing support structures so that,
once on campus, these students can thrive and go on to challenging careers in
technical areas of national need.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because Native Americans
form the largest minority group in the state, the project draws this population
into the discipline by partnering with seven tribal community colleges on the
reservation and three public community colleges in Montana. The project is
extending the Missoula Math Circle to rural communities through video
conferencing. The project provides two-year scholarships for talented,
financially-needy undergraduate students; and provides fellowships for graduate
mathematics majors who demonstrate financial need. Research opportunities,
professional development, extensive mentoring, and peer and faculty mentoring
are central to all levels of the program. Since the mathematical sciences are
foundational to all technical disciplines, improved access to high-quality
mathematics programs holds promise to improve the learning and research
environments in other STEM fields, as the pool of students with excellent
quantitative ability becomes larger and more diverse at all levels.