* 1356520
* Reduction of Financial Barriers By Providing Academic Scholarships in the Sciences
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2020
* Mark Melton, Saint Augustine's College
* Standard Grant
* Connie Della-Piana
* 06/30/2020
* USD 600,000.00

Through this scholarship program, Saint Augustine's University (SAU) attracts,
supports and retains in interrelated majors with an emphasis in Science,
Technology, Engineering &amp; Mathematics (STEM) to increase the the quantity
and quality of STEM graduates. SAU serves a geographic niche in North Carolina
which is characterized by higher proportion of minority residents in a rural
setting that are often afflicted by persistent poverty. The program goals are:
1) to achieve full retention of talented but financially disadvantaged
undergraduates majoring in the sciences, while significantly reducing their time
to graduation; and 2) increase the number of underrepresented minorities, who
elect and are well-prepared to pursue advanced degrees in the sciences and
pursue educational, leadership and managerial roles in STEM fields. This project
supports a STEM initiative that increases and strengthens partnerships, networks
and collaborations between this HBCU and mainstream universities, state and
regional forensic and health sciences laboratories, USDA and other STEM
research-related enterprises. The project targets 30 full-time SAU students
majoring in one of the following STEM disciplines; Biology, Chemistry, Forensic
Science, Engineering Mathematics, Mathematics, and Computer Science. Each
scholarship recipient will have a designated Faculty Mentor to guide academic
and research development. The recipients each are assigned a Faculty Mentor and
participate in academic development activities and work as peer tutors to
promote experiences and progress in cohort groups. A rich array of opportunities
are available to the scholarship recipients including the Science Seminar
Series, tutoring sessions, summer internship opportunities at on-campus and off-
campus laboratories, service learning activities, field trips, faculty-student
collaborative research, attendance at conferences, alumni mentoring, and
comprehensive career counseling. Programmatic evaluation will focus on multiple
factors, including improved student learning, problem solving abilities,
performance on exams, teamwork, presentation skills, graduation rates, job
placement in field of study, and pursuit of higher education. &lt;br/&gt;