* 1356964
* Biogeochemical and Ecological Impacts of Amphipod Circoviruses in Benthic Habitats
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2019
* Lars Rudstam, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 05/31/2019
* USD 619,123.00

Overview: This project will investigate how circoviruses influence the
herbivory/detritivory rates of benthic amphipods through the study of an
experimental gradient of viral prevalence and by addition of cultivated viruses.
The hypotheses to be tested are: H1: Circoviruses cause decreased detritivory
and herbivory by infected amphipod hosts; H2: Circoviral impacts on amphipods
result in decreased growth rate of sediment bacteria, decreased extracellular
cellulose activity of sediment microorganisms, and decreased fluxes of oxidized
inorganic nutrients from sediments into overlying waters; H3: Circoviruses
negatively impact the nutritional quality of their hosts. These hypotheses will
be tested by conducting sediment-water mesocosm experiments to assess the
impacts of circoviruses on aquatic vegetation breakdown, and subsequent impacts
on biogeochemistry, including bacterial production, efflux of reduced N into
overlying waters, and production of dissolved organic C. Finally, this project
will examine how circoviruses influence the nutritional quality of amphipods by
examining elemental ratios of amphipod populations from high to low circoviral
prevalence and experimentally infected amphipods. Data from these three
approaches will be used to form a model of how circoviruses influence benthic
foodwebs and biogeochemical cycles in sediment habitats. This study focuses on
circoviruses within two ecologically sensitive amphipods that are crucial to
ecosystem function: Diporeia (in Lake Michigan), which has experienced dramatic
decline in abundance over the last 20 years within the Great Lakes, and
Peramphithoe femorata, which is a major consumer of the environmentally
threatened giant kelp Macrocystis pyrifera on the US West
Coast.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Decades of research have
identified the importance of viruses in aquatic ecology and
biogeochemistry.&lt;br/&gt;However, most studies have focused on bacteriophage
and viruses of eukaryotic microorganisms. Metazoa are important drivers of
benthic biogeochemistry, where they cause bioirrigation of anoxic sediments,
resuspension, settlement of particulate matter, facilitating nutrient fluxes
from sediments to overlying waters, and potentially influencing ocean-scale
processes like sediment denitrification. Circoviruses have been identified as a
common constituent of crustacean viral assemblages, where they are well
correlated with host death rates and population decline, and cultivated
circoviruses cause death of arthropod cells. There is therefore a strong need to
investigate how viruses impact the ecology of their crustacean hosts, and how in
turn those impacts influence ecosystem function. Amphipods are important
epifaunal constituents of benthic habitats, where they consume settled
particulate matter and aquatic vegetation, which in turn influences its
conversion to dissolved organic matter through microbial degradation. In turn
their feeding activities stimulate benthic mineralization rates, and they are
consumed by higher trophic levels. Therefore, amphipods link microbial to
macrobial food webs in coastal and lake habitats. This project investigates how
circoviruses infecting amphipods influence the flux of C through benthic
ecosystems as a model of how viruses of metazoa influence biogeochemistry of
aquatic ecosystems. The research will provide insight into how viruses influence
aquatic biogeochemistry, opening up a new area of research into metazoan viruses
in benthic ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The project has
been designed to incorporate three broader impact activities. First, it will
involve science teachers at the Newfield High School (Newfield, NY) and Oneida
Lake Region high schools to directly involve and integrate high needs students
into the research team to conduct experiments and laboratory analyses,
culminating in presentation of their research activities to their peer group.
Second, it will engage undergraduate students through summer internships at the
Cornell Biological Field Station, and undergraduate researchers during the
school year at Cornell to participate in the experiments and hone skills in
scientific presentation. Third, it will develop extensive web-based outreach
tools, including a website (incorporating live views of experiments), and social
media pages targeting the general public and K-12 students. Finally, the
proposed work will provide insight into the ecology of vulnerable aquatic
ecosystems.