* 1356756
* Regional air-sea CO2 fluxes from the WOCE and CLIVAR 13C-DIC dataset and in an ocean carbon cycle model
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/2014,01/31/2019
* Paul Quay, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 01/31/2019
* USD 593,822.00

Accurate model predictions of future atmospheric CO2 levels are critical for
anticipating and planning for the impact of climate change. Since about one-
quarter of fossil fuel combustion-derived CO2 is taken up by the ocean, accurate
models of this uptake process are essential to accurately forecast the earth's
climate. Models of the earth's carbon cycle are complex because of the many
processes affecting atmospheric CO2 and its cycling between the atmosphere,
terrestrial biota, and ocean. Thus, comparison between model output and
observations is an essential step to evaluating model performance and improving
climate predictions. In this study, researchers from the University of
Washington will aim to improve the validity of the ocean component of the Earth
System Model using new and historic datasets of a carbon tracer. Results from
this study will increase the accuracy of the model's predicted cycling of
anthropogenic CO2 in the ocean.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The
research will provide a better understanding of, and improved model simulations
and forecasts of the changing ocean carbon cycle, ultimately contributing to
climate research. The project will support a postdoctoral researcher, who will
further their expertise in carbon cycle research and advance their scientific
career.