* 1356469
* Collaborative Research: ABI Development: A New Platform for highly-optimized, low-latency pipelines for genomic data analysis
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2014,02/28/2018
* Toby Bloom, New York Genome Center
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 02/28/2018
* USD 345,581.00

Next-generation sequencing has transformed genomics into a new paradigm of data-
intensive computing, raising several salient challenges. First, the deluge of
genomic data needs to undergo deep analysis to mine biological information,
which requires a full pipeline that integrates many data processing and analysis
tools. Second, deep analysis pipelines often take long to run, which entails a
long cycle for algorithm and method development. This project aims to bring the
latest big data technology and database technology to the genomics domain to
revolutionize its data crunching power. This project is anticipated to produce
significant scientific and educational benefits. By providing a highly-optimized
parallel processing platform for genomic data analysis and making it accessible
in private and public clouds, it will enable many new models and algorithms to
be developed for genomics and help advance this field at unprecedented speed as
big data technology did for Internet companies. This project also integrates
research and education with curriculum development, tutorials for K-12 teachers
and community college faculty, and engaging women in research through college
outreach and NSF-funded outreach programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research includes the development of (1) a deep pipeline for genomic data
analysis by assembling state-of-the-art methods, (2) automatic parallelization
of the workflow using the big data technology, (3) a principled approach to
optimizing the genomic pipeline, and (4) integration of streaming technology to
reduce latency of important results. The prototype system will be deployed in
both private and public cloud environments, and fully evaluated using existing
long-running pipelines at the New York Genome Center and in a variety of real
use cases. By way of doing so, this project will provide new knowledge regarding
how to adapt and advance big data technology, including new optimization,
partitioning, and scheduling techniques, for the genomics domain. The results of
the project are disseminated at the web site: http://gesall.cs.umass.edu.