* 1356621
* ABI Innovation: Advanced informatics and effective algorithms to enable CryoEM protein structure prediction and density analysis
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Shuiwang Ji, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 06/30/2018
* USD 589,703.00

This award is for an interdisciplinary project to develop efficient
computational methods and tools for determination of protein structures from 3D
images in the presence of errors. Understanding the machinery of large molecular
assemblies has been significantly enhanced by the cryo-electron microscopy
(cryo-EM) technique. This technique allows the visualization of tens to over a
thousand interacting molecules in an assembly and hence provides direct insights
into important biological functions and mechanisms that cause abnormal function.
The Electron Microscopy Data Bank (EMDB) archives density images of molecular
assemblies at resolutions ranging from 2Å to 100Å and the rapidly accumulating
data are valuable resources for data mining for enhanced accuracy in
interpretation. The research will concretely demonstrate the applicability of
data mining the EMDB and the use of sophisticated graph algorithmic methods for
better protein structure prediction. The computational methods and tools being
developed can be used to interpret large molecular assemblies that have
important biological functions such as viruses, membrane-bound channels and
cellular machines. Understanding these mechanisms is crucial for designing drugs
and vaccines. The data mining and algorithmic techniques developed are very
likely to be applicable for solving other computational problems, especially
those dealing with searching large spaces and where one has to deal with data
errors. Through the involvement of undergraduate researchers and summer high
school students in the project, particularly women and those to be recruited
from the African-American community, the project will contribute to the NSF goal
of strengthening the pipeline and broadening participation in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long term goal of this project is to develop
sequential and parallel computational methods and tools to derive atomic
structures for EMDB density images at the mid-resolution range of 4-10Å. Such
methods will be generally applicable to determine the structure of proteins for
which no existing templates can be identified. Novel ideas will be implemented
in two difficult but critical steps in this problem. The first one addresses the
long-standing challenge of accurately identifying &amp;#946;-strands from
density images. The second addresses the problem of finding the correct mapping
of secondary structures (helices and &amp;#946;-strands) in a density map to
those identified on the protein sequence in presence of errors, making use of
advanced computational methods. This project is a multidisciplinary effort
bringing together expertise from computational structural biology, data mining,
efficient algorithm design, and parallel computing. The methodology to be
developed will be validated using experimentally derived cryo-EM density images
and will be incorporated into Chimera, a popular 3D molecular viewer, for the
cryo-EM community.&lt;br/&gt;The outcome of the project will be made available
at the following website: http://www.cs.odu.edu/~jhe/