* 1356133
* Cal-Bridge: A California Bridge to Astronomy and Physics PhDs for California State University   and Community College Students
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2020
* Tammy Smecker-Hane, Cal Poly Pomona Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Camacho - Walter
* 06/30/2020
* USD 728,532.00

PROJECT ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;The President's Council of Advisors on Science and
Technology (PCAST) in their February 2012 report noted that "Federal agencies
should encourage projects that establish collaborations between research
universities and community colleges or other institutions that do not have
research programs." In the 2010 Decadal Survey of Astronomy one of the top
strategies to address the lack of diversity in astronomy and physics is
"Partnerships of community colleges and minority serving institutions with
research universities and with national centers and laboratories." Cal-Bridge is
exactly such a program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mission of the Cal-Bridge
program, while open to all students who meet the selection criteria, is to
increase the number of underrepresented minority (URM) and female students
completing a bachelor's degree and entering a PhD program in astronomy, physics,
or closely related fields. The program leverages an ideal set of institutions to
address this national problem. The Cal-Bridge program comprises a diverse
network of higher education institutions in southern California: 5 University of
California (UC) campuses, 8 California State University (CSU) campuses, and 8
community colleges. By identifying and mentoring students through the critical
transition from undergraduate STEM major to top-level PhD programs, Cal-Bridge
will have a significant national impact on the number of underrepresented
minority and female students obtaining a PhD in physics and astronomy, thus
serving as a model for minority-serving institutions
nationwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mission is achieved by providing intensive,
sustained, joint mentoring of students by CSU and UC faculty, aimed at
increasing the persistence of Cal-Bridge Scholars in completing their
undergraduate degree, and successfully entering and completing a PhD program.
The Cal-Bridge program will search for students with "untapped potential", using
research-based criteria developed by successful bridge programs such as the
Fisk-Vanderbilt Masters-to-PhD Bridge program. The recruiting pipeline will be
via the highly successful CAMPARE summer research program and its feeder
schools. This NSF-funded program has in the past 5 years successfully provided
authentic summer research experiences at world-class research institutions to a
large number students from a network of 20 CSUs and community colleges, mostly
Hispanic-serving institutions, all of which are part of the Cal-Bridge
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Official transcripts are collected quarterly for
each student. Mid-term progress reports, annual surveys, participant interviews,
data collection/statistical analysis are provided annually to the external
evaluator. Continual formative feedback through the use of Mid-Term Progress
reports ensures each student's progress and success. In addition there is
summative feedback for annual review by the Steering Committee.