* 1356527
* Expanding Career and Educational Learning in Information Technology (EXCEL-IT)
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Alan Carter, Green River Community College
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 08/31/2017
* USD 624,817.00

The Expanding Career and Education Learning in Information Technology (EXCEL-IT)
project combines financial aid with advising and support services to low-income
and under-served students at Green River Community College who are pursuing
Applied Associate's and Bachelor's degrees in Information Technology. EXCEL-IT
is awarding a minimum of 89 scholarships from 2014-2017 and is improving student
access to careers as IT professionals in an area of high national importance via
outreach and concurrent enrollment in K-12 school districts. Not only can
project graduates meet employers' workforce needs more economically than foreign
labor, but such careers deter reliance on government subsidies and empower
graduates to be responsible citizens and taxpayers.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
technical merit of the project lies in its coordinated approach to increasing
student retention and graduation rates through advising, tailored support
services, and cohort-based activities. In addition, the project is producing a
diverse body of well-educated and skilled graduates who are increasing the
breadth of perspectives and backgrounds in the Computer Science and Information
Technology profession. Moreover, the project is advancing scientific
understanding of how four-year degrees pursued and obtained through community
colleges can effectively broaden access to STEM careers for low-income and
under-represented students. Relevant data and identified best practices are
being shared through professional associations and external partners, which
include a statewide IT workforce agency and a regional ATE Center, thus
contributing to the larger knowledge-base about the undergraduate STEM education
enterprise.