* 1356488
* Kalamazoo Scholars: Expanding an Active Science Program Through Scholarships
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2020
* John Fink, Kalamazoo College
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Lewis
* 08/31/2020
* USD 608,546.00

The goal of the Kalamazoo Scholars Program is to improve the success of students
who are traditionally-underrepresented in STEM and to increase the diversity of
the scientific workforce. The program builds on Kalamazoo College's success in
attracting and retaining students in the natural sciences and mathematics and
seeks to increase the likelihood that first-generation and underrepresented
minority students with financial need will pursue careers and advanced degrees
in STEM. To achieve these objectives, Kalamazoo College will award scholarships
and provide academic and professional development support to two cohorts of
12-13 students majoring in biology, chemistry, mathematics, computer science,
physics, or engineering. Students in the program will have academic experiences
common to all Kalamazoo students: broad training in the liberal arts,
international engagement, in-depth study in an academic major, and a capstone
research experience. In addition, Kalamazoo Scholars will engage in research-
based practices shown to increase the persistence and success of students in
STEM, beginning with a pre-orientation program, a "Science in the World" first-
year seminar cluster, and peer mentoring, and continuing with weekly mentoring
lunches with faculty, STEM leadership activities, early research experiences,
internships and other career and professional development activities. The
leadership experiences embedded in the program will also influence other STEM
students on campus and younger students, often underrepresented minorities, in
the community.