* 1356132
* Collaborative Research:   Advanced modeling for understanding fluid and magma migration in subduction zones
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Peter van Keken, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 08/31/2017
* USD 39,312.00

The interactions of fluids and solids control some of the most critical
geochemical and geodynamic processes in subduction zones. These include flux
melting of the mantle and geochemical transport by fluids and magma, possible
rheological weakening of the mantle wedge, and control of seismicity and fault
mechanics. Quantitative models for the solid mantle flow have been developed but
there has been relatively little work to numerically simulate the production,
transport, and coupled interactions of fluids and melts with the solid. This
requires a more general computational framework that can deal with a wide range
of uncertainty both in the physical model and input parameter space. This
project continues the development of TerraFERMA (the Transparent Finite Element
Rapid Model Assembler), which will be used to: quantify potential fluid and
solid flow paths at subduction zones; develop a better understanding of
reactive, open system flux melting; and investigate the effects of fluids on
solid-state rheology. Model predictions will be tested against a suite of
observations from the relatively robust location of arc volcanism to the
compositions of lava samples produced at these sites.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of this project include support of an
early career scientist working at the interface between computational and Earth
science and the development of a new computer code for integrating geochemical
and geochemical dynamics in subduction zones. The resulting computer code will
be incorporated into holdings of Computational Infrastructure for Geosciences,
which provides open access to software for scientific purposes. Increased
understanding of mantle deformation, magmatism, and thermal structure of the
Earth at subduction zones could lead to improved knowledge of where brittle
behavior (earthquakes) is more or less likely along the megathrust fault that
marks the boundary between the downgoing plate and the surrounding mantle.