* 1356505
* Collaborative Research: ABI Innovation: BCSP: Understanding the design and usage of distributed biological networks
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Ziv Bar-Joseph, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2019
* USD 847,835.00

Computer science and biology have enjoyed a long and fruitful relationship for
decades. Biologists rely on computational methods to analyze and integrate large
data sets, while several computational methods were inspired by the high-level
design principles of biological systems. Several common aspects and goals of
computational and biological systems suggest that we can use one as a source for
studies of the other and vice versa. With recent advances in our ability to
generate and analyze biological data it is now possible, for the first time, to
design new, bi-directional studies that directly link biology and computer
science. This form of coupled experimental and computational thinking, which
will be utilized in this project, can greatly benefit both biology and computer
science. The proposal also seeks to help establish the usefulness of this
approach to increase public interest in science and engineering and to provide
interdisciplinary educational and research experiences for a diverse population
of students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This joint experimental-computational project
will use a bi-directional approach to study the design, communication and
coordination of networks utilized by Escherichia coli. The overall goal is to
determine how biological systems utilize distributed networks over different
scales, environments and varying communication strategies. The project will
address biological questions ranging from how information processing is
performed in signaling networks to the importance of various topological
features of E. coli networks to coordination in a population of bacterial cells.
In addition to addressing the biological questions these studies seek to provide
insights into the design and usage of networks for distributed computational
systems that can tolerate harsh environments, failures and limited resources
making them applicable to a wide range of real world applications. Distributed
networks are utilized by species ranging from single cell organisms to mammals.
The proposal seeks to determine shared principles regarding the design and usage
of such networks in E. coli. and the findings can be applied to understand
similar systems in other species, as well. Beyond the immediate impact of the
biological modeling and the algorithms developed, the synergy between
computational and biological systems is of great interest to computer
scientists, biologists and the general public. The proposal includes an
interdisciplinary collaboration between computer scientists, engineers and
biologists. Students funded as part of this project will spend time at
collaborators' labs from other disciplines leading to interdisciplinary training
and the research will support and provide training opportunities for
undergraduate and graduate students from underrepresented groups. The PI and co-
PIs plan to develop and offer a new class on biologically inspired computational
methods and to organize workshops and tutorials in relevant international
meetings about the topic of this proposal. Project outcomes will be disseminated
at http://www.algorithmsinnature.org.