* 1356751
* Collaborative Research: ABI Development: Kurator: A Provenance-enabled Workflow Platform and Toolkit to Curate Biodiversity Data
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* James Macklin, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2019
* USD 748,931.00

The University of Illinois Urbana Champaign and Harvard University are awarded
grants to develop software tools for scientific data digitization, sharing,
integration and use. The considerable challenge to digitizing natural science
collections in the U.S. (and globally) necessitate a focus on both digitization
efficiencies and the utility of the generated data. This grant will develop a
novel, extensible, open source toolkit (Kurator) for automated and semi-
automated workflows with diverse curation services to aid biodiversity research
and beyond. This project will enhance discovery and understanding while
promoting teaching, training and learning. A postdoctoral fellow will be trained
in provenance enhanced workflow technology and contribute to Kurator design and
implementation. Principles of data management curation with a focus on
provenance will be taught in undergraduate and graduate courses. This project
will also enhance infrastructure for research and education through
collaborations with iDigBio and the Encyclopedia of Life. Educational modules
and outreach activities on data quality and data curation will be developed for
undergraduates and high school educators. Several Thematic Collection Networks
will provide data via iDigBio for testing to insure dissemination of high
quality data. Critical community authority files that do not have associated web
services will be made available to the greater community as Kurator actors and
services.

Kurator will consist of a user friendly web interface for users to configure and
launch workflows while maintaining provenance, and a workflow platform for rapid
development of new curation services and workflow variants. The latter will also
be used to "wrap" valuable domain authority files that are not currently
available as services. New "curator-in-the-loop" workflow technology allows us
to directly involve experts in semi automatic curation pipelines, using human
interaction actors via FilteredPush, other syndication methods, and discovery
environments. Kurator will allow examination of data lineages to facilitate the
assessment of credibility, supports repeatability in publication, informs legal
proceedings where data are regulated, and provides context for feedback to a
given resource. Kurator will facilitate digitization efforts through custom
processing of raw data obtained from hardcopy specimen labels against existing
services, including taxonomic name resolution, georeferencing, and duplicate
specimen detection, as well as newly created customizable actors for appropriate
controlled vocabularies to clean the data. Where required, semi-automated
services can invoke expert review using annotation services and existing
discovery environments. Curation pipelines can be integrated with other
workflows for analysis of ecological, evolutionary, phenological, genomic and
related data, can be shared or repurposed easily, and can be made accessible for
publication.