* 1356549
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: An Ethnographic Analysis of Healthcare Services Delivery in Socially Marginal Communities
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2014,11/30/2015
* Phillipe Bourgois, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 11/30/2015
* USD 12,828.00

Nicholas Iacobelli, under the supervision of Dr. Phillipe Bourgois of the
University of Pennsylvania, will explore how healthcare security is negotiated
among socially marginal communities. The research focuses on prison inmates, a
population largely uninsured and with inconsistent healthcare access on the
outside, but who are paradoxically the only U.S. population group currently
guaranteed a constitutional right to healthcare. The study seeks to evaluate
this paradox through an ethnographic evaluation of the legal, political, and
economic determinants of prison healthcare juxtaposed with the everyday
operations of correctional healthcare administration in a maximum-security
prison. This project will address 1) How prisons are relied upon to generate
healthcare security, and 2) What social factors shape local care seeking and
provision.

This project responds to the dearth of detailed ethnographic research in prison
settings by examining the everyday dynamics of incarceration and analyzing them
in the larger context of state services and citizenship. The study's
ethnographic approach will provide insight on the interpersonal, administrative,
and legal processes that dictate care with a focus on what is at stake "on the
ground."

It is thus uniquely situated to generate knowledge about contemporary state
services, social marginalization, and the political role of health. It will also
be able to help local correctional healthcare providers structure their policies
and practices to address the study's findings and generate broader debate about
care provision and the costs of incarceration.