* 1356577
* Science and Math Research Training Scholarships
* EHR,DUE
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2019
* Marie Mons, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Mark Pauley
* 07/31/2019
* USD 613,554.00

The Science and MAth Research Training (SMART) program at Georgia Tech
University is contributing well-prepared individuals to the science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) workforce by providing an educational
experience that emphasizes experiential learning. The overall goal of the
program is to prepare a cohort of highly talented students, working in science
and mathematics to be the technology leaders of tomorrow. It utilizes a Living
Learning Community (LLC) with participation of students and faculty from the
Schools of Biology, Chemistry & Biochemistry, Biology, Earth & Atmospheric
Sciences, Mathematics, and Physics. The program is introducing students to their
majors, interdisciplinary and collaborative learning, and research through a
series of activities. Specific objectives of the program are to: (i) provide
financial assistance to scholars to relieve them of the burden of loans or non-
career related jobs; (ii) improve retention of students in the College of
Sciences; (iii) decrease the time-to-degree; (iv) increase participation in
experiential learning (e.g., undergraduate research, cooperative education,
internships, service learning and international study); (v) increase the number
of science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) graduates from
underrepresented groups; and (vi) increase the rate at which graduates embark on
advanced training or careers in STEM fields. These goals are being achieved by
providing scholarship funds to students with financial need, and by developing
components to build strong student interactions with research-active faculty
members.

The project addresses the challenge of increasing retention of students in STEM
disciplines by providing enhanced mentoring and a coherent suite of student
support services based around a LLC. This is enhancing the ability of the
institution to increase the number of STEM graduates from underrepresented
groups to better reflect the composition of the U.S. population. An extensive
evaluation programs is designed to quantify the effect of participation in the
program, and its individual components, on the academic success of the scholars.
Examination of the value of a STEM-based LLC is important as institutions face
the challenge of creating programs to recruit and retain STEM majors and enhance
interdisciplinary education and training.

Undergraduates are being provided the training and advising necessary to prepare
them for an array of research projects and internship experiences. This includes
skill-building and professional development seminar classes and monthly lunches.
Each year a cohort of 24 students, 8 with S-STEM scholarships and 16 others,
enter this program that provides a strong foundation for academic success. A
tangible outcome of these interactions is enhanced involvement of scholars in
experiential learning programs that provide them with skills, experiences, and
motivations so that they are best prepared to succeed at the university and to
enter productive, sustainable and rewarding careers. Research opportunities
across the university and in collaboration with other on-campus and off-campus
units are available, and many faculty members have a culture of publishing with
undergraduates as co-authors. The program builds on many successful components
of a previous S-STEM program and benefits from synergies with existing student
support services and programs.