* 1356779
* Ecology of diatom viruses:  connecting physiology and field dynamics through host transcriptional responses
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2014,02/28/2017
* Gabrielle Rocap, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 02/28/2017
* USD 451,985.00

Overview: Viruses play critical roles in aquatic ecosystems. Phages infecting
marine bacteria are abundant members of the plankton that contribute to cell
mortality, structure population diversity and drive genome evolution though
horizontal gene transfer. Viruses infecting eukaryotic phytoplankton have been
demonstrated to induce both life cycle switching and programmed cell death in
coccolithophorids and be significant agents of mortality in blooms of
pelagophytes, haptophytes and raphidophytes. However, much less is known about
viruses infecting one of the largest, most diverse and most productive groups of
algae, the diatoms. Only thirteen diatom infecting viruses have been reported,
and little is known about their mechanisms of infection, effects on host
metabolism or diversity and dynamics in the field. This is a remarkable
knowledge gap considering the ecological importance of the diatoms. Infection
with a clonal virus on Pseudo-nitzschia multiseries can result in complete host
lysis within 12-16 hours. The P. multiseries virus (PmDNAV) is a single stranded
DNA virus with an icosahedral capsid of 50 nm. The PmDNAV infects the widest
host range of any marine eukaryote-infecting virus, lysing other strains of P.
multiseries, other species of Pseudo-nitzschia, and other genera of diatoms
including many centric diatoms. With the recent completion of the genome of the
host, P. multiseries, we now have a model system to investigate the response of
the host to viral infection and the potential impacts of viruses on diatom
mortality in the field. The objectives of this project are to: 1. isolate and
characterize additional diatom viruses utilizing established methods, using a
variety of host strains and field viral concentrate combinations 2. use RNA-Seq
to determine the transcriptional profiles of three diatoms (P. multiseries, P.
pungens and T. pseudonana) during the course of viral infection 3. determine a
surface water metavirome at four stations on a coastal to open ocean transect in
diatom dominated waters in the Pacific Northwest (line P), with an emphasis on
diversity and biogeography of ssDNA and ssRNA viruses. Viral and host genes
whose expression is diagnostic of viral infection, will be identified by
observing genomic responses to infection in culture. These genes, along with
viruses assembled in the metaviromes, will be combined with eukaryotic
metatranscriptomes already available from the same waters to assess virus
activity in the field.

Intellectual Merit: This project seeks to strengthen the model system initiated
by the discovery of the Pseudo-nitzschia multiseries DNA virus. The host-virus
transcriptomics will lay the groundwork for assessing the impact of viruses on
diatom communities in the environment. In turn, the paired metaviromes and
metatranscriptomes will reveal new questions about both diatom virus diversity
and function that can then be further explored by controlled, culture-based
experiments. This research will be the first extensive exploration of diatom
virus ecology and function and will ultimately help further connect viruses and
diatoms to global biogeochemical cycles, unravel complex organismal
interactions, and inform ocean-related public health.

Broader Impacts: Diatoms are the dominant primary producers in the productive
coastal oceans and contribute significantly to carbon export across all oceanic
regimes. Viral impacts on species distributions and cell abundances have
implications for health of fisheries and ecosystem responses to climate change.
More specifically, there are public health and economic impacts associated with
Pseudo-nitzschia blooms. Another goal of this project is to broaden the pool of
individuals who pursue graduate work in environmental sciences by providing
students from underrepresented minority groups early research experience,
sustained financial support, peer mentorship and exposure to the discipline at a
national level. A graduate student and five undergraduates from underrepresented
groups will be involved in the research.