* 1356043
* Collaborative Research:  Dinitrogen fixation rates and diazotrophic communities in contrasting oxygen regimes of the Eastern Pacific Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2014,02/28/2019
* Amal Jayakumar, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 02/28/2019
* USD 342,062.00

There are three major open ocean oxygen minimum zones (OMZs) in the world: the
Eastern Tropical North Pacific (ETNP), the Eastern Tropical South Pacific
(ETSP), and the Arabian Sea. OMZs &amp;#8232;are important areas of
denitrification (including anammox) and represent a significant loss
&amp;#8232;of fixed nitrogen (N) from the ocean. However, multiple lines of
evidence have recently indicated that N inputs via dinitrogen (N2) fixation and
denitrification may be more closely coupled in space than previously suggested.
Despite the geochemical inferences regarding the location and magnitude of N2
fixation that might be associated with OMZs and the importance of these regions
for removing fixed N from the ocean, it is thought that OMZs do not harbour
diazotrophs. In a preliminary study, nifH genes and their expression were
detected from within the Arabian&amp;#8232; Sea and ETNP OMZs and active N2
fixation was measured in the ETNP OMZ, confirming that N2 fixation occurs in
oxygen deficient waters. The PIs propose to measure N2 fixation and the
&amp;#8232;diversity of diazotrophic communities with respect to vertical
gradients of oxygen, light, &amp;#8232;and dissolved nitrogen (N)
concentrations. They will compare these detailed vertical profiles&amp;#8232;
with similar profiles made in fully oxic waters adjacent to the OMZs. In
addition, they will &amp;#8232;compare and contrast two very different OMZ
regions; one that includes some of the most productive oceanic waters on Earth
(ETSP), and another that is far less productive (ETNP). As part of&amp;#8232;
this project, they will acquire a better understanding of where N2 fixation
occurs with respect &amp;#8232;to areas of active denitrification and the
microbes involved in these processes. Armed with &amp;#8232;this more
comprehensive understanding of the vertical distribution of N2 fixation and
active diazotrophic communities with respect to chemical and biological
gradients in OMZ waters,&amp;#8232; they will garner a more realistic view of
the N cycle within these regions and a better understanding &amp;#8232;of depth-
integrated rates of N2 fixation that include oxic and anoxic aphotic
waters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Despite the geochemical
inferences regarding the location and magnitude of N2 fixation and&amp;#8232;its
juxtaposition with denitrification within OMZs, there are few rate estimates and
biological &amp;#8232;data supporting these conjectures. The biological evidence
we do have suggests that diazotrophs are active within the Arabian Sea and ETNP
OMZs and that there is measureable N2 fixation &amp;#8232;within the ETNP OMZ.
The proposed research will allow the PIs to establish the contribution of
diazotrophy to N inventories within and adjacent to two expansive OMZ regions.
The ability &amp;#8232;to reconcile oceanic N budgets and construct accurate
biogeochemical models is currently limited by the geographical paucity of rate
measurements from diverse oceanic environments. In addition, while the PIs have
measured active N2 fixation in aphotic waters, they lack the depth resolution
&amp;#8232;to include the expansive sub-euphotic oceanic realm in depth-
integrated estimates of oceanic &amp;#8232;N2 fixation anywhere. Through their
ongoing collaboration with Ward and Devol, who have measured N losses associated
with denitrification in this OMZ, the PIs will be able to construct an "end-to-
end" view of the N cycle in this globally important system. The molecular data
generated from &amp;#8232;this project will not only shed light on the active
clades that contribute to oceanic &amp;#8232;N inputs through N2 fixation and N
loss through denitrification, but also give insights &amp;#8232;into the
relative distributions and activity of diazotophs and dentrifiers along vertical
&amp;#8232;gradients of oxygen, light, and dissolved
N.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Results will contribute to our
understanding of controls on marine N2 fixation; variations &amp;#8232;in
diazotrophy along vertical gradients of light, oxygen, and nutrient
concentrations; and&amp;#8232; the balance between N inputs and losses from
OMZs. This project will&amp;#8232; be potentially transformative in shaping our
view of the oceanic N budget, both the input and output ends. The project will
also contribute to education on a number of levels. Undergraduate and graduate
students at Old Dominion University and Princeton will have opportunities to
gain valuable research experience using state of the art research facilities
both on land and at &amp;#8232;sea. In addition, we will create a video
classroom to communicate with elementary and middle school students during the
cruises to the ETNP and ETSP and keep the scientific community and general
public updated through blogs.