* 1356094
* Alcohol Intoxication and Young Adults
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2016
* Geoffrey Hunt, Scientific Analysis Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 07/31/2016
* USD 219,996.00

This project will examine the meaning, practices, and contexts of alcohol
intoxication among young adults. Alcohol intoxication is associated with a wide
range of health problems and adverse consequences, is a major risk factor for
mortality and morbidity, and can lead to a host of social problems. The existing
research indicates that gender patterns in alcohol consumption may be
converging, yet it is unclear if the meaning, practices, and contexts of
intoxication for men and women are also converging. The vast majority of
research on alcohol use and intoxication has been conducted within
epidemiological, psychological, treatment, or bio-health traditions, however in
this sociological study our aim is to examine issues of the meaning of
intoxication for young adult men and women.

The primary data collection tool will be in-depth interviews with 50 young
adults, between the ages of 18 to 25, who drink to intoxication. The interview
will include a survey with open-ended questions to gather extensive information
about their beliefs about intoxication; the social practices, settings, and
perceived consequences of intoxication; and the role and meanings of alcohol
intoxication within their lives. Broader Impacts of the project include making
an important contribution to sociological inquiry, and especially the
connections between social context and cultural consumption. In addition, the
results will produce important information about the meaning, practices, and
contexts of alcohol intoxication in a diverse sample of young adult men and
women. The knowledge generated can make an important contribution to public
health and policy by expanding and transforming knowledge about alcohol
intoxication from the perspective of young adults.