* 1356052
* STEM Scholars - Building Professional Identities in Under-Represented Students
* EDU,DUE
* 12/01/2014,11/30/2020
* Raymond Pugh, University of Wisconsin-Platteville
* Continuing Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 11/30/2020
* USD 623,486.00

STEM Scholars - Building Professional Identities in Under-Represented
Students&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to increase the number
of distinguished underrepresented STEM graduates from the University of
Wisconsin-Platteville. To accomplish this, females and underrepresented
minorities (URMs) will be supported through large scholarships and high-impact
practices, enabling them to be academically successful in STEM majors, acquire
career development skills, participate in undergraduate internship
experience(s), and to secure desirable STEM job placements upon graduation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this program is refining campus
best practices for recruiting and retaining underrepresented students.
Innovative practices will be employed, including the use of non-cognitive traits
to demonstrate academic potential and to personalize support programming for
students, development of a cohort network of support through shared scheduling
of classes and shared extracurricular experiences, and a strong peer mentor
support system. Additional best practices will include the building of early
networks with industry champions, student development that includes career
placement initiatives, and building the campus' overall institutional capacity
for student success among academic and student services and also industry. This
capacity-building effort also will have broader impact
implications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this project will help
creating a legacy of STEM Scholars on campus and improving degree attainment for
underrepresented students in the College of EMS. This project is also augmenting
the campus' pipeline of underrepresented populations into STEM professions.
Finally, through existing and developing industry relationships, the project
will improve faculty and industry partners' competency in supporting
underrepresented students.