* 1356918
* AF:III:Small:Collaborative Research: New Frontiers in Join Algorithms: Optimality, Noise, and Richer Languages
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Christopher Re, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Rahul Shah
* 08/31/2016
* USD 173,898.00

The relational join is central to relational database processing, which is the
dominant way data is processed today. The join also models problems in
biological and social networks, coding theory, compressed sensing, machine
learning, and constraint satisfaction. Recently,  the investigators described
the first ever worst-case optimal algorithm (the NPRR algorithm) for join
queries.  These new results open a line of new tools to attack a diverse set of
fundamental problems related to the join. This project aims to further exploit
the new algorithmic techniques developed for NPRR to address the following three
classes of problems:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(1) Optimal Join algorithms.
Developing algorithms that are instance optimal when the data are stored in
either traditional database indexes or new indexing structures is a goal of this
project. (2) Coping with and Leveraging Noise. This project will extend the
latest work to handle and leverage both worst-case and statistical noise models,
bridging to coding theory and compressed sensing.  (3) Expressive Query
Languages. The project will explore a series of extensions to join queries that
will pave the way to overcome challenges in motif finding, search, databases
with functional dependencies, and more powerful classes of queries and join
operations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this grant will
apply to a variety of pattern extraction problems in modern massive, dynamic,
and noisy data sets, which have a wide range of applications in complex network
analysis, coding theory, and compressive sensing.