* 1356750
* ABI Development: BISQUE - Scalable Image Informatics for Quantitative Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Bangalore Manjunath, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 07/31/2019
* USD 887,957.00

The University of California Santa Barbara is awarded a grant to develop a
collaborative environment for biological image sciences based on the emerging
paradigm of cloud-computing and web-based protocols. Recent advances in
microscopy imaging, image processing and computing technologies enable large-
scale biological experiments that generate not only large collections of images
and video, but also pose new computing and information processing challenges.
This project addresses core challenges concerning large scale, unstructured
biological images and video collections. These include providing ubiquitous
access to images, videos and metadata resources; creating easily accessible
image and video analysis, visualizations and work flows; and publishing both
data and analysis resources. Streamlining collaborative efforts across teams
with online virtual environments will improve scientific productivity, enhance
understanding of complex phenomena and allow a growing number of researchers to
quantify conditions based on image evidence that so far have remained
subjective. The BISQUE (Bio-Image Semantic Query and Environment) open-source
platform is being developed keeping these requirements in mind. This project
will focus on scalability issues concerning analysis and annotations,
computational scalability with distributed computing and cloud enabled services,
sophisticated new methods for video and 3D-5D image analysis/visualization, and
validation and curation of data and methods. Furthermore, the project will
provide individual researchers and laboratories with the means to publish and
share data and analysis techniques, thus creating opportunities for cross-
fertilization of ideas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will lead to new
paradigms for management of image data in diverse scientific fields. One
specific area that will immediately benefit is quantitative biology, where
large-scale quantitative analysis of information will enable new scientific
discoveries and reproducible results. The Bisque platform, with its web-enabled
tools and seamless support for demanding computations, will allow diverse labs
to publish both scientific datasets and analysis in an easy to use form. Bisque
will be used in teaching and research by graduate and undergraduate students.
There will be opportunities for undergraduates and high-school students for
summer research internships. Through workshops, online tutorials, video demos,
and the iPlant discovery environment, this project will ensure outreach to a
broader spectrum of researchers. For more information and access to the Bisque
platform, visit the website at http://www.bioimage.ucsb.edu/bisque.