* 1356077
* ABI Development: Forest3D - an open source platform for lidar applications in forestry
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Shawn Newsam, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2018
* USD 265,854.00

The University of California Merced is awarded a grant to develop an integrated
software platform for LiDAR data analysis in forest research. Light Detection
and Ranging (LiDAR) is an active remote sensing technology that measures the
properties of scattered light to find the range of a distant object. Due to its
ability to generate 3-dimensional (3D) data with high spatial resolution and
accuracy, LiDAR technology is increasingly being used to obtain individual tree
properties, measure forest biophysical parameters, and reconstruct virtual
forests. Despite the increasing availability of LiDAR data, however, there are
few platforms that allow forestry managers to fully explore this rich 3D data
and seamlessly extract forest parameters. The platform provides the following
functionality: data management and visualization, point cloud filtering, digital
model generation, forest metrics calculation, regression analysis, individual
tree segmentation, forest biophysical parameter extraction, and forest
visualization. The platform will enable forestry managers to easily manipulate
LiDAR data and extract a range of forest parameters of
interest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this research are
threefold. First, it will help forest managers to better manage our precious
natural resources and make more informed conservation decisions. Second, the
platform will enable ecosystem scientists more broadly to extract 3D vegetation
structure parameters from the LiDAR data, and thus advance the understanding of
ecosystem patterns and processes. Third, this project will support education and
research at the University of California, Merced which is a Hispanic Serving
Institution. The PIs will actively train and recruit underrepresented students,
and promote the use of LiDAR technology and spatial thinking in decision making
processes for the local community, state, and federal agencies.