* 1356086
* Engineering Scholars Program
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2020
* Winny Dong, Cal Poly Pomona Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* John Jackman
* 07/31/2020
* USD 597,496.00

The goal of the Engineering Scholars Program (ESP) at Cal Poly Pomona (CPP) is
to support academically talented, financially-needy students who might otherwise
have to leave their undergraduate engineering program for a semester or more in
order to earn tuition money. The award will increase the number of students who
successfully graduate with degrees in Engineering. ESP specifically supports
students who are low-income, first-generation college students and/or from
underrepresented groups in Engineering. ESP will identify 20 motivated and
eligible students annually in the College of Engineering (5 freshmen, 5
sophomores, 5 juniors, and 5 seniors). The ESP will build upon a variety of
strategies that have been proven to be effective in the recruitment, retention,
and graduation of disadvantaged and URM students at CPP. Program activities
include 1) monthly monitoring of student progress; 2) supplemental instructional
support via group study, tutorial services, professional development workshops,
and linkage to appropriate student organizations; 3) advisement regarding
undergraduate academic programming, career and graduate school planning; 4)
opportunities to engage in faculty mentored research experiences; 5) financial
support via financial aid and ESP scholarships, as well as assistance in
applying to other internship, paid research, and scholarship opportunities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal goals of the Engineering Scholars Program
are threefold: &lt;br/&gt;1. To increase the number of financially
disadvantaged, underrepresented minority (URM), and female students who graduate
in the fields of Engineering; &lt;br/&gt;2. To enhance participant educational
achievements via professional development opportunities embedded in a cohesive
infrastructure of support; and &lt;br/&gt;3. Assess the impact of ESP activities
to allow the ESP staff, College of Engineering, and CPP to make evidence-based
decisions regarding the development of under-served minority students preparing
to enter the engineering workforce or to continue on to graduate
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To provide formative and summative evaluation, the
project will use a mixture of qualitative measures, including surveys and
reflective reports, as well as quantitative measures, including retention data
and comparative transcripts. The project also has an advisory board of alumni
and industrial affiliates who will provide guidance to the overall direction of
the project.