* 1356659
* ABI Development: An Online Registry for Biorepositories and Other Scientific Collections
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2014,01/31/2017
* David Schindel, Smithsonian Institution
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 01/31/2017
* USD 58,670.00

The Smithsonian Institution is awarded a grant to develop a conceptual plan for
a single, sustainable directory of scientific collections that will interface
with two public portals: one for biorepositories and another for collections in
all scientific disciplines including earth and space sciences, anthropology,
archaeology, biomedicine, and applied fields such as agriculture and technology.
The proposed Global Registry of Scientific Collections will be conceived as an
interdisciplinary extension of the existing Global Registry of Biorepositories
currently including over 7000 records. Two requirements gathering meetings will
be held with community members to build on earlier attempts to develop
standardized descriptors of collections and to gather input into improved
versions of the database and two portals. The planning process will develop
specifications and standards for the registry content including: unique
identifiers for institutions or collections; address and contact information;
text descriptions and some categorical data about each institution or
collection; and search, filter and download functions. Common web services
functions will be specified to standardizing the way that information about
biorepositories and their collections is accessed online. Plans for
implementation and for long term hosting and maintenance of the system will be
developed in close communication with other cyberinfrastructure projects
involved in collections data management.

Access to digital data and publications resulting from publicly funded research
is an increasingly important goal because re-use is more efficient than re-
discovery. The same is true for the research objects stored in scientific
collections. Digitization of individual specimens and samples is extremely
valuable but it is also slow and expensive. Online descriptions and standardized
data about collections can increase their visibility, use and impact prior to
complete digitization. Comprehensive registries of collections also provide
standardized vocabularies that can be used to link different collections and
types of collections, thereby increasing their accessibility and research
impact. Online registries of scientific collections will raise the general
awareness of collections, their diversity and depth, and their varied research
uses. Researchers will be able to broaden the types of collections they study in
pursuit of interdisciplinary research challenges. Teachers and students will
gain an appreciation of the diversity of collections from microbes to moon
rocks, and an understanding of how object-based research (as opposed to
observational research) is being conducted on specimens and collections that
have been amassed for centuries.