* 1356233
* CAMP-YES (Career Advancement Mentoring Program for Young Entrepreneur and Scholars)
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Michael Georgiopoulos, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Pushpa Ramakrishna
* 07/31/2019
* USD 634,500.00

Preparing highly qualified Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics
(STEM) graduates who are well prepared for the workforce is a national
challenge. The University of Central Florida (UCF), the second largest
university in the nation with more than 11,000 students majoring in STEM fields
is building upon the prior, successful, Young Entrepreneur and Scholar (YES)
program. The expanded Career Advancement Mentoring Program for Young
Entrepreneurs and Scholars (CAMP-YES) includes various graduate school
preparation activities, a wide variety of internship opportunities to include
mid-and large-size companies, and a host of academic and entrepreneurial
learning opportunities to help launch new business ventures in partnership with
the Center for Entrepreneurial Leadership (CEL) at UCF. Strong industry letters
of support from Lockheed Martin, Disney World, Siemens, Duke Energy and others
define a network of employers who are committed to providing mentors or advisory
board members for the (CAMP-YES) program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CAMP-YES creates
a direct S-STEM pipeline through three formal pathways, the Research Path,the
Internship Path, and the Entrepreneurship Path, to either the workforce or
graduate school. A wide array of enhanced educational activities is added. The
advantage of offering these opportunities and experiences through one program is
to create a one-stop, cohesive, structured learning community for students to
explore career pathways and develop their professional identity. Students stay
in a Path or switch Paths to explore their professional interests and gain real-
world experience to help make informed decisions about their career or education
plan with guidance from their faculty or industry professional mentors. Research
Path students participate in the Graduate School Preparation Academy. Internship
and Entrepreneurship Path students participate in any of the activities that
interest them. Entrepreneurship Path students register with Blackstone
Launchpad, an entrepreneurship advising service supported by a $1.4 million
grant to UCF from the Blackstone Foundation. The project evaluation plan
involves formative and summative assessment instruments to ensure that all
project outcomes are met in a timely manner. A mixed method approach is used to
assess the effectiveness of the proposed educational strategies in fulfilling
the desired learning outcomes from both educators' and learners' perspectives.
The effectiveness of persistence to graduation efforts and preparation for
transition to the workforce or graduate school is evaluated. Summative program
evaluation in year five will be conducted by external evaluators. An education
research component of CAMP-YES will examine how students perceptions change over
time in terms of how they see themselves as becoming a professional in the
field, and how they feel they are accepted as a professional in the field.