* 1356667
* CNIC: U.S. - Czech Geomorphologic Study of Soil Erosion, Floodplain Sedimentation, and Agricultural Sustainability over Decadal to Centennial Timescales
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2015
* J Michael Daniels, University of Denver
* Standard Grant
* Roxanne Nikolaus
* 07/31/2015
* USD 61,822.00

This project initiates an interdisciplinary research collaboration led by the
principal investigator at the University of Denver with partners in the Czech
Republic from three institutions. Together they will begin to examine
relationships between soil erosion, floodplain sedimentation, and agricultural
sustainability over decadal to centennial timescales. Soil erosion is a pressing
environmental concern facing 21st century society. Erosion rates in many regions
of the United States and throughout the world have been shown to exceed natural
rates of soil formation and have been directly linked to declines in
agricultural productivity. Most previous work on soil erosion and downstream
sedimentation in agricultural landscapes has been conducted using process-based
approaches; this work has resulted in a number of models that predict erosion
rates reasonably well over timescales of days to years. However,
geomorphological theory suggests that these models may not be easily scaled to
predict erosion rates over decades to centuries. These longer timescales are
important because they correspond with natural rates of soil formation, and for
broader impact, because they can inform long-range agricultural land-use
management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project development efforts will engage a U.S.
graduate student as part of the U.S.-Czech team for combined field-based data
collection, hydrologic and sedimentologic modeling, and geochemical analyses of
soils and floodplain sediments. Cooperative research with Czech scientists is
essential for several reasons. First, the study area in southern Czech Republic
has an agricultural land-use pattern that has persisted since the early medieval
era. It represents a unique setting in which to empirically assess erosion rates
over decadal to centennial timescales. Collaborators at Czech University of Life
Sciences work with land-use managers and property owners in the study region
that will make the field component of the project feasible. Second, existing
erosion models for these agricultural landscapes have been calibrated over
annual timescales by collaborators at Czech Technical University. Third, novel
geochemical and chronostratigraphic methods for documenting floodplain
sedimentation rates have been developed by the partner from Czech Academy of
Sciences' Institute for Inorganic Chemistry. The team assembled for this project
is highly-interdisciplinary and has the technical expertise to address
fundamental research questions. Preliminary results have the potential to lead
to follow-on, longer-term joint research efforts that advance theoretical
understanding in geomorphology, spatial science, and land-use dynamics.