* 1356479
* Sustainability for Livelihood, Values, and the Environment
* EHR,DUE
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2020
* Audrey Huerta, Central Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Connie Della-Piana
* 04/30/2020
* USD 735,140.00

The SOLVER (Sustainability for our Lives, Values, Environment, and Resources)
project is offering two year scholarships to 26 academically talented,
financially needy transfer or rising junior students majoring in biology,
geology, chemistry, mathematics, physics, engineering, or computer science. The
overall objective of the program is to increase the quality and diversity of
students graduating with baccalaureate degrees in the science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) fields, with an emphasis on recruitment,
retention, and graduation of Hispanic and Native American students. The program
is providing scholars with financial, academic, personal, and professional
support. It is using six interrelated practices that have been shown to increase
both student persistence and achievement on essential learning outcomes for STEM
professionals: a learning community organized around the issue of
sustainability, common intellectual experiences among scholars, diversity
learning, undergraduate research opportunities, academic service learning, and
internships. These practices are being coupled with strong student support,
including targeted recruiting and application assistance, community and family
involvement, individualized academic counseling, faculty and peer mentoring,
tutoring, career development, and leadership training.

Intellectual Merit: This program is based on educational practices that have
been shown to be exceptionally effective in promoting retention, academic
excellence, and career preparation in STEM students. Based on published STEM
education research, these represent best practices for all students, but are
particularly powerful for underrepresented minorities. Quantitative and
qualitative data on SOLVER scholars and a control group of STEM students are
being gathered to assess the impact of each practice. In addition, all scholars
have the opportunity to contribute to the STEM knowledge base through
independent research projects.

Broader Impacts: The SOLVER program is designed to increase the number and
diversity of STEM majors by instituting practices that target Hispanic and
Native American students. SOLVER scholar projects, involving academic service
learning, research, or internships, are designed to have direct, positive
impacts on local communities. The program is strengthening the ties between the
university and the local Hispanic and Native American communities; training
faculty mentors in cultural responsiveness and student support services; and
making the university community generally more inclusive and aware of regional
diversity through campus wide events. All of these activities build the capacity
of the university to increase the number and diversity of STEM graduates into
the future.