* 1356515
* Collaborative Research: ABI Innovation: Rapid prototyping of semantic enhancements to biodiversity informatics platforms
* BIO,DBI
* 06/15/2014,05/31/2018
* Matthew Yoder, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 05/31/2018
* USD 421,200.00

This research aims to help scientists develop and use relatively simple tools to
describe species in a way that makes those descriptions easier to share with
other scientists and easier for computers to process and analyze. Taxonomists
are scientists who describe the world's biodiversity. Taxonomists' descriptions
of millions of species allow scientists to do many different kinds of research,
including basic biology, environmental science, climate research, agriculture,
and medicine. The problem is that describing any one species is not easy. The
language used by taxonomists to describe their data is complex, and typically
not easily understandable by computers nor even other scientists. This situation
makes it difficult to search for patterns across the millions of species that
have been documented by thousands of different researchers over many decades of
work worldwide. Innovation from this project is applicable to the long-term
development of open source software initiatives serving laboratories throughout
the world, and the research facilitates the production of open, shared data, as
mandated by various federal agencies. As a result of this project, these data
will become more accessible and informative to the general public. The project
provides rich, real-world training for graduate students in library and
information sciences, training them to be cross-disciplinary researchers in a
field that is in need of new experts. Collaborating experts studying bees,
wasps, and ants will receive training on the cutting edge theories and methods
from the bioinformatics toolbox developed as a consequence of this project. In
return their contributions of data will act as the basis for computational
benchmarks needed in areas of logical inference and data modeling.

This research addresses the problem of how to produce and utilize semantic
data, specifically semantic phenotypes, within the taxonomic context of
describing the Earth's biological diversity. The approach to be taken is bottom-
up and iterative, involving the rapid prototyping of tools, combining of
existing tools, and the tailoring of applications developed for one purpose but
now being reused for this scientific activity. Scientists are busy innovating
partial solutions by tinkering with and combining available computer programs
and datasets. Their efforts comprise an incredibly productive source of
innovation, since it is often much easier and faster to combine computer
resources that already exist than to build something from scratch. However such
cobbling together of resources to meet a need can benefit from analysis and
active support. In particular, a more principled set of approaches can make
innovations easier to share and to maintain. With a focus on the Hymenoptera,
the researchers plan an innovative approach for biodiversity informatics based
on work in the field of Computer Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW). Using a
combination of ethnography to define work practice, user-centered design, and
iterative agile software development, the collaboration between information
scientists, biologists, and application developers aims to produce a suite of
concrete deliverables, a rapid prototype portfolio, comprising interface and
workflow tools, and end user requirements for semantic phenotype production. The
project will explore and document examples of innovative prototyping of
solutions by scientists to understand how it occurs, what it is that scientists
most need, and how these can be most effectively supported. These components may
be generalized to allow broader scientific use.