* 1356252
* Collaborative Research: Crime and Community in a Changing Society, the National Neighborhood Crime Study 2
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2017
* Christopher Lyons, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 07/31/2017
* USD 167,701.00

SES-1357207 Lauren Krivo Rutgers University

SES-1356252 Maria Velez Christopher Lyons University of New Mexico

The United States recently has undergone considerable social and economic
upheaval in communities across the country, especially in the years leading up
to and following the Great Recession of the 2000s. Rising unemployment,
increased poverty and income inequality, high foreclosure rates, and falling
home prices have strained communities and exacerbated inequalities across areas
and between racial/ethnic groups in ways that should alter levels and
disparities in serious crime. Changing crime, in turn, can alter the fate of
neighborhoods as groups and institutions seek to leave or instead remain trapped
in high crime areas. Yet, there is a lack of information about the influences of
societal conditions and crime on each other in a changing society. This research
will answer two fundamental questions: (1) how have social transformations since
2000 affected differences across neighborhoods in their levels of crime?; and
(2) to what extent are changing city and neighborhood conditions, including
race-ethnic inequality, both causes and consequences of evolving crime patterns?
The research team will collect new data for 2010 on crime for over 9,500
neighborhoods in 91 cities and combine these with crime data for 2000 from the
first wave of the National Neighborhood Crime Study. Information regarding the
social, economic, demographic, political and geographic contexts of cities and
neighborhoods will be added to the crime data to produce a comprehensive
nationally representative database of urban neighborhoods and crime for 1990 to
2010. These data will be used to analyze the consequences of recent societal
changes for crime and neighborhood race-ethnic differences in crime. They will
also be used to study how crime shapes social conditions within U.S.
communities. The research questions will be addressed using forms of statistical
analysis that consider how neighborhoods are embedded within a particular city
and metropolitan area, and how neighborhoods that are near one another may
affect each other.

Broader Impacts

This research has significant broad impacts in a number of important ways.
First, by shedding light on the underlying sources of neighborhood
vulnerabilities for rising crime, especially in non-White areas, findings will
inform discussions about how to make communities safer. Second, the data
collected will be made publically available and, thereby, provide an
unprecedented resource for other researchers to further study changes in cities
and neighborhoods. Third, the investigators will enhance the training and
careers of students from diverse backgrounds by employing students from
underrepresented groups to work on data collection and analysis. Fourth, the
project will contribute to the intellectual development of a diverse
interdisciplinary group of scholars with core interests in race, crime, and
justice (the Racial Democracy, Crime, and Justice Network currently funded by
the National Science Foundation) by providing members of this network with
direct training and early access to the data. Finally, the investigators plan to
disseminate theoretical and practical information based upon findings about ways
to improve neighborhoods and cities to increase safety within communities
through presentations at academic conferences, scholarly publications, and
briefings with policymakers.