* 1356723
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Political Ecology of Large-Scale Logging Initiatives
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2014,10/31/2015
* Jerry Jacka, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 10/31/2015
* USD 25,200.00

Doctoral student Jason Roberts, under the supervision of Dr. Jerry Jacka, will
undertake research on the local processes, effects, and responses to large-scale
logging in subsistence horticultural communities. The research will take place
on New Hanover Island, Papua New Guinea (PNG), an excellent test site for
exploring the expansion of international logging in the Asian and Pacific
region. The international logging industry has recently developed a much greater
presence throughout PNG as previous sources of timber in the Southeast Asian
tropics have been progressively logged out. As well, the conditions for
international business have become more favorable with the enactment of natural
resource driven development policies within PNG. These national policies
coincide with local desires for improved socioeconomic benefits, and natural
resource extraction remains one of the few means by which many Papua New
Guineans can hope to realize these goals. Studies have demonstrated that large-
scale logging in the tropical forests of developing countries is detrimental to
these ecological systems and the human populations that depend upon them for
subsistence. What is not as clear is how local people and local landscapes
respond to the enduring effects of logging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using
ethnographic and ecological research methods, this study compares the results of
clearcut and selective logging development schemes on New Hanover Island.
Participant observation and interviews at various scales, from the local to the
national, will examine changing livelihoods and development policies under
different logging and related agricultural development regimes. Ecological
sampling techniques and remote sensing data analysis will quantify changes in
local forest structure and growth, as well as changes in local subsistence
production. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study combines theoretical interests in
development and globalization, political ecology, and land-change science to
inform our understanding of the relationships between natural resource based
development, forest sustainability, and horticulturalist resilience. It is
designed to promote interdisciplinary conversations in both the social and
natural sciences by producing theory and data about the interconnections between
social and environmental change that could be used to inform future policy.