* 1356460
* Membrane vesicles produced by marine bacteria:  origins, distributions, and functions
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/2014,01/31/2019
* Sallie Chisholm, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 01/31/2019
* USD 599,200.00

Overview: Some bacteria are known to release small amounts of their cell
envelope in the form of tiny (< 200 nm diameter) spherical structures known as
membrane vesicles. While the functions of these vesicles have been explored in
pathogens, nothing is known about their abundance or roles in marine ecosystems.
The investigators have recently demonstrated that Prochlorococcus, the
numerically dominant photosynthetic cell in the world's oceans releases membrane
vesicles continually during growth, and they have shown that these structures
are indeed found in abundance in ocean samples. Bacterially produced membrane
vesicles represent a major new feature of ocean ecosystems and could provide
important clues about the network of interactions among microbes and their
environment. Prochlorococcus vesicles contain diverse macromolecules, including
lipids, proteins, and nucleic acids, suggesting that these structures could play
many varied roles within marine microbial communities. The researchers will use
the Prochlorococcus model system and the analysis of natural seawater samples
from several field sites to address fundamental questions about the production
and function of membrane vesicles in the oceans. The overarching questions
motivating this study include: What environmental factors influence the rate of
release of membrane vesicles by Prochlorococcus, and what can this tell us about
the regulation of this process? How does vesicle abundance vary in different
regions of the oceans? What DNA is found in vesicles from natural seawater
samples? How does the vesicle "metagenome" compare to the bacterial metagenome,
and what can this tell us about the diversity of organisms that release
vesicles? What ecological roles might vesicles play in marine microbial
ecosystems? Can they facilitate horizontal gene transfer? Can they act as a
"decoy" to reduce phage predation?

Intellectual Merit: Membrane vesicles represent a major new feature in ocean
ecosystems. These discrete, organized structures may influence a number of
biogeochemical processes, including horizontal gene transfer; moving small
molecules, proteins or other macromolecules between cells; or serving as a
source of fixed carbon for other bacteria. Yet we know nothing about them. This
project will open this black box, and help us begin to understand the abundance
and sources of membrane vesicles in the oceans, determine factors affecting
their production by the numerically dominant photoautotroph Prochlorococcus, and
explore aspects of their ecological roles in marine systems. With this research,
the investigators will begin to establish a new area of study in marine
microbial ecology that has the potential to alter current paradigms about the
mechanisms through which microbes interact with both their biotic and abiotic
environment.

Broader Impacts: The investigators will take advantage of several avenues
available at MIT to work with under-represented groups. These include: the MIT
Summer Research Program, CONVERGE (a preview weekend); SEED (a Saturday
education program); KEYs (a program for girls), and the MIT Edgerton Center
which facilitates visits from local K-12 classes. The investigator is committed
to communicating science to broad audiences. The PI has published two children's
books on photosynthesis (Living Sunlight, Ocean Sunlight, Scholastic 2009, 2012;
both received "best children's picture book" awards from AAAS), and is currently
working on a third, on fossil fuels and climate, which will appear in 2014. This
project will play a central role in the professional development of the post-
doc(s) involved and data resulting from the proposed activity will be posted on
public web sites, including the Prochlorococcus Portal
(http://proportal.mit.edu/), and the Vesiclepedia database
(http://www.microvesicles.org)