* 1356738
* Effects of Disturbance and Larval Supply on Communities at Hydrothermal Vents
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2014,02/28/2018
* Lauren Mullineaux, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 02/28/2018
* USD 225,731.00

Overview: The long-term aim of this project is to understand the effects of
disturbance on species occurrence and regional diversity in vent systems. The
investigator is working toward that goal by conducting field studies on larval
dispersal and colonization processes, and by collaborating with theoretical
ecologists. The present project investigates a unique set of field observations
gathered from decade-long monitoring of vents before and after a recent
catastrophic eruption on the East Pacific Rise (EPR). The specific objectives
are to determine whether succession is deterministic (or are there alternative
stable states?), and whether disturbance at one vent field can influence
community structure on a larger spatial scale. Answering these questions
requires characterization of larval exchange between vents and of the effect of
pioneer colonists on successional trajectory. The approach is to characterize
species composition of larvae and colonists at three vent sites on the EPR: one
that was disturbed by the eruption (9 degrees 50 minutes N) and two that
remained undisturbed (9 degrees 47 minutes N and 9 degrees 30 minutes N). The
investigators are running out of time to process the samples, because they
degrade over time and the specimens are at risk of losing morphological detail
which is critical for species identification. This award has modest funding to
focus specifically on species identification and enumeration, without attempting
to interface with models or population genetic analyses. These will come later.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The question of how vent communities
persist despite living in patchy, ephemeral habitat has intrigued scientists
since the discovery of vents in the late 1970s. A necessary synthesis of the
influence of larval connectivity on metacommunity dynamics at the regional scale
continues to elude us. This project works toward that synthesis by
characterizing critical aspects of larval exchange and community succession at
vents on the well-studied EPR. This study has general application to vent
systems globally because it challenges the assumption that vent succession is
deterministic, and it will contribute to our understanding of spatial scales of
larval connectivity. The data on larval exchange and community resilience that
will result from this study are precisely the kind needed for metapopulations
modeling, for prediction of vent community response to anthropogenic events such
as seafloor mining, and to inform management efforts at the Marianas Trench
Marine National Monument.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The investigator
will broaden the impact of this research by engaging under-represented minority
students into research through recruitment of promising undergraduates via the
well-established Partnership Education Program (PEP) in Woods Hole. The
objective of PEP is to increase diversity in the Ocean and Environmental
Sciences; it is sponsored by 6 scientific institutions in the region. Funds are
budgeted to bring additional students into the program in two summers,
specifically to work on vent ecological research. In addition, PI Mullineaux
will continue her long-term efforts at education and outreach through teaching
graduate courses, engaging undergraduates into vents research through the WHOI
SSF program, and transitioning ocean science to the local community through the
Woods Hole Science and Technology Education Partnership.