* 1356766
* Resilience and Adaptation in Environmental and Natural Sciences: RA'ENS and S-STEM
* EDU,DUE
* 03/15/2014,02/29/2020
* Lawrence Duffy, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Susan Carson
* 02/29/2020
* USD 524,914.00

Through this S-STEM project the PI team at the University of Alaska Fairbanks is
increasing the number of academically talented students with demonstrated
financial need who earn baccalaureate degrees in environmental and natural
sciences. The student cohort is comprised of 28 upper level undergraduates who
are already at the university and transfer students from the five feeder
community colleges as well as from Ilisagvik Tribal College. The goal of the
project is to retain the scholarship students by integrating them into the
Alaskan community of sustainability research and education. Project elements
include (a) a comprehensive recruitment strategy, (b) a strong mentoring
program, (c) career and communication workshops, and (d) supplementary courses
and early research involvement. Acknowledging the regional need to prepare
students who have backgrounds in environmental science and that participation in
research related to solving civic problems has a strong appeal for Native
American and Native Alaskan students, the project team has designed a rigorous,
30- credit hour curriculum for an interdisciplinary Certificate in Resilience
and Adaptation (sustainability) which participants are encouraged to complete.
In order to broaden participation, Native American and Native Alaskan students
are recruited actively.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are two important ways in
which this project will have broad impact. First, data generated through
assessment and evaluation is expected to support the rationale that high
retention of students in STEM fields can be achieved through a comprehensive
academic program linked to community-based research and civic engagement.
Formative evaluation is carried out to examine whether or not a diverse group of
students is recruited and equipped to (a) maintain the target GPA (3.0 or
higher), (b) perform skills at the appropriate level, (c) graduate with a STEM
degree. Summative evaluation is to ascertain whether or not the project goal to
increase the number of well-prepared students in the selected fields is
accomplished based on the Student Assessment of Learning Gains, student essays,
and post-graduation data. Secondly, dissemination of the project results is
expected to provide a model for implementation of community-based practices in
recruitment and retention of STEM students. The project team plans to present
their work at the national meetings on STEM teaching and learning as well as
through the National Center for Science and Civic Engagement. Project
deliverables include results of summative evaluation and the course materials
developed for the Certificate in Resilience and Adaptation.