* 1356857
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: The Impact of Working Conditions on the Health of an Aging Workforce
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2014,02/29/2016
* Teresa Ghilarducci, The New School
* Standard Grant
* Georgia Kosmopoulou
* 02/29/2016
* USD 7,920.00

Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: The Impact of Working Conditions on
the Health of an Aging Workforce&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
changing nature of work over the past forty years has important implications for
the health and well being of an aging workforce. This dissertation will examine
the relationship between work and health over the life cycle to better
understand how various working conditions influence health disparities as
workers age. Understanding how work-related pathways affect health as workers
age has important implications for retirement age policies, labor force
attachment at older ages, and the cost of Medicare, Medicaid, and other retiree
health care programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Isolating trends in health due to
working conditions in the years leading up to retirement is challenging:
pathways are hard to define and measure and most studies do not adequately deal
with the selection bias that occurs between job choice and health, making it
difficult to draw stronger conclusions regarding causality. Research has also
shown that health depreciates faster with age for individuals in manual
occupations, suggesting that working conditions could have long-term or
cumulative impacts. Therefore, any estimation of the occupational health
gradient at older ages must untangle the cumulative effect of a worker's
occupational commitment over their lifetime from current job demands.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address the possibility of endogenous variation in
working conditions due to omitted variables or selection and isolate the effect
of contemporaneous working conditions on health after age fifty, this
dissertation analyzes a unique and rich nationally representative panel dataset
that links working conditions at older ages with health and earnings over the
course of a worker?s career. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To improve how we measure
working conditions in economics, this dissertation uses an interdisciplinary
approach. Much research in the epidemiology, sociology, and occupational safety
and health literature has shown that physical, environmental, and psychosocial
aspects of work all have the potential to impact health. In particular, the
decline in manufacturing jobs and the switch to service jobs has increased the
likelihood that psychosocial job stressors affect health. As a result, the ?work
ability? model, or the leading model for research on aging and work in the
occupational safety and health literature, is used as a guiding theoretical
framework to incorporate physical, environmental, and psychosocial working
conditions into the study. Longitudinal analysis on a comprehensive set of
objective job demands will contribute to a better understanding of the existence
and formation of occupational health gradients at older ages.