* 1356839
* Collaborative Research: Post-eruption reinflation at Axial Seamount
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2018
* William Chadwick, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Candace Major
* 03/31/2018
* USD 127,617.00

Axial Seamount is an active submarine volcano on the Juan de Fuca Ridge in the
NE Pacific that erupted in 1998 and 2011. This recent activity provides access
to study the dynamic interactions between seafloor volcanism, hydrothermal
venting, and biological responses. Axial is the first and only site in the world
where a volcanic deformation cycle has been documented on the seafloor and it
will soon have operating sensors and real-time data transmission as part of the
Ocean Observatories Initiative (OOI). Being able to forecast possible future
magmatic activity based on recent seafloor deformation, and associated
inferences on magma injection, may help guide OOI science
planning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Continued monitoring of seafloor depth changes
will document vertical deformation associated with magmatic inflation/deflation
at Axial Seamount. A combination of Bottom Pressure Recorders, which provide
continuous data, and campaign-style reoccupation of existing benchmarks will
quantify behavior on timescales both long (years) and short (minutes-hrs). Two
eruptions have been partially documented since 1998 but measurements of the pre-
eruption inflation period are not complete. Since Axial is in what is
interpreted to be the re-inflation stage now, following a 2011 eruption, the
opportunity to complete characterization of the cycle exists. This geodetic
fieldwork will take place in 2015 and 2017, with student participation and
provision of seafloor imagery for use in Science on a Sphere exhibits.