* 1356248
* Biology Opportunities and Scholarships for Success (BOSS) Project
* EHR,DUE
* 06/15/2014,06/30/2020
* Mustafa Morsy, University of West Alabama
* Standard Grant
* Connie Della-Piana
* 06/30/2020
* USD 609,360.00

The University of West Alabama (UWA) Biology Opportunities and Scholarships for
Success (BOSS) is supporting 16 undergraduates majoring in either Biology or
Environmental Sciences who demonstrate academic potential, motivation for STEM,
and financial need. Nearly half of the University's students (46%) are from six
western Alabama counties, four of which are among the 20 poorest counties in the
nation. The majority of UWA students are affiliated with underrepresented groups
including women, ethnic minorities, and first-generation students. With a large
population of under-served students in its targeted service area, UWA is
distinctively set to address the needs of first-generation and low-income
students.

The guiding objective of the BOSS program is to increase student retention
through degree achievement by providing comprehensive educational opportunities
so that the S-STEM scholars can reach their full academic potential. The program
helps to increase the number of successful biological and environmental sciences
graduates joining the workforce or graduate schools by providing career
exploration and professional development opportunities. UWA also offers scholars
a wide range of supportive services, including counseling services, focused
student advising, and tutoring. The evaluation of student scholars involves an
Individualized Success Plan (ISP) to assess every participant through ongoing
evaluations pertinent to the student's success. Outcome data include academic
progress reports, internship participation, professional presentations, and
other professional networking activities.