* 1356733
* Facilitated Access to Science Training (FAST)
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2021
* George Negrete, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Continuing Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 06/30/2021
* USD 625,843.00

Through the Facilitated Access to Science Training (FAST) project the Principle
Investigator team at the University of Texas at San Antonio seeks to increase
the number of economically disadvantaged students who complete biology,
chemistry, or physics degrees and proceed to enter the scientific workforce or
pursue advanced studies. The project requires 13 participants to take part in
activities designed to help them find support, build relationships with faculty
mentors, and strengthen their self-efficacy and self-identity as scientists. A
unique feature of the plan is an intensive one-week, pre-college science boot
camp that focuses on providing students with foundational knowledge in subject
areas in which they are deficient and introduces them to scientific thinking. In
order to broaden participation, students are recruited from the greater San
Antonio area which is 70% Hispanic and African American.

Throughout the project, S-STEM scholars (a) develop academic excellence and
independence as they proceed through gatekeeper and advanced courses, (b)
enhance their competence as scientists by connecting with a mentor, (c)
participate in scientific research, and (d) engage in professional and personal
enrichment activities including participation in scientific conferences. The
program builds on current, successful initiatives including the implementation
of evidence-based practices in gateway courses and recruitment of undergraduates
from the university's college preparatory program. Data generated through
assessment and evaluation supports the rationale that this three-pronged
approach of providing students with a support structure, faculty mentors, and
helping them to become self-identified scientists leads to retention and
graduation. Formative and summative evaluation focuses on assessment of student
confidence, academic aspirations and expectations, and career development. The
students are also tracked and interviewed about the project's impact.
Dissemination of the project results provides a model for strengthening self-
efficacy and self-identity as a means of retaining STEM students. The project
team plans to present their work through the Annual Conference on Understanding
Interventions that Broaden Participation in Research Careers as well as through
national meetings of the American Chemical Society and the AAAS. Project
deliverables will include results of summative evaluation and the course
materials developed for the boot camp.