* 1356518
* The CECS Student Success Scholarship Program:  Leveraging Curricular Innovation in Engineering and Computer Science Education
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2019
* Kuldip Rattan, Wright State University
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie August
* 05/31/2019
* USD 614,096.00

This project is providing scholarships to academically talented and financially
needy students across all disciplines of engineering and computer science at
Wright State University, with a particular focus on the recruitment and
retention of underrepresented students. By increasing the number of academically
talented engineering and computer science graduates, the institution is directly
contributing to the technology-based economy in the Dayton region and beyond.

The technical aspects of the project feature the formation of student cohorts
from both first-year and transfer students participating in Wright State's
National Model for Engineering Mathematics Education and related interventions.
Student learning communities specifically for S-STEM scholars support their
success in EGR 101 Introductory Mathematics for Engineering Applications.
Separate S-STEM learning communities for computer science majors support their
success in a newly redesigned SCALE-UP curriculum (based on a successful model
adapted from physics education reform efforts). All S-STEM scholars receive
student support and enrichment activities from first-year through graduation,
including mandatory, individualized academic advising each term, peer mentoring
and tutoring programs, undergraduate research, internship and co-op
opportunities, undergraduate teaching and K-12 outreach opportunities, and other
co-curricular interventions.