* 1356985
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Interviewer Voice Characteristics and Data Quality
* SBE,SES
* 06/15/2014,05/31/2016
* Kristen Olson, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 05/31/2016
* USD 15,998.00

Telephone interviews frequently contain socially desirable, socially
undesirable, and complex questions that tend to produce problems for
respondents. A speaker may be especially likely to change vocal patterns for
these types of questions. These changes may either directly affect data quality
or indirectly affect data quality through the listener's perception of the
voice. As telephone surveys continue to be the primary mode of data collection
for many large national studies, it is important to understand how interviewer
voices affect data quality. This study will examine whether interviewer voice
characteristics affect data quality in socially desirable, undesirable, and
complex survey questions. Interviewer voices are the primary means of
communication to respondents in telephone interviews. If voice characteristics
of interviewers affect data quality, those overseeing interviews may be able to
select or train interviewers to modify some of their vocal characteristics with
the goal of maximizing data quality. Moreover, results from this research will
be useful for selecting interviewers based on voice characteristics for audio
computer-assisted self-interviewing (ACASI), telephone audio-CASI (T-ACASI), and
interactive voice response (IVR) systems with the goal of minimizing measurement
error. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, support is
provided to enable a promising student to establish a strong, independent
research career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this study has three
objectives. The project will evaluate whether a telephone survey interviewer's
objective voice characteristics including speech rate, pitch, intonation, and
disfluency are associated with a listener's subjective perception of these voice
characteristics and their assessment of five subjective interviewer traits
(credibility, confidence, reliability, trustworthiness, and easiness to
understand). The project also will examine whether objective voice
characteristics of telephone survey interviewers affect data quality in socially
desirable, socially undesirable, and complex questions. Finally, the project
will investigate whether subjective perceptions of an interviewer's voice
mediate the relationship between objective voice characteristics and data
quality. The study will objectively measure interviewer's voice characteristics
by using the Praat computer software program and will use raters to subjectively
evaluate voice characteristics (e.g. pitch and speaking rate) and interviewer
traits (e.g. credibility, confidence) on seven-point scales. Hierarchical
logistic regression models will be used to examine the association between the
objective and subjective voice characteristics and data quality. Measures of
data quality include item nonresponse for all questions, rounding answers (e.g.
5, 10) for complex and neutral questions, and the directional hypothesis of
more/less is better for socially undesirable/desirable questions.