* 1356434
* Collaborative Research: ABI Development: VIROME, Bioinformatics Cyberinfrastructure for the Next Wave of Scientific Advancements in Microbiome Research
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Anup Mahurkar, University of Maryland at Baltimore
* Continuing Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 06/30/2018
* USD 250,687.00

The University of Delaware and the University of Maryland Baltimore are awarded
collaborative grants for improvements to a computational tool that will enable a
broader community of life scientists, engineers, and geoscientists to access
viral metagenomics for the next wave of scientific discoveries in microbiome
research. Eight percent of the human genome derives from retroviruses; these
viral sequences differentiate the human genome from that of other primates.
Within microbial communities, including those living in association with animal
hosts, viruses are the most numerically abundant microorganisms, outnumbering
all cellular microbes by 10 to 1,000 fold. These natural viral communities are
genetically diverse, containing a vast number of novel and unknown genes. In the
oceans, viral breakdown of microbial cells contributes to the chemical
transformation of carbon and nutrient elements. Ultimately, these
transformations impact the productivity of marine ecosystems as well as regional
and global climate. While understanding of extant viral diversity and the role
of viruses within natural systems is still rudimentary, there is evidence that
viruses play critically important roles in the biology, ecology, and evolution
of life on earth. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will enhance a newly
developed computational tool, the Viral Informatics Resource for Metagenome
Exploration (VIROME) to better facilitate the coming wave of discoveries
surrounding the role of viruses in natural systems. In particular, we will
pursue three specific developmental goals: 1) leverage sources of long-length
DNA sequence data to improve the quality of the information output from the
VIROME bioinformatics pipeline; 2) utilize the VIROME gene classification scheme
to develop a sustainable database of unknown viral genes, i.e., viral genetic
dark matter; and 3) advance the sustainability of the VIROME resource through
virtualization of its underlying computational
workflow.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given that viruses impact life on earth over
evolutionary time and global scales, further development of VIROME will benefit
researchers in the life sciences, engineering, and geosciences. The project?s
impact will be enhanced by directly training graduate and undergraduate students
and by conducting twice yearly workshops on the use of VIROME for the analysis
of viral metagenome sequence data. The project will also advance public
understanding of the emerging scientific consensus surrounding the nuanced and
critical impacts of viruses on cellular life by hosting an informational booth
at Ag Day, a public outreach event reaching thousands of residents in the quad
state vicinity of the University of Delaware, Newark campus (DE, MD, PA, &amp;
NJ). Lastly, the team will reach out to K-12 students by hosting an annual ?Get
to know viruses? STEM program at the Delaware Biotechnology Institute for groups
of Cub Scouts and Girl Scouts in the Newark, Delaware area.