* 1356426
* STEM-Connect: Scholarships for the Computer Science STEM Disciplines
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/2014,05/31/2019
* Margaret Eppstein, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Johnson
* 05/31/2019
* USD 649,159.00

This S-STEM scholarship project at the University of Vermont (UVM) addresses the
significant shortage of computer scientists, both in Vermont and at the national
level. The project is increasing the number and diversity of well-educated,
skilled employees in computer science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project improves
educational opportunities for UVM computer science students by providing
scholarships to students with a demonstrated financial need. The project
improves UVM's ability to develop leaders in the field of computer science by
raising awareness through outreach efforts and recruiting individuals who do not
traditionally select computer science as a major. Female award recipients are
assigned dedicated female faculty mentors and advisors and participate in a
female subsection of the department-sponsored student organization, CS Crew, to
create a strong female cohort and increase retention and recruitment of female
students, both scholarship recipients and others. The project builds on several
recent initiatives at UVM, including the highly successful STEM-Connect
internship program in the UVM College of Engineering and Mathematical Sciences.
STEM-Connect provides internship placement services and career placement
services to computer science scholarship award recipients as they near
graduation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will be evaluated using the
Taskstream Electronic Assessment program. Enrollment trends, student progress,
outcomes of work-based learning opportunities, and career placement rates will
be analyzed to determine the effectiveness of the program. Finally the National
Survey of Student Engagement (NSSE) will be administered in each year of the
program to measure student satisfaction and learning gains. The results of the
NSSE survey will be used to compare the effectiveness of this program with other
institutions and students at UVM who are not part of the program.