* 1356679
* Interdisciplinary, Research-based Engineering and Design (IRED) Green Building Scholars Program
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2021
* David Sailor, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 08/31/2021
* USD 630,978.00

The Interdisciplinary, Research-based Engineering and Design (IRED) Green
Building Scholars project at Portland State University (PSU) is preparing a
cohort of engineering and architecture students to meet the scientific and
technical challenges to reducing the energy use and environmental impact of the
building sector. In the US, buildings consume 41 percent of the primary energy
and are responsible for 40 percent of carbon dioxide emissions, so preparing a
workforce in the building sciences is essential to ensure that buildings are
created, adapted and retrofitted using rigorous scientific and engineering
principles. Furthermore, engineers and architects must collaborate in order to
integrate building systems while minimizing energy use, resource consumption,
and cost. IRED enables the rapid integration of green building strategies,
materials, and systems by conducting university-led laboratory simulations or
post-occupancy analysis and applying this research to projects currently under
design through collaboration with professional practice.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This S-STEM project is recruiting more women and
underrepresented minorities into building science majors; encouraging
undergraduate students in mechanical engineering, civil engineering, and
architecture to take building science courses and IRED seminars to better
prepare them for practice and research; and providing a financial incentive for
these students to continue their education at the Master's level to pursue
advanced elective coursework in building science that includes IRED projects and
the option to assist with ongoing green building research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three competitive scholarship tracks support students
pursuing Bachelor of Science, Master of Science, and Master of Architecture
degrees at different points in their education. In addition to required
coursework, the IRED Student Support Center provides support services for the
cohort including: weekly study groups and peer tutoring sessions; peer advising;
advising from green building faculty and practitioners; monthly research
roundtables and firm tours; recruiting events at high schools, community
colleges and on the PSU campus; travel support to present research from IRED
courses at conferences; career services; and cohort-building activities
including field trips to tour green buildings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The IRED
Green Building Scholars program serves as a model for other universities to
increase the building science knowledge and skills of their students, improve
interdisciplinary interactions in preparation for practice, and better prepare
future building professionals to significantly reduce the environmental impact
of the built environment through the use of robust scientific knowledge and
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To iteratively improve the program, formative
evaluation will include the scholar?s academic progress, retention, and a review
of recruitment statistics measure against baselines for the 2012-13 academic
year. To identify successes and barriers with respect to achieving project
objectives, the formative evaluation will also include an annual survey of the
S-STEM Scholars as well as information from mentoring meetings between the
grantees and the Scholars.