* 1357163
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Borderland Orders: An Ethnographic Exploration of Border Securitization in a High Population Density Context
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2014,11/30/2015
* Kalyanakrishnan Sivaramakrishnan, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 11/30/2015
* USD 18,522.00

Shana Ghosh, under the supervision of Kalyanakrishnan Sivaramakrishnan at Yale
University explores how newly established borderlands transform social,
cultural, and economic relationships and influence cross-border activities. The
project asks how the securitization of previously porous borders impacts
regional economic networks and affects the daily lives and livelihoods of
borderland residents. The research takes place along the border of India and
Bangladesh, a 4,000 km long border which India has recently taken the initiative
to fence and guard. This is an appropriate site for this study since
securitization is taking place within a densely populated area. Most studies of
borderlands have tended to regard borders as landscapes of defense or as zones
of criminality, rather than as places characterized by the mobility and
circulation that one might find in densely populated areas. This project focuses
on the new economies and relationships that emerge in an area of the world that
has been transitioning to democracy and free trade. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
researcher will conduct 16 months of ethnographic research combining participant
observation with interviews, life histories, network mapping, and focus group
discussions with residents of this borderland, border security forces, and local
administrative officials of both countries. The research will focus on northern
Bengal, and be based in Coochbehar district, India and Lalmonirhat district,
Bangladesh. The wide range of research methods and informants will provide a
rich account of participation in transborder movements for familial, religious,
and economic reasons.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project critically engages with
the existing assumptions about cross-border movements to uncover how and why
people and goods move, to illuminate debates and values on mobility,
citizenship, and security from the points of view of those who reside in this
borderland and experience its securitization daily. It will contribute to
scientific debates about the relationships between states, the social practices
and structures that undergird cross-border activities, and debates about
migration, resettlement, and transnationalism. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project's findings will be of great benefit to policymakers and practitioners
concerned with understanding how the role socioeconomic stability, migration and
trade play in areas of the world that are democractizing. The project also
provides for the training of a graduate student.