* 1357155
* Determining the suppressibility of functional categories in second-language acquisition: from Spanish to Palenquero
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2014,08/31/2018
* John Lipski, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 08/31/2018
* USD 89,902.00

Are some languages easier to learn than others? This question, one that most
linguists would find naive, is frequently heard among would-be language
learners. A phenomenon often associated with more "difficult" languages is
grammatical agreement, e.g. verb conjugation and noun-adjective gender and
number, whose forms and rules seem to represent a net increase in complexity
over languages that lack agreement. And yet, as one scholar remarks, "Non-native
speakers [...] will readily appreciate this demand. But most native speakers
will hardly be aware that it exists at all; to them [...] agreement usually
comes for free." But does it? And if so, how can systems that stymie learners be
so easy for native speakers? In principle, the most effective way to determine
the real-time complexity of grammatical agreement would be to "turn it off" and
see whether speakers experience any sort of "relief." An integral component of
language such as agreement cannot be voluntarily deactivated, but given the
proper combination of languages and an appropriate population of native speakers
and learners it may be possible to indirectly explore the seemingly paradoxical
fact that agreement appears effortless for native speakers but burdensome for
all but the most proficient learners.

This research project focuses on bilingual speakers of two languages with highly
similar vocabularies and sentence structures, one of which exhibits several
forms of agreement and the other of which does not. The languages are Spanish
and the creole language Palenquero, spoken in the Afro-Colombian village of San
Basilio de Palenque. Although they are not mutually intelligible, Palenquero
grammar is in many respects a proper subset of Spanish, lacking grammatical
inflection on nouns, adjectives, and verbs and the accompanying agreement. In
order to speak Palenquero without interference from Spanish, the bilingual
speaker has to suppress grammatical agreement while producing essentially the
same noun and verb phrases with the same basic words. Recent language-
revitalization efforts have resulted in a cohort of native Spanish speakers who
have acquired Palenquero as a second language. This study will include
psycholinguistic experiments with first- and second-language speakers of
Palenquero to test the suppressibility of agreement. In addition, by
demonstrating that historically stigmatized languages can play a crucial role in
addressing significant issues in linguistics, this study will aid in efforts to
legitimize other languages and peoples struggling for acceptance.