* 1357530
* Natural Iron Fertilization from the Patagonian and South Georgia Island Shelves to the Open Waters of the Southern Ocean.
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2014,02/28/2019
* Ricardo Matano, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 02/28/2019
* USD 753,084.00

As in other high nutrient, low chlorophyll (HNLC) regions, primary production in
the Southern Ocean is likely limited by iron availability. These HNLC conditions
are rarely observed in the Atlantic sector of the Southern Ocean in contrast to
the Pacific sector, indicating that productivity in the Atlantic sector may be
the result of a greater input of iron, the source of which remains unidentified.
In this study, researchers from Oregon State University will use model
simulations to quantitatively examine iron sources and the processes leading to
the chlorophyll-a blooms observed in the South Atlantic sector of the Southern
Ocean, particularly in the region contiguous to the Patagonian shelf and near
the South Georgia Island. Results from this study will advance our understanding
of how natural iron fertilization affects primary productivity in potentially
the strongest carbon sink area of the Southern
Ocean.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This research will contribute to
the climate and marine ecosystem community research, particularly with respect
to how iron inputs may control carbon dioxide fluxes in the Southern Ocean. In
addition, educational impacts from this study include training for undergraduate
and post-doctoral researchers, and integration of findings into undergraduate
curriculum.