* 1357387
* REU Site: RUI: Creating Interdisciplinary Research Opportunities for Phosphorus Sustainability (CROPS)
* SBE,SMA
* 02/01/2014,09/30/2017
* Stephen Nold, University of Wisconsin-Stout
* Continuing Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 09/30/2017
* USD 281,994.00

This project brings together a dynamic and creative group of faculty from the
University of Wisconsin-Stout to create an 8-week interdisciplinary REU site
targeting first generation and underrepresented minority students. Students and
faculty engage in a holistic apprentice-style training model with the overall
theme of studying phosphorus pollution in a highly impacted Wisconsin watershed.
The team studies inclusive decision-making, social networks among farmers,
responsive policy implementation, economic impacts, land-use effects on
phosphorus run-off, remediation strategies, and sediment geochronology. Data are
integrated into a comprehensive strategy for economically sustainable phosphorus
use. Students and faculty participate in professional development programming,
interdisciplinary data sharing, and original research activities designed to
empower and prepare students for science&lt;br/&gt;careers. Ultimately, this
investment in human capital will help produce a workforce trained in
interdisciplinary and collaborative thinking necessary to solve 21st century
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit :&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
work offers significant intellectual contributions by improving student learning
and development in response to research experiences, creating innovative
approaches to manage the training and professional development of students and
faculty in interdisciplinary research, and understanding the complex processes
contributing to phosphorus pollution while developing&lt;br/&gt;sustainable
solutions. These efforts dovetail nicely with an ongoing NSF-funded project at
UW-Stout to study classroom-based research. The research results are broadly
disseminated via student presentations, peer-reviewed literature, local media
outlets, and policy stakeholders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts
:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project is ecpected to result in lasting
impacts for students, faculty, and community alike. The PI-team's efforts at
synthesizing different research projects centered on the same substantive
problems have improved their effectiveness in collaborative problem solving and
in teaching undergraduates an interdisciplinary approach to research. The team
expects an increase the retention and success of underrepresented groups and
their pursuit of advanced science degrees. By sharing results with civic
leaders&lt;br/&gt;and government regulators, their new knowledge will impact
public policy, the local economy, and regional water quality. This should have a
significant impact on developing a more competitive workforce in the social and
natural sciences in the US, increasing participation of underrepresented
minority groups and women in the sciences, improving undergraduate education in
the social&lt;br/&gt;and natural sciences. Most importantly, this project whould
have a positive impact on public scientific literacy.