* 1357133
* Collaborative Research:  The Upper Branch of the Southern Ocean Overturning in the Southern Ocean State Estimate:  Water Mass Transformation and the 3-D Residual Circulation
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/2014,01/31/2019
* Ryan Abernathey, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 01/31/2019
* USD 101,621.00

Overview: The Southern Ocean plays a pivotal role in the global circulation and
climate. The absence of land barriers in the Drake Passage latitude band makes
it possible for westerly winds to drive the strong eastward Antarctic
Circumpolar Current (ACC) that encircles the globe in the Southern Ocean,
connecting the individual ocean basins. Due to its steeply sloping density
surfaces with upwelling from great depths to the sea surface, the Southern
Ocean's overturning circulation is extremely different from the equally vigorous
North Atlantic/Nordic Seas overturn. Near the sea surface, the upwelled deep
waters split into waters that become lighter (more buoyant) and eventually
circulate into the subtropical thermocline (upper cell), and waters that become
denser and feed the global bottom waters (lower cell). The Southern Ocean's
overturning circulation is responsible for a large portion of the global
redistribution of heat, freshwater, carbon and nutrients. Warming in the
Southern Ocean over the past 50 years is weaker than in the Northern Hemisphere,
possibly because Drake Passage limits southward oceanic flux of heat, hence
maintaining cold, ice-covered waters. However, because of its very large volume,
the Southern Ocean is absorbing a significant fraction of the climate system?s
excess heat and about 60% of the total oceanic anthropogenic carbon dioxide
inventory is stored in the Southern Hemisphere oceans. Nutrients from the
upwelling deep waters in the Southern Ocean enter the thermocline via the upper
cell, where they support 75% of primary productivity north of 30Â°S.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit : The zonally averaged Southern Ocean
overturning circulation is commonly hypothesized to have an upper cell and a
lower cell, fed by inflowing Indian, Pacific and Atlantic Deep Waters, that
upwell to the ocean surface where surface buoyancy fluxes convert them to
lighter and denser waters, respectively. The degree of separation (or not) of
these cells will be examined as part of this work. Observations indicate that
the upper cell is most likely fed by nutrient-rich deep waters that originate in
the Indian and Pacific rather than from the Atlantic, a hypothesis that will be
examined in detail.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A second hypothesis is that the two-
dimensional, zonally averaged meridional overturning circulation hides
significant zonal asymmetries that are essential to the circulation. Using a
residual circulation framework with proposed new online diagnostics of isopycnal
and diapycnal volume transport in neutral density coordinates, the investigators
will quantitatively examine regional contributions to the residual circulation
in the Southern Ocean State Estimate (SOSE), including the role of the ACC,
topographic features, and subtropical and Antarctic gyre systems. They will also
quantify the relative contributions of eddy-driven and steady flow in the three-
dimensional residual circulation pathways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Water mass
transformation and formation processes in the upper cell are also three-
dimensional. The hypothesis that air-sea fluxes dominate with nearly equal
importance of freshwater and heat, but that diapycnal mixing, particularly in
isopycnal outcrop regions, can also be important will be tested. Using the
proposed new online SOSE diagnostics, the relative, localized contributions of
heat and salinity forcing to transformation will be quantified at every model
time step. Regionally, with SOSE and these new diagnostics, the investigators
will examine the balance of processes that lead to coherent net heating regions,
find the most important upwelling/air-sea exchange sites, and quantify the role
of sea ice processes in the essential freshwater inputs to the upper
cell.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The project will inform
understanding of Southern Ocean response to climate change, including changes in
surface temperature, upper ocean heat content and sea ice cover. The results
will be published in scientific journals and presented at major meetings.
Existing public outreach efforts (schools, teacher groups, libraries, university
clubs) will be enhanced by the project, including visualizations. The proposed
development of online diagnosis of the 3D residual (i.e. isopycnally-averaged)
circulation will benefit MITgcm users as well as SOSE users through the
inclusion of the contributions to the diapycnal velocity from all diabatic
processes. The code implementing online neutral density calculation will be made
available to all MITgcm users. State estimates are increasingly a tool of choice
for synthesizing data. This project supports the rapidly growing user base for
SOSE, including many students. SOSE will be a broadly used tool for
understanding Southern Ocean dynamics, thermodynamics, and biogeochemistry for
years to come, as the numbers of in situ observations under sea ice and of
biogeochemical parameters soar. Crucial verification of its water mass structure
and air-sea fluxes will be undertaken. A graduate student will be mentored.