* 1357078
* Boundary Layer Effects on Flow and Mixing in Deep Ocean Canyons
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2018
* Ian Eisenman, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 03/31/2018
* USD 223,089.00

Overview: The main reasons to identify the spatial and temporal distribution of
mixing and upwelling in the deep ocean are to understand its energy budget, to
close the overturning circulation and to understand deep currents and the
transport of heat, fresh water, dissolved carbon, geochemical tracers, and
nutrients. Observations suggest that the majority of deep-ocean mixing happens
over rough topography, like the flanks of the world's mid-ocean ridges. Though
tidally-driven internal waves are the most commonly discussed explanation for
this mixing, a number of observations suggest that mixing and upwelling within
the ridge flank canyons is significant, and that it is not fully explained by
internal wave processes. There are about 1,000 mid-ocean ridge flank canyons in
the deep ocean, and the canyon to be studied in this project is representative
of many or most of them. Therefore, if boundary layer processes are shown to be
significant in this canyon, they are expected to be significant throughout much
of the world's oceans. This study presents a novel hypothesis for the mechanism
behind an important process (abyssal mixing), developed with physical models,
and which can be feasibly and cleanly tested with an observational program.

Intellectual Merit: A novel mechanism for abyssal mixing and upwelling is
proposed: diffusion-driven boundary layers interacting with complicated
topography. Though it occurs in conjunction with tidally-driven mixing, this
mechanism may significantly change the expected distribution of deep-ocean
mixing. This project investigates whether boundary layers are driving the
circulation within a canyon in the South Atlantic using a series of modeling
experiments to elucidate how these boundary layers interact with complicated
topography and affect bulk properties of the ocean. The approach consists of a
hierarchy of models with increasing complexity, from canyons with constant
cross-sections to fully-realistic three-dimensional topography. A key
deliverable is a set of metrics for the total impact of the boundary layers on
the density field far from the boundary. These metrics will be related to the
characteristics of the topography as a first step toward mixing
parameterizations that do not collapse all topographic effects into a single
roughness parameter.

Broader Impacts: This project will improve our understanding of mixing and
upwelling throughout the deep ocean. A key goal of the modeling portion of this
study is beginning to develop mixing parameterizations for global models that
take into account boundary layer and mixing processes within canyons and are
based on both models and observations. This project will also form a central
portion of the training of a postdoctoral researcher.