* 1357430
* Enlarged Network Integration As A Response To Social Change
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2017
* David Pollack, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2017
* USD 165,853.00

Population movement and social transformation are the tangible expressions of
societal response to systemic stress. Whether studying these processes at the
local or global level, today or in the past, these are issues that are relevant
to gaining a deeper understanding of the human condition. Just as groups with
different backgrounds and histories come together today in response to
particular developments or crises to form new collective social identities, so,
too, did groups in the past. This project is a case study that investigates how
one kind of society, small-scale farming groups, created a new collective social
identity and restructured external relationships in response to cultural and
environmental stress.

The goal of this project directed by a research team consisting of Drs. David
Pollack, Gwynn Henderson and Heather Worne, is to understand the processes by
which new social identities are created. Archaeology is particularly well
positioned to address this issue, as its forte is the study of change over long
periods of time. Contemporary social theoretical approaches structure the
researchers' investigation into how collective social identity and external
relationships change. The results of this project will provide a better
understanding into how communities and regional populations reacted and
responded to changing cultural and environmental conditions. In so doing, this
project will expand understanding of one of the most fundamental of all
historical processes - how societies respond to change.

The late fourteenth to early fifteenth century was a period of change for Ohio
Valley farmers. Downstream, Mississippian polity collapse led to widespread
population dispersal. In the Valleys middle reaches, the response was much
different. Here, ca. A.D. 1400, Fort Ancient farming groups chose to aggregate
within large villages. Exploring one Fort Ancient community's response to this
process contributes to understanding of the factors at play in this region as a
whole. In this manner, researchers can begin to understand human perseverance
during a period of change and why, throughout history, Fort Ancient people
maintained a separate and distinct identity from their neighbors.

Educating and training undergraduate/graduate students and avocational
archaeologists is an important element of this research project. It will provide
an opportunity for students to participate in all aspects of the research: field
and laboratory work, analysis, report preparation, and presenting research
results (to the public and to professionals). Through a field school and paid
project internships or enrollment in independent study courses, University of
Kentucky undergraduate/graduate students will gain vital hands-on educational
experiences and training in a real research context. This is especially
important for University of Kentucky undergraduate students, a population that
includes individuals from rural Kentucky areas who are economically
underprivileged; their participation in this research project will expose them
to aspects of scientific research. The laboratory at UK's Archaeology Facility
will be open for students and the interested public to participate in washing,
cataloguing, and analyzing the materials recovered. Dissemination of research
results to professionals will occur at conferences and through journal
publications; and to the public through public-oriented publications.
Professionals and the public alike will be able to follow project discoveries
through the project webpage, where brief reports and short video clips will be
posted.