* 1357017
* Oxygen Minimum Zone Variability and Ecosystem Responses in the Arabian Sea during the Last Glacial-interglacial Cycle:A Paired Paleogenomic and (Isotopic) Lipid Biomarker Approach
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2014,02/28/2017
* Valier Galy, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 02/28/2017
* USD 550,000.00

Available monitoring data suggest that mid-water oxygen depletion regions, or
Oxygen Minimum Zones (OMZs), are expanding in the world's oceans in the context
of global warming. As OMZs expand, marine ecosystems are expected to experience
disturbances in the structure and dynamics of food webs and in the production of
greenhouse gasses, with resulting feedbacks on the climate system. The northern
Arabian Sea has an exceptionally widespread OMZ characterized by a strong
seasonal variability of monsoonal upwelling and high algal primary productivity.
Although sediment records from the region have been extensively studied to
reconstruct causes, timing, and duration of OMZ extent since the last glacial-
interglacial cycle, it remains entirely unknown how long-term changes in OMZ
variability has impacted past ecosystems and food webs in the Arabian Sea. This
research, conducted by a team of scientists from the Woods Hole Oceanographic
Institution (WHOI), uses ultra-high-throughput sequencing of sedimentary ancient
DNA signatures (i.e., the "paleome") to reconstruct past populations of marine
organisms. Advanced bioinformatics and statistical tools will be used to
identify species that were most strongly impacted by long-term fluctuations in
OMZ strength during key climate intervals over the last 80,000 years. Parallel
changes in climate and environmental conditions will be reconstructed using
(molecular) geochemical techniques. For this project the research team will use
a continuous, undisturbed and radiocarbon-dated sediment record that was
recently obtained from the center of the OMZ on the continental slope northwest
of the Indus Canyon.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The high-resolution ancient DNA
records will greatly help to refine past environmental and climate
interpretations in the monsoon-impacted northeastern Arabian Sea area. This
study will provide insights into how ecosystems will respond to long-term
periods of OMZ conditions and how these ecosystems adapt after the return of a
well-mixed and oxygenated water column. Bioinformatics and numerical modeling
analyses will be carried out in collaboration with a researcher from the
University of Glasgow in the United Kingdom. The project will provide
educational opportunities for a graduate student enrolled in the MIT/WHOI joint
program in oceanography and for two undergraduate students, who will be
recruited through WHOI's Summer Student Fellowship and Minority Fellowship
programs. In addition, results and bioinformatics approaches from this study
will be implemented in a lecture during the popular annual course "Strategies
and Techniques for Analyzing Microbial Population Structure (STAMPS)" at the
Marine Biology Laboratory (MBL) in Woods Hole.