* 1357134
* Collaborative Research:  Marine priming effect - molecular mechanisms for the biomineralization of terrigenous dissolved organic matter in the ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2014,01/31/2015
* Robert Spencer, Woodwell Climate Research Center, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 01/31/2015
* USD 150,392.00

Overview: Large fluxes of apparently refractory terrigenous dissolved organic
matter (t-DOM) are transported through rivers to the coast each year, yet there
are vanishingly low traces of t-DOM in the oceans. The removal of t-DOM is
central to the global carbon cycle, yet the mechanisms that drive removal remain
poorly understood. In soils, the presence of labile organic compounds is known
to enhance the remineralization of recalcitrant compounds, a phenomenon known as
the priming effect (PE). The PE is quantitatively important in soil systems, but
has received little attention in aquatic systems despite its potential to
explain C mineralization patterns at the land-sea interface. This project
investigates the magnitude of PE in the coastal ocean and the metabolic and
ecological mechanisms that give rise to it. It focuses on the microbial
communities of US Atlantic Ocean coastal marshes. In these systems, river-borne
t-DOM provides a particularly valuable and tractable model for evaluating the
magnitude of the PE. The study utilizes a well-characterized DOM standard
collected from a Georgia river as the model t-DOM material in a series of
laboratory experiments with natural coastal microbial communities and cultures
of heterotrophic marine bacteria of the Roseobacter lineage. Roseobacters are
particularly appropriate biological models for this work as they are abundant in
southeastern US coastal zones and are known to catabolize lignin and other
plant-derived aromatic compounds. Long-term (60 day) incubation experiments will
track the PE resulting from addition of labile DOM of differing chemical
complexity. Changes in lignin phenols will be the primary measure of the
influence of PE on t-DOM degradation, but the research also monitors a broader
suite of aromatic compounds represented by optical properties and identified by
high-resolution mass spectrometry. Measurements of the microbial response to
added labile organic matter, via extracellular enzyme activities, bacterial
production, community composition and gene transcript analysis, will reveal the
biological mechanisms responsible for the PE. Experiments using Roseobacter
strains will allow detailed investigation of the relationship between metabolic
pathways, specific bacteria, and organic carbon mineralization in a well-defined
experimental system. Data on gene expression, microbial activity, and DOM
transformations from the lab experiments will be integrated to elucidate the
specific metabolic pathways invoked as part of the PE and guide development of
molecular tools to track genetic signatures along a river to coastal ocean
transect in the final year of the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: The role of heterotrophic microorganisms in remineralizing t-DOM at the
land-sea interface is a central question in biological oceanography. Components
of t-DOM, principally lignin, are refractory in the sense that degradation rates
are typically slow relative to other biomolecules, and yet lignin is effectively
removed somewhere between land and the open ocean. The project will determine
whether priming plays a role in the rapid removal of t-DOM in the coastal ocean,
provide evidence for the types of labile organic matter most effective as
priming agents, and attempt to discover the metabolic pathways by which the PE
is mediated. These studies have the potential to reveal conserved and
predictable metabolic responses that may contribute to regulation of the
transformation and turnover of naturally occurring semi-labile/refractory DOM in
marine environments. As climate change is likely to affect fluxes of both
terrigenous carbon and nutrients to the coastal ocean, understanding the
magnitude and mechanisms of PE will be necessary to predict the geochemical
consequences of these changing fluxes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The
project will directly support the interdisciplinary and multi-institutional
training of two graduate students and several undergraduate students. Training
opportunities under a recently funded Research Experiences for Undergraduates
(REU) program at UTK will be leveraged and extended to local UTK undergraduates
participating in the project. Funding of this project will also provide support
for research faculty to continue to develop an outreach program at a primarily
minority high school in Newark NJ. Finally, all PIs will continue to disseminate
their research results in presentations, papers and other forms on a timely
basis.