* 1357756
* Collaborative Research: Subduction Zone Segmentation over Multiple Seismic Cycles, South-Central Chile
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2013,02/29/2016
* Benjamin Horton, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 02/29/2016
* USD 123,540.00

The possible segmentation of subduction zone faults currently presents one of
the most significant questions to the physics and geology of earthquake
occurrence and the assessment of future earthquake hazards. How will future
large earthquakes be arrayed along a fault? How and why will individual
earthquake ruptures stop? Subduction zone faults form the tectonic plate
boundaries that parallel the coastlines of many countries around the world.
Advances in instrumentation and modeling in recent decades have produced
important insights into fault behavior, yet these measurements span only
fractions of the time interval between major earthquakes. The goal of this
research project is to use an interdisciplinary array of evidence preserved in
coastal landforms and sediments to investigate whether segmentation of
subduction zone faults is maintained over multiple earthquake cycles spanning
hundreds to thousands of years. The field are, the Arauco Peninsula coast of
south-central Chile, crosses the boundary between the rupture zones of two of
the largest subduction zone earthquakes in the worldwide historic record, on May
22, 1960 (Mw 9.5) and February 27, 2010 (Mw 8.8). Prior to 2010, the study area
for this project in south-central Chile was one of the most accepted hard fault
segment boundaries along the Peru-Chile trench; it was believed to bound several
historical ruptures, including the Great Chilean earthquake of 1960. The Chilean
earthquake in February 2010 called this hypothesis into question, when the
rupture extended south of this boundary and only partially overlapped with the
previous earthquake in AD 1835. The combination of geological evidence of past
earthquakes over the last 4000 years, frequent large subduction zone
earthquakes, and an unusually long and comprehensive historic record of
earthquakes in south-central Chile makes this region a natural laboratory to
address fundamental questions about fault segmentation. This research project
will test multiple hypotheses regarding earthquake behavior and coastal
response: (1) fault ruptures over multiple earthquake cycles could terminate at
fixed (hard), variable (soft), or random boundaries, or could include multiple
segments; (2) large subduction zone earthquakes will produce a tsunami deposit
simultaneous with an abrupt change in land level; and (3) the Holocene coastal
evolution in this region reflects a modest net change in relative sea level in
which the vertical uplift or subsidence during large earthquakes is largely
reversed during the periods between earthquakes. To address these hypotheses the
research team will reconstruct vertical land-level changes and tsunami history
associated with multiple earthquake cycles using geomorphic, sedimentological
and microfossil analysis. They will characterize the optimal environmental
settings for the preservation of land-level changes and tsunami deposits in
sedimentary sequences and analyze the impacts of these land-level changes on the
coastal landscape.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ruptures on subduction zone faults have
created some of the largest earthquakes and tsunamis in the world, such as the
catastrophic earthquake in Japan in 2011 that killed thousands of people and
destroyed coastal cities. The practical importance of this investigation for
assessing future earthquake hazards in other similar geological settings was
underscored by the unforeseen extent of fault ruptures and resulting earthquake
magnitudes in the recent devastating earthquakes in Sumatra in 2004, Chile in
2010 and Japan in 2011. The project will build on strong existing collaboration
with Chilean scientists. The results will inform the construction of earthquake
and tsunami risk maps through established contacts in Chile, and we will arrange
public presentations on earthquake and tsunami hazards. The general concepts
will advance knowledge of earthquake behavior over time periods that exceed the
relatively short period of the instrumental record.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is supported by the Tectonics Program and Geomorphology and Land Use
Dynamics Program in the Division of Earth Sciences and the Office of
International Science and Engineering.