* 1357240
* Signaling, Dyad Formation, and the Encrypted Nature of Group Cohesion
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2014,06/30/2016
* Richard Mcelreath, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 06/30/2016
* USD 183,702.00

Dr. Richard McElreath and Dr. Thomas Flamson will explore the mechanisms that
influence human group formation and the means through which group formation are
negotiated, maintained, and reformed, a core question in anthropology's mission
to theoretically explore the causes, consequences, and complexities of human
social and cultural variability. The project will entail a two-year study of the
formation of smaller cooperative groups within larger communities, a process
often called "assortment." Individuals vary in their goals, desires, and
abilities, and successful cooperation often depends upon assortment that
respects this variation. This research will be primarily conducted in an
agricultural community in Northeastern Brazil, where the changes in community
membership and composition since 1997 have led to new assortment of
relationships with both kin and non-kin. Additional behavioral experiments will
be conducted at UC Davis, for cross-cultural comparison. Three primary questions
will be addressed: (1) How much do people vary within groups, in knowledge,
attitudes, and personality?; (2) How do people produce and understand signals of
this variation?; and (3) How do people use this information to assort within
groups? Evidence will come from mathematical modeling, experiments, participant
observation, time allocation studies, social network structure, and content
analysis of verbal interactions.

Anthropologists have long recognized the importance of so-called "ethnic
markers" in signaling group membership to improve cooperative outcomes, which
has recently been the focus of extensive formal modeling. Given the fluid nature
of social life, however, assortment within local groups confronts a different
set of problems than that between groups, which this research will address,
assessing adaptations to individual variation. Further, this work investigates
the significance of individual differences in generating cultural products,
emphasizing the role of similarity-based preferences in interpersonal
association, and uncovering the underlying signaling functions of symbolic
behaviors.

This project will also make broader contributions to international collaboration
and scientific training. Extensive interaction with Brazilian scholars will be
facilitated at multiple universities in Brazil, strengthening ongoing
associations and introducing new opportunities for collaboration. Research
training and experience will also be provided to students, both in the US and in
Brazil. Finally, the study of social assortment and cooperative outcomes has
tremendous applied importance for the design of institutions for conservation
and governance, at both local and regional scales.