* 1357705
* Medicare Part D: An Analysis of the Supply Side Incentives
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2014,02/28/2019
* Stephen Ryan, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 02/28/2019
* USD 460,000.00

Medicare is a public health insurance program for the elderly and disabled in
the United States that covers over 50 million beneficiaries. In 2006, Congress
expanded the program to include prescription drug coverage via Medicare Part D,
generating the largest expansion of Medicare since the program?s inception in
1965. In 2012, approximately 32 million individuals benefitted from the program
with a cost for the government of about $60 billion. The expansion of Medicare
into Part D has generated a tremendous amount of policy interest and academic
research. However, the vast majority of the literature has been focused on
demand-side questions. In contrast, this project intends to examine the role of
Medicare Part D?s regulations on supplier behavior. The supply side of Medicare
Part D is vital to the operation of the market, as the program is centered on
publicly-subsidized private delivery of prescription drug plans.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal consists of several closely-related
projects. The first study will describe how features of the current regulations
induce strategic manipulation of the premiums by the insurers and quantify how
this behavior affects prices. It will use an instrumental variable empirical
strategy aimed at quantifying the effect of subsidy manipulability on premium
growth across the geographical regions in which Medicare Part D divides the US
territory. The second study will complement this reduced-form analysis by using
a structural model of supply and demand in the Part D market to evaluate prices
and allocations under counterfactual policies characterized by different
provisions for the subsidies paid by Medicare. The final arm of the proposal
will use micro-level administrative data from CMS and a different empirical
approach to study the role of adverse selection and risk-adjustment mechanisms
in our preceding analysis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project is
expected to generate broad impact through a number of channels. First, within
the academic community, the project will help solve a few puzzles discussed in
the literature on Medicare Part D and it will help connect the Health Economics
and Industrial Organization perspectives on this important market. Second, the
results of the project have direct implications for policy reforms that could
improve how tax-financed subsidies are administered in Medicare Part D, so as to
better align the supply-side incentives with the goal of the program. These
insights are applicable beyond the Medicare Part D program, providing guidance
to the ongoing public debate about the regulatory design of health insurance
exchanges as part of the Affordable Care Act. Finally, we note that this
proposal is among the only research in the economics literature that explicitly
considers the low-income enrollees in Medicare Part D, an economically-
disadvantaged group which is under studied.