* 1357018
* SHINE:   Impact of Large-Scale Magnetic Topology on Dynamics of Solar Corona
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Graham Barnes, Lockheed-Martin Advanced Technology Center
* Continuing Grant
* Ilia Roussev
* 06/30/2018
* USD 343,105.00

The main goal of this 3-year SHINE project is to perform a large ensemble study
of the topology of the large-scale magnetic environments associated with a
series of features and events in the solar corona. The statistical analysis
resulting from this project is likely to result in a significant understanding
of the causes of disruptive events on the Sun, which is important from a
societal standpoint as these events often lead to space weather. Furthermore,
programs such as the NSF's Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) and the
existing partnership between the Lockheed Martin Solar and Astrophysics
Laboratory and the Palo Alto Unified School District, would allow the project
team to involve young, up-and-coming talent in the pursuit of science. The
research and EPO agenda of this project supports the Strategic Goals of the AGS
Division in discovery, learning, diversity, and interdisciplinary research.

The main research objective of this SHINE project is to apply topological
analysis software on a series of magnetic field models of the corona during
sunspot cycles 23 and 24 (spanning about 20 years), and by applying statistical
methods to these results. The project team will investigate the relationship
between the production of dynamical events on the Sun and the presence of null
points, separatrix surfaces, separator field lines and other key topological
indicators of the magnetic structure. As part of this project, several
improvements to the existing Potential Field Source Surface (PFSS) model
extrapolation and topological analysis codes will be implemented, including the
addition of more accurate spherical harmonic calculation, field interpolation,
and field-line integration methods. Topological analysis codes will also be
developed and implemented. The research work thus represents a significant
upgrade of the existing PFSS package, which is available to anyone in the
scientific community via the Solar SoftWare (SSW). Additionally, the catalog of
topological objects, such as coronal null points, separatrix surfaces, and
separators will be uploaded to the Heliophysics Events Knowledgebase (HEK),
which allows such objects to be returned in queries of the HEK by the user
community.