* 1357325
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: An anthropological exploration of the efficacy of conditional cash transfers (CCTs) on food security
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2014,10/31/2016
* Eduardo Brondizio, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 10/31/2016
* USD 9,601.00

Indiana University PhD candidate, Ana De Lima, supervised by Prof. Eduardo
Brondízio, will investigate the impact of condition cash transfer (CCT) programs
on the nutrition of children's diets. The research will focus the study on the
Brazilian government's family cash transfer program, the Bolsa Família (BFP),
which is an excellent baseline for analyzing CCTs as it has been widely assessed
since its inception in 2003 and consumption of processed foods in the rural
areas it serves has been on the rise. In particular, the study will look at
associations between management of the benefit by mothers in households with
different food provisioning strategies and children's food intake. In addition
to documenting the management of funds, they will investigate how the mothers'
understanding of what represents a good diet influences children's nutrition.
This research will use an integrative methodological approach that includes
participant observation during grocery shopping, household surveys using
structured interviews, inventories of house pantries, food production and
procurement for consumption, dietary recalls, anthropometry, and isotope
analysis of fingernail fragments (to elucidate dietary history). The researchers
will undertake 12 months of fieldwork.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many evaluations of
CCTs such as the BFP and the impact on child nutrition have yielded inconsistent
results. This is likely because of their largely quantitative, short-term foci.
This research builds upon previous research in economic and nutritional
anthropology, adding the BFP as an object of inquiry. This research will develop
and test an empirical conceptual model and methodology to elucidate linkages
among cash transfer policies, household economic and dietary decision, and child
nutrition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will help us better understand how
effective CCT programs are not only in areas such as Amazonas where the research
will take place, but globally as such programs are implemented to other
countries and continents. The results will also contribute to a better
understanding of social assistance programs in the U.S. Food security,
particularly as it affects children, has been a top initiative of the U.S.
government in recent years. Understanding how cash assistance programs
contribute to nutritious diets and in other cases obesity will lead to a
healthier population. It has been argued that poor nutrition among poor families
is a contributing factor to perpetuating poverty.