* 1357667
* IRES: Environmental Impact of the Panama Canal Expansion Project
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Tahar El-Korchi, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Dudka
* 08/31/2017
* USD 293,506.00

The Panama Canal is one of the most important engineering structures in the
world. The Panama Canal Authority (ACP) is currently investing five billion
dollars to expand and modernize the Canal in order to accommodate rising trade
volumes. This expansion project focuses on sustainability and has necessitated
significant scientific research to measure the environmental impact of both the
expansion efforts and the new technologies being deployed in the Canal Zone.
This International Research Experience for Students (IRES) award will leverage
an existing relationship between Worcester Polytechnic Institute (WPI) and ACP
to involve undergraduate students in these historic research efforts. Five
students and one local high school teacher will be selected as participants each
year, using a recruitment process that will ensure the inclusion of a high
proportion of under-represented individuals. Diverse pre-departure activities
will both prepare the students for their research and serve as a platform by
which the larger community can become involved. Programmatic assessment by an
experienced evaluator will lead to the continuous improvement of the research
program, as well as wide-spread dissemination of the results. Finally, the STEM
Education Center at WPI will aid the high school teachers in developing a lesson
plans based on their activities that will be widely
disseminated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The expansion project will incorporate
cutting-edge technological systems in order to improve sustainability and reduce
environmental impact with additional locks complementing those originally
constructed in 1914. Significant scientific research is being carried out to
develop and evaluate these technologies as well as to quantify the ecological
effects of the construction activities. The IRES students will investigate
topics such as water quality at Gat√∫n Lake; unconventional energy generation
methods; optimizing the efficiency of pumping networks; and modeling the long-
range transport behavior of pollutants under complex meteorological conditions.
The objective of these research efforts is to provide a holistic understanding
of the interactions between the Panama Canal, the expansion project, and the
local environment, ensuring both economic growth and maintenance of ecological
health.