* 1357918
* EPRI: Spray-Freezing of Phase-Change Materials for Decoupled Condensation and Heat Rejection in Next Generation Air-Cooled Power Plants
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2014,09/30/2020
* Young Cho, Drexel University
* Continuing Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 09/30/2020
* USD 477,669.00

1357918&lt;br/&gt;Sun&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Thermal management systems
for steam-driven electric power plants account for approximately 40% of total
fresh water withdrawals in the US. Due to dwindling access to fresh water
resources worldwide, continued operation of these systems poses a significant
engineering challenge. As such, this project aims to develop transformative
"dry-cooling" technologies completely eliminating the use of water for cooling
steam condensers in modern electric power plants. This will be achieved using
air-cooled spray-freezing of phase-change materials (PCM). On the steam side,
solid PCM particles in a slurry bath will anchor the steam condensation
temperature to a constant, low value regardless of ambient air conditions. On
the air side, spray freezing of millimeter-sized PCM droplets will dramatically
increase surface area, as well as heat transfer coefficient, as compared to
current air-cooled condensers (ACCs). This approach decouples the condensation
and heat rejection processes, significantly reducing steam condensation
temperature, pressure drop, and system size. Additionally, the proposed spray-
freezing thermal energy storage concept will also provide high capacity, fast
charging/discharging storage solutions for other high-load cooling and heating
applications, including building HVAC and data centers. The collaboration
between Drexel University, Advanced Cooling Technologies (ACT), and
WorleyParsons (WP), will help to bridge the gap between fundamental research and
disruptive technology developments for commercialization. Both graduate and
undergraduate students will benefit from research co-ops and internship
opportunities at ACT and WP. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project leverages the
spray-freezing of phase-change materials (PCMs) to decouple steam condensation
and heat rejection in the development of novel air-cooled condensers. Spray
freezing techniques are widely used in the food industry, due to the fast
cooling rates achievable in high surface-to-volume ratio droplets. In the
proposed system, heat is transferred from the condenser steam to a slurry bath
comprised of solid PCM particles suspended in liquefied PCM. The liquid PCM is
then drawn from the bath and sprayed into a cooling tower, where the heat is
rejected to the ambient air. The PCM droplets solidify as they are convectively
cooled, and fall back to the PCM slurry bath completing the cycle. The
integrated university-industry team will combine experts in phase change
materials, complex fluids, two-phase flow, and air-cooled heat exchangers to
investigate both fundamental scientific principles as well as overcome technical
challenges in the realization and eventual implementation of this novel spray-
freezing condenser concept. The specific tasks of the university-industry
collaboration are to:&lt;br/&gt;(i) Develop novel PCMs with high thermal
conductivity and optimal spray/jetting characteristics;&lt;br/&gt;(ii)
Investigate the effects of nozzle design and operation on spraying and freezing
of droplets;&lt;br/&gt;(iii) Characterize the simultaneous melting and flowing
of PCM slurries over banks of steam tubes;&lt;br/&gt;(iv) Design, fabricate, and
characterize lab-scale components and sub-scale proof-of-concept spray-freezing
condenser systems.&lt;br/&gt;These tasks will be achieved through an integrated
research methodology including advanced modeling and direct experimental
characterizations of thermofluidic properties of PCMs, complex fluid flows, and
convective heat transfer.