* 1357928
* Big Data, Big Networks: Big Opportunities for Collaboration between Mexico and the United States
* CSE,OAC
* 12/15/2013,11/30/2014
* Louis Fox, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 11/30/2014
* USD 49,000.00

The Research and Education (R&E) communities of the U.S. and Mexico have a long
history of cross-border collaborations. Given the proximity and the breadth of
research taking place at R&E institutions in California and Mexico, the
opportunity for enhancing network-dependent cross-border science research and
education collaborations holds great promise. An important cross-border
collaboration involves Mexico's Center for Scientific Research and Higher
Education (CICESE) and the University of California San Diego (UCSD).

In 2010, the NSF International Research Networks Connections (IRNC) program
funded FIU's Americas Lightpaths (AmLight ) proposal, which included upgrading
the network connection between Los Angeles, San Diego, and Tijuana to 10Gbps.
With support from Mexico's National Council for Science and Technology
(CONACYT), Corporaci√≥n Universitaria para el Desarrollo de Internet (CUDI), and
other institutions in Mexico, the 10Gbps network connection was extended from
Tijuana to Ensenada to connect CICESE.

There are continuing challenges in cross-border science research and education
collaborations benefiting from the use of the enhanced network infrastructure
between Mexico and California, and the U.S. Researchers, both in the U.S. and
Mexico, must be better informed of the network capability the AmLight project
has made available, and explore how to leverage the network?s capability to
dramatically enhance cross-border research and education activities.

In an effort to stimulate growth in cross-border science research and education,
FIU and CENIC (stakeholders of the AmLight project), with support from UCSD,
CUDI, and CICESE, a Big Data, Big Networks workshop explores how to enhance
existing or to form new cross-border networks of collaboration between
researchers and students connected by the AmLight West 10G link. The broader
impacts of the Big Data, Big Networks workshop are aimed at identifying
opportunities to underpin with the AmLight cross-border network infrastructure
the current and planned cross-border Big Data projects, and at linking into
U.S.-Mexico inter-governmental activities aimed at fostering cross-border
science research and education collaborations, such as initiatives fostering
innovation and education.