* 1357908
* Coupled Geomechanical Processes and Energy Technologies - Research Experience at Ecole des Ponts Paris Tech (ENPC, France)
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,12/31/2019
* Chloe Arson, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 12/31/2019
* USD 200,299.00

Technical description. &lt;br/&gt;The proposed International Research Experience
for Students (IRES): Coupled Geomechanical Processes and Energy Technologies -
Research Experience at Ecole des Ponts Paris Tech - ENPC, France (?CGPET -
ENPC?) aims to expose Georgia Institute of Technology (GT) undergraduate and
graduate students to geomechanical research applied to energy technologies,
immerse them in the academic culture of a leading European institution (ENPC),
and inspire them in the pursuit of a scientific career to improve the
sustainability and security of energy sources and production. Undergraduate and
graduate students from Georgia Tech School of Civil and Environmental
Engineering (GT-CEE) will complete a two-month internship at ENPC Navier
Laboratory, to work on research planned and supervised by dual ENPC and GT-CEE
faculty mentors. Navier Laboratory gathers world?s experts in theoretical poro-
mechanics and thermodynamics, and has unique experimental, imaging and
computational facilities especially adapted for geomechanics. Topics of study
envisioned in this IRES involve fundamental research in the physics of thermo-
hydro-chemo-mechanical coupled processes in geomaterials, multi-scale modeling
of porous networks, three-dimensional image analysis and advanced numerical
simulation techniques. The ?CGPET- ENPC? program will start with five teams of
dual mentors, who will work on the following subjects: (1) Clay nano-
poromechanics for carbon dioxide sequestration, (2) Characterization of
particulate pore structures for geological storage, (3) Micro-mechanical
modeling of fatigue in salt rock for Compressed Air Energy Storage (CAES), (4)
Reactive fluid injection and withdrawal in rock, for oil and gas recovery and
geothermal energy systems, and (5) Freeze/thaw cycles and sulfate attacks for
improved cement-based buffers. Every year, a GT-CEE mentor will spend the last
week of IRES participants? internship at ENPC, to work with his/her ENPC
collaborator and supervise GT-CEE students? final research presentations;
similarly the ENPC mentor will spend the week following the internship period at
Georgia Tech. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader description. &lt;br/&gt;Fundamental
understanding of soil, rock and cement-based materials is needed to address
society?s most pressing needs in energy production (e.g., hydraulic fracturing,
geothermal systems), energy storage (e.g., CAES) and waste management (e.g.,
nuclear waste disposals, carbon capture). Through their engagement in a project
aimed to improve energy geotechnologies, IRES participants will discover the
responsibility of researchers towards their sponsors, their scientific community
and society at large. Students selected for this CGPET ? ENPC program will have
an international experience as part of a cohort through cultural and
professional activities, and will contribute to build and maintain a global
network of scholars through public research presentations at ENPC and GT,
wikipage postings, academic publications, and mentoring of new IRES
participants. Currently, most students enrolled in Civil and Environmental
Engineering discover soil mechanics during their senior year, through the course
of Introduction to Geotechnical Engineering. Activities planned before, during
and after the ENPC internships will expose a broad population of GT students to
geomechanical research, which will provide opportunities to inspire and attract
more students in the pursuit of a scientific career. The integration of
activities for faculty and undergraduate and graduate students from ENPC and GT-
CEE is expected to sustain long-term collaborations between groups focusing on
experimental, theoretical and numerical research in energy geomechanics. This
IRES will also serve a broader effort to share knowledge, expertise and
resources between Europe and the United States, and to explore new ways to
initiate scientific collaborations between high-ranked education and research
institutions around the world.