* 1357967
* I-Corps:  Controlled Membranes for Industrial Applications
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2013,03/31/2015
* Cornel Sultan, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 03/31/2015
* USD 50,000.00

The project will take closer to implementation fundamental research results in
the technology of actively controlled membranes. By leveraging structures,
materials, sensing and feedback control into membrane technology the project
could advance fundamental as well as applied knowledge in all these areas. Via
the envisioned controlled membrane devices, which will embed very recent
theoretical and technological advances, this project will bring research much
faster out of University Labs into the applications area and to the market.
Dedicated software tools for integrated modeling and design of controlled
membrane structures enhance this technology. These tools can enable certain
software developers to move away from the traditional sequential approach in
which each step of the modeling and design process is rather separated from
other steps. The control design step is in general particularly isolated, since
control design is performed after all the previous modeling and design steps
have been completed. Integrated software tools will enable the multidisciplinary
design approach that is nowadays facilitated by growing computational
capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project may impact the field of optics by
providing lightweight, adaptive solutions to replace existing technology that
uses heavy, glassy reflectors. Since reflectors are widely used, from space
telescopes to light amplifiers in surgery rooms, the societal impact may also be
multi-faceted, ranging from improved science data gathering (e.g. via space
telescopes) which will enhance scientific understanding of the general public,
defense capabilities (in aerospace applications), to health care equipment and
conditions. Software for controlled membranes may also impact software
developers by providing new, dedicated tools to address the emerging technology
of lightweight controlled membrane structures. The project also has the
potential to impact biology/medicine because researchers in these areas may use
the software to analyze membrane behavior in biological contexts.