* 1357452
* International Integrated Microdata Series
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2020
* Robert McCaa, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 08/31/2020
* USD 6,699,794.00

SES-1357452&lt;br/&gt;Steven Ruggles&lt;br/&gt;Ragui A. Assaad&lt;br/&gt;Deborah
Levison&lt;br/&gt;Robert E. McCaa&lt;br/&gt;Anne Meier&lt;br/&gt;University of
Minnesota&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Integrated Public Use Microdata Series
(IPUMS) project is creating fundamental infrastructure for scientific research,
education, and policy-making. The collaborators have created the world's largest
population database, with information describing 545 million persons drawn from
238 censuses and surveys of 74 countries between 1960 and 2011. This proposal
continues funding to build, enrich, and freely disseminate a microdata resource
of unprecedented scale and scope. This next project phase expands the coverage
of the database, preserves it for future generations, and disseminates the data
to users around the world. This project focuses on five major activities: (1)
Data acquisition and long-run preservation; (2) Data cleaning and processing;
(3) Creating comprehensive documentation to guide users on the meaning of census
and survey responses and their comparability across time and space; (4)
Improving the web-based dissemination and analysis system and conducting an
expanded program of education and dissemination activities; and 5) Developing
with national statistical agencies a secure dissemination system for data that
pose disclosure risks, making a vast new trove of big data available.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IPUMS is critical scientific infrastructure. The
extraordinary growth and redistribution of population and economic resources are
reshaping the planet. To meet the challenges created by rapid demographic,
economic, and environmental change, researchers must have full and open access
to the best possible information. Richly detailed population data spanning the
globe over multiple decades are indispensable for creating the next generation
of social science and environmental models. IPUMS data have already stimulated
new research that transcends national boundaries and static interpretation. The
expansion, improvement, and support of the database are directly relevant to the
central mission of the NSF to promote the progress of science. The next project
phase will leverage the NSF's previous investments and make IPUMS an even more
powerful resource for understanding the causes and consequences of the sweeping
transformations of the human population. This infrastructure will multiply the
quality, quantity, accessibility, and interoperability of information about the
changing population, creating a transnational resource of unprecedented power
for understanding human society on a global scale. By disseminating big
microdata, this project will enhance scientific understanding of critical
policy-related issues such as population aging, international migration, climate
change, and the effects of government programs on economic development and well-
being. The project will promote teaching through: (1) online data analysis and
sharing of curricular materials for teaching; (2) conducting training workshops
and developing online instructional modules on data usage; and (3) employing a
diverse group of graduate and undergraduate research assistants, including
members of underrepresented groups, who will develop valuable new skills in a
stimulating interdisciplinary en