* 1357060
* The Turbulence Responsible for Horizontal Surfzone Dispersion
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2014,02/28/2018
* Matthew Spydell, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 02/28/2018
* USD 230,091.00

Improved understanding of the surfzone (within a few 100 m of the shoreline)
horizontal turbulence that causes material dispersion is the goal of this
project. Poor water quality at many beaches poses health risks to beach goers
and negatively impacts local economies. Recent research has indicated that
surfzone horizontal eddies, which have length scales greater than the water
depth, mix and disperse surfzone tracers such as pollution. Although dispersion
by surfzone eddies is critical to the dilution, as well as the cross-shore
exchange of material (including larvae), how to parameterize the surfzone eddy
diffusivity in computer models is unknown. Exactly how the Eulerian properties
of the turbulence (the eddy velocity, and the eddy space and time scales) are
related to surfzone Lagrangian statistics (i.e. the dispersion and eddy
diffusivity) is unknown. Also not completely understood is how the surfzone
Eulerian eddy properties are related to the incident wave field. By analyzing
existing observations and performing model experiments, the link between
Eulerian eddy properties and dispersion will be illuminated.

Intellectual Merit: The first objective of this study is to examine surfzone
horizontal eddy properties in existing observations. As dispersion depends
critically on the velocity c, eddy length L, and eddy time scales T, and in
particular the parameter alpha = cT/L, surfzone values will be determined from
space- and time-lagged velocity autocorrelation functions. First, they will be
calculated for SandyDuck observations (Huntington Beach 2006 and Imperial Beach
2009 will also be considered to the extent possible) and observed surfzone eddy
fields will then be characterized. Small values of alpha indicate that the eddy
field changes very quickly in time and results in qualitatively different
dispersion than if the eddies are long lived (large alpha). How the observed
eddy properties depend on the incident wave field will be investigated and
whether alongshore currents change the nature of the eddy field determined.
Also, the dependence of surfzone eddies on cross-shore position will also be
calculated. In particular, as surfzone eddies are only generated within the
surfzone, whether or not the surfzone eddy field is different within and seaward
of the surfzone will be examined.

The second objective is to perform the same type of analysis done for the
observations on wave resolving and wave averaged numerical simulations of
observed (e.g. SandyDuck) conditions. Do the models reproduce the observed eddy
velocities, length and time scales even though wave averaged and wave resolving
velocity frequency-wavenumber spectra can differ significantly? This is an
important consideration as dispersion depends on the bulk properties of the
frequency-wavenumber spectra rather than its detailed shape. Model simulations
will also allow the calculation of very reliable Lagrangian statistics as
virtual drifters will be added to the model. Eulerian and Lagrangian eddy
statistics will then be compared and the relevance of an existing theory which
relates Eulerian to Lagrangian statistics, developed for isotropic homogeneous
turbulence, for the surfzone will be determined. If this theory is applicable,
the surfzone eddy diffusivity can then be inferred without explicit Lagrangian
statistics as long as the Eulerian eddy statistics are known.

Broader Impacts: At United States beaches in 2008, 7% of beach water samples
exceed national health standards and there were over 20,000 closure and advisory
days. Pollution from urban runoff often drains directly onto beaches and poses
significant health risks to swimmers. Management decisions could benefit from
better understanding of surfzone turbulence and dispersion. As part of
educational outreach efforts, the PI will collaborate with I Love A Clean San
Diego (ILACSD), a nonprofit environmental group, and assist them with the
development of their teaching materials and education program. Additionally, the
PI will provide guest presentations at selected ILACSD programs. Partnering with
ILACSD is going to have a large impact as they have provided environmental
education to 30,000 high school students (45% Title 1 or underserved) in total
and they work closely with resource managers throughout San Diego.