* 1357806
* IRES: RUI Undergraduate research on sustainable harvesting in a coral reef ecosystems
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Charles Acosta, NORTHERN KENTUCKY UNIVERSITY RESEARCH FOUNDATION (DO NOT USE)
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Dudka
* 07/31/2017
* USD 177,258.00

This project will facilitate a three-year international research experience for
U.S. undergraduates majoring in STEM disciplines. Students from a diverse
regional population will be recruited as summer cohorts to participate in an
intensive and immersive research project on fishing impacts on a remote coral
reef ecosystem off the coast of Belize. Each summer cohort will consist of a
minimum of four students who will attend preparatory seminars, travel, and work
collaboratively over a six-week period. Students will cooperate as a group but
will conduct research on a specific aspect of existing long-term ecological
studies to understand the ecology of target reef species and the impacts of
commercial fishing on their populations. This international research activity
will be coupled with intensive instruction on current marine conservation
issues, ecological field methods, quantitative techniques for analyzing
harvesting data, and the socio-economics of fishing of the Central America and
Caribbean region. The comprehensive learning experience will provide students
with unique insights into applied ecological science for marine conservation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merits of this research are aimed at
understanding, predicting, and preventing overfishing. Overfishing continues to
plague coral reef conservation efforts, and effective management is hampered by
the lack of life history data on key species and quantitative assessment models.
Cohorts of undergraduate students will collaborate on a comprehensive study of a
multi-species fishery on an isolated coral reef in Belize. Under the mentorship
of professional researchers at the Wildlife Conservation Society's Glover's Reef
Marine Research Station, each student will collect data on a specific project
designed to determine population dynamics and fishing impacts on a suite of key
commercially-valuable reef species. Students will study aspects of recruitment
to reef nursery habitats, population size structure in primary habitats in
fished and protected regions, and dispersal dynamics among reef habitats, as
well as fishing yields and fisher preferences by examining catches. Prior to
departure, students will receive broad training in marine conservation science,
marine ecological methods, statistical and mathematical modeling for data
analysis, and cultural sensitivity. After the international research experience,
students will be mentored in data analysis and will be expected to present
results at scientific conferences. Data also will be incorporated into a new
predictive model for this reef fishery. The U.S. researchers will then complete
development of a hybrid systems-dynamics/individual-based model for this
ecosystem and for further conservation assessment.