* 1357386
* Detecting genetic adaptation during marine invasions
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2014,02/28/2018
* Allan Strand, College of Charleston
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 02/28/2018
* USD 622,923.00

Overview:&lt;br/&gt;Biological introductions, defined as the establishment of
species in geographic regions outside the reach of their natural dispersal
mechanisms, have dramatically increased in frequency during the 20th century and
are now altering community structure and ecosystem function of virtually all
marine habitats. To date, studies on marine invasions focus principally on
demographic and ecological processes, and the importance of evolutionary
processes has been rarely tested. This knowledge gap has implications for
management policies, which attempt to prevent biological introductions and
mitigate their impacts. The Asian seaweed Gracilaria vermiculophylla has been
introduced to every continental margin in the Northern Hemisphere, and
preliminary data indicate that non-native populations are both more resistant to
heat stress and resistant to snail herbivory. The project will integrate
population genetics, field survey and common-garden laboratory experiments to
comprehensively address the role of rapid evolutionary adaptation in the
invasion success of this seaweed. Specifically, the PIs will answer the
following. What is the consequence of introductions on seaweed demography and
mating systems? How many successful introductions have occurred in North America
and Europe? Where did introduced propagules originate? Do native, native-source
and non-native locations differ in environmental conditions? Do native, native-
source and non-native populations differ in
phenotype?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merit of this project is based on three gaps in the literature. First, while
biological invasions are widely recognized as a major component of global
change, there are surprisingly few studies that compare native and non-native
populations in their biology or ecology. Native and non-native populations will
be surveyed in a similar manner, allowing assessment of differences in
population dynamics, mating system, epifaunal and epiphytic communities, and the
surrounding abiotic and biotic environment. Second, G. vermiculophylla exhibits
a life cycle typical of other invasive species (including some benthic
invertebrates), yet we still lack data on the effects of decoupling the haploid
and diploid stages on genetic structure, and in turn, on the evolvability of
their populations. Finally, this project will provide unequivocal evidence of an
adaptive shift in a marine invasive. To our knowledge, such evolutionary change
has been described previously for only a complex of marine copepod species. G.
vermiculophylla will serve as a model for understanding evolution in other
nuisance invasions, and perhaps lead to novel methods to counter future
invasions or their spread.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;There
are several broader impacts afforded by this project. The postdoctoral
researcher will receive extensive training in population and ecological
genetics, develop skills necessary to further development as an independent
researcher, and develop career-enhancing interpersonal skills by leading the
field trips and mentoring undergraduates. At least four undergraduates will be
recruited, all of whom will generate data and will be encouraged to pursue
independent projects. The results will be published in peer-reviewed journals
and be presented at national and international meetings of both applied and
basic scientists, during lectures and seminars at our home universities and at
other universities. Finally, a co-PI has successfully implemented after-school
hands on plant-ecology programs at the urban public library in their after-
school programming for K-5 students (http://www.cclpl.org) with undergraduate
research apprentices and collaboration with undergraduate senior education
majors. Offerings will be expanded in this after-school program by developing
hands on quantitative inquiry based modules on marine invasive species, marine
algae and other topics. Undergraduate students on this project will have the
opportunity to interact with undergraduate students in other ongoing projects in
our group (see http://arabidopsisunpak.org). Thus research students across
different areas of ecological-genetics will have the opportunity to share
experiences and expertise.