* 1357411
* Relating the Optical Properties of CDOM within the Ocean Basins to Source and Structure
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2017
* Neil Blough, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 12/31/2017
* USD 500,441.00

Chromophoric dissolved organic matter (CDOM) is optically measured material in
the oceans resulting from the degradation of organic matter. While the
importance of CDOM in the optical properties and biogeochemistry of marine
waters has been well established over the last several decades, the source and
structure of this material within the ocean basins remains unclear. Some studies
indicate that CDOM is produced primarily in situ from either the chemical or
biological processing of marine materials, while others have provided evidence
that CDOM is primarily a remnant of terrestrial matter that has been diluted and
modified during transit to and within the oceans. In this study, researchers
from the University of Maryland Center for Environmental Studies will use
complete spectral absorption and emission properties combined with chemical and
mass spectral tests on samples from the North Pacific Ocean to determine the
source and structure of CDOM. The results will be compared with those previously
acquired, or to be acquired, from the Delaware Bay, the Middle Atlantic Bight,
and the Equatorial Atlantic. By employing this multifaceted approach, the
researchers will significantly advance our knowledge of
CDOM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project will provide support
for graduate and undergraduate student training, and results will be broadly
disseminated through peer-reviewed research publications and presentations at
national meetings, where student-led presentations will be emphasized.