* 1357113
* IRES: U.S. - Australia International Research Experience for Students: Materials for Energy Storage and Transduction
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2018
* Jacob Jones, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 09/30/2018
* USD 249,203.00

Non-technical explanation

This IRES integrates several academic and research programs at three research-
intensive institutions including North Carolina State University (NCSU),
Pennsylvania State University (PSU), and the University of New South Wales
(UNSW) in Australia. Under the direction of a UNSW foreign mentor, each of six
student participants will complete a 10-week individual research project that
contributes to the overall research theme. The newly established Center for
Dielectrics and Piezoelectrics, a collaboration between NCSU, PSU and corporate
members, will also be leveraged in order to provide thematic research projects
and training experiences that are of broad interest, additional presentation
opportunities for students, and complementary undergraduate research
opportunities in the U.S.

A global sustainable energy future requires the advancement and implementation
of new materials for energy storage and conversion and the concomitant
development of scientists and engineers who exercise an ability to see bigger
problems and create global solutions. The unifying research theme of Materials
for Energy Storage and Transduction will promote the development of sustainable
energy technologies and human capital in this area of global need. The IRES
project develops human capital in the sustainable energy sector and advances the
understanding of phenomena and materials that underpin sustainable energy
technologies. Through their projects and activities, U.S. students are trained
to be global scientists and engineers who leverage global resources and seek
diverse perspectives and expertise. The activities also establish an
international network of cooperating scientists and engineers from three
different research-intensive institutions on topics of high societal relevance.
The marketing and recruitment activities of the project will enable and
encourage applications from the most competitive and diverse student applicants.
Through these activities, the project will continue a strong track record by the
investigators of engaging women and persons from underrepresented groups in
undergraduate and graduate research projects. The results of the work will be
broadly disseminated at national and international conferences and undergraduate
research symposia and published in core, disciplinary journals.

Technical description

Student research projects will be focused on material polarization phenomena
that enable the storage of electrical charge and its conversion between
mechanical, thermal, and other forms of energy. The dielectric and piezoelectric
materials that rely on polarization phenomena are critical to a variety of
energy systems ranging from the small (microelectromechanical, microelectronic,
and wireless communication systems) to the large (electric cars and smart
grids). To accomplish their projects, students will be trained in and utilize
state-of-the-art instrumentation and modeling approaches at UNSW including, for
example, scanning probe microscopy, cathodoluminescence spectroscopy, X-ray
diffuse scattering, confocal laser scanning probe microscopy, and density
functional theory modeling. In addition to their foreign mentors, the students
will interact with faculty and academics at NCSU and PSU who have a vested
interest in advancing knowledge and training students in these research areas.