* 1357620
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in DRMS:  The Consumer Logic of Anti-Government Antagonism
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2014,02/29/2016
* Ethan Porter, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 02/29/2016
* USD 29,965.00

This research addresses a persistent puzzle across the social sciences: What
explains Americans' opposition to government? That is to say, why do Americans
evince comparatively low support for redistributive programs, register
decreasing trust in government, and offer electoral support to increasingly
regressive tax schemes? The projects tests a novel causal explanation, grounded
in behavioral economics and social psychology. The explanation proposes that,
when evaluating government, citizens import the same consumer frameworks they
rely on when making everyday consumer decisions. In other words, they treat
government as just another consumer good. Such a framework is inherently ill-
equipped to grapple with some of the benefits that government provides. Citizens
conclude that government is providing them low "transaction utility" -- that
they are getting a raw deal. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research expands on
preliminary results to investigate the relationships among transaction utility
as it is derived from government, attitudes toward government, and compliance
with government rules and norms. Specially, the projects involves three
experiments, one in the field and two over the Internet. The survey experiments
evaluate the relationship between perceived costs and perceived benefits, and
opposition to government. The field experiment tests the relationship between
perceived costs and benefits and compliance with government rules and norms. The
research relies on insights from behavioral economics, consumer psychology,
political science and sociology to answer a question that has bedeviled scholars
from across those disciplines. In so doing, the research will chart an
interdisciplinary course to help public servants better communicate with
citizens.