* 1357419
* I-Corps:  Printable Photovoltaics
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2013,03/31/2014
* Brian Korgel, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 03/31/2014
* USD 50,000.00

This project will focus on inorganic nanocrystal ink-based manufacturing of thin
film, light-weight and mechanically flexible photovoltaic devices. There has
been tremendous effort focused on developing organic materials for these
applications, but organics still suffer from low efficiencies and very poor
stability, especially under sunlight. Inorganic inks offer a solution to these
problems, but their development has not been nearly as extensive. The key
advantage of inorganic nanocrystal inks is that thin films of proven inorganic
semiconductors can be deposited with the potential for high device efficiency
and stable performance of long time periods. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This new
materials system could impact the solar cell industry, enabling significant
reduction in manufacturing cost compared to standard high temperature vacuum
processes that are used now. There are few, if any, technology solutions for
portable and integrated solar cells nor are there photovoltaic devices that can
be wrapped in a seamless way. This technology has the potential to create a new
low-cost solar cell technology that can be employed on various substrates,
including plastics and fabrics. Providing a low-cost photovoltaic device that
could be integrated into other products has applications in the aerospace and
automotive industries as well as for military purposes.