* 1357872
* Sustainable Funding and Business Models for Academic Cyberinfrastructure (CI) Facilities Workshop II
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2014
* David Lifka, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Irene Qualters
* 09/30/2014
* USD 40,872.00

This award to Cornell University funds a workshop to be hosted by The Coalition
for Academic Scientific Computation (CASC). The CASC community is the primary
provider of advanced computing for the nation's academic researchers who require
access to both high-end computing resources and expertise. Participants are
leaders in advanced computing infrastructure at campus, regional, and national
levels. Units that provide campus cyberinfrastructure (CI) face the challenges
and opportunities of a dynamic technical frontier that must facilitate
collaborations and operations at local, national, and international levels. At
the same time, campus CI face common challenges regarding implementing viable
and sustainable economic models. Within this dynamic and challenging
environment, this workshop offers a rare opportunity to engage leaders from
academia, industry, and funding agencies to share and contrast emerging CI
challenges, opportunities, and solutions. Campus CI, while unique to an academic
institution and reflective of different institutional priorities, often share
common operating models, technical challenges, and financial realities. This
workshop offers an innovative and agile leadership group the opportunity to
anticipate, compare and contrast various approaches to common CI challenges and
opportunities, both technical and economic. Topics of discussion include
shifting research and education drivers and their infrastructure requirements;
the role of state and federal agencies in CI funding; high-tech workforce and
staff development; and, planning for a productive and efficient future at all
levels of CI in the midst of growing infrastructure requirements, disruptive
technologies, and increased competition for funding.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Campus cyberinfrastructure, while unique to an academic
institution and reflective of different institutional priorities, often share
common operating models, technical challenges, and economic realities.
Cyberinfrastructure includes not only computing and data storage resources but
also scientific instruments such as telescopes, gene sequencers, and distributed
sensor networks. This workshop offers an innovative and agile group of U.S.
cyberinfrastructure leaders an opportunity to anticipate, compare and contrast
various approaches to the common challenges and opportunities in providing
cyberinfrastructure services and resources, both technical and economic.