* 1357375
* P-NEXFS investigation of the influence of aerosol phosphorus on the Mediterranean Sea
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Julia Diaz, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 07/31/2018
* USD 288,928.00

Primary nutrients, such as nitrogen and phosphorus, are critical for all life on
earth, and limited quantities in the marine environment can inhibit primary
productivity. Atmospheric aerosols are a significant source of these nutrients
to nutrient-poor ocean regions, such as the phosphorus-limited Mediterranean
Sea. The availability of phosphorus in aerosols has traditionally been linked to
the composition and abundance of different phosphorus phases present.
Unfortunately, investigating phosphorus composition in aerosols has been
challenging due to methodological limitations until recently. In this study,
researchers from Georgia Tech will use a new technique known as synchrotron-
based P Near Edge X-ray Fluorescence Spectroscopy, in conjunction with X-ray
fluorescence microscopy, to examine the diversity of aerosol phosphorus phases
delivered to the Mediterranean Sea. By defining the relationship between air
mass source region, aerosol composition, and bioavailability, results from this
work will improve current knowledge of the factors regulating productivity in
the Mediterranean Sea and help to clarify the potential response of this region
to different climate change scenarios.

Broader Impacts: In addition to the valuable insights this project will provide
on the controls on productivity and nutrient cycling in the Mediterranean Sea,
this study will further education of young scientists, broaden participation of
under-represented groups in ocean science, and enhance research infrastructure.