* 1357649
* EAGER:   A Non-Boussinesq, Non-Incompressible Framework for Studying Atmospheric Turbulence
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2014,06/30/2017
* Cristina Archer, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Edward L. Bensman
* 06/30/2017
* USD 111,629.00

A new theoretical framework for studying atmospheric turbulence is introduced,
which challenges two of the most widely-used assumptions: the incompressibility
of air and the Boussinesq approximation. The incompressible assumption is
represented mathematically by the conservation of density following an air
parcel and implies that the flow field is non-divergent. With the Boussinesq
approximation, air density can be replaced by a constant, uniform value in all
terms of the momentum equation, except for the gravity term. Both assumptions
are generally valid in atmospheric flows and have the great benefit that they
simplify noticeably the system of equations and their closures. However, the
real atmosphere is neither incompressible nor homogeneous. Compressibility
effects may be especially important in the proximity of wind turbines, whose
rotor tips move at speeds that are close to Mach number of ~0.3, the limit for
the incompressible assumption. Also, the majority of numerical mesoscale models
used for routine weather forecasting are compressible. Given today's powerful
and inexpensive computer systems, it seems time to step away from un-necessary
assumptions and attempt to resolve "real" turbulent air flows, which are
compressible and not homogeneous.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this new framework,
the air incompressibility and the Boussinesq approximation are tossed and
replaced by a simple, less-restrictive, new assumption: that air density is not
turbulent. Whereas wind velocity, temperature, and pressure are turbulent and
therefore they can be decomposed into a mean (or resolved) and a fluctuating (or
eddy) component, air density is assumed to be varying slowly enough in time that
its eddy component is zero. This simply means that air density responds to flow
changes slower than the other meteorological variables, in such a way that it is
fully resolved at the grid resolution and time step of the simulations and
without chaotic, turbulent fluctuations below those temporal and spatial scales.
Because under such an assumption density would remain 4-D (as opposed to 0-D as
with the Boussinesq approximation), such a flow is not incompressible by design,
because air density changes with time following a parcel, and the Boussinesq
approximation becomes moot. The relevant equations need to be rewritten
entirely, but, surprisingly, they remain very similar to their incompressible
and Boussinesq counterparts, except for one additional term each in the momentum
and in the continuity equations. These terms are easy to calculate numerically
because they depend only on mean-flow properties and do not require any new
closure or parameterization. The Large-Eddy Simulation (LES) model WiTTS (Wind
Turbine and Turbulence Simulator), recently developed in-house at the University
of Delaware, will be modified and tested with and without the new framework to
evaluate the magnitude of the compressible effects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Impacts
can occur in the wind industry, which currently relies on incompressible and
Boussinesq LES codes to understand the deleterious effects of turbine wakes on
the performance of wind turbines located further downstream. Even if
incompressibility errors are just ~5-10%, understanding compressibility in
turbulent wakes will allow them to reduce wake losses and optimize wind turbine
layout, which could introduce savings of the order of millions of dollars over
the lifetime of a wind project and therefore lower energy prices. Lastly, as
wind farms are becoming increasingly widespread and more people live near a wind
farm, understanding mixing of temperature, humidity, pollutants and dust induced
by turbine wakes, as well as their sound waves, can positively impact the health
and well-being of people who live in the proximity of wind turbines. Because
this framework is transformative and challenges the "status-quo" of turbulence
theory, it fits well with EAGER.