* 1357995
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: Public Funding of Sanitation Infrastructure:  An analysis of Voter Behavior and Health Outcomes
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2014,07/31/2015
* Philip Hoffman, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Hyun Hong
* 07/31/2015
* USD 14,985.00

Clean water and sewers are essential for economic development. But how the
provision of such sanitation infrastructure is affected by political
institutions remains unknown, even though classic theoretical results predict
more spending on clean water and sewers as governments become democratic.
However, these theoretical papers, as well as most empirical studies, focus on
government redistribution. They ignore the very real possibility that demand for
sanitary infrastructure is increasing in income, and if it is, then democracy
could be associated with less spending on clean water and sewers, particularly
when the poor get the right to vote. Using an original data set, the proposed
research seeks to resolve this issue by studying how government investment in
sanitation infrastructure is shaped by the extension of voting rights to the
poor and its consequences for health and mortality
rates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The data set comes from Britain in the years
1870-1914. Nineteenth-century Britain offers a valuable opportunity for testing
how political institutions influenced government spending on sanitation
infrastructure. The rapid urbanization accompanying the Industrial Revolution
overwhelmed existing sanitary infrastructure, and left local governments facing
new demands for public goods that they were ill-equipped to handle. The study
exploits variation in the size of the electorate over time and across towns to
test the effects of extending the franchise on the level of sanitary investment
and mortality. This project constructs a new comprehensive annual dataset of
mortality, sanitary investment and the extent of the franchise at town-level. In
addition to testing the effect of political institutions on infrastructure
spending, the dataset will also be used to identify the importance of sanitary
investment for the decline in mortality rates during the period, which will shed
light on the ability of subnational governments to counter the health
consequences of urbanization. Further, the study will complement recent work by
economic historians in measuring and explaining growth in government capacity at
the local level and hence, importantly, investments in sanitation
infrastructure. At the conclusion of the project efforts will be made to make
the data publicly available through the Global Price and Incomes History group
or the IPCSR.