* 1357619
* Scalable Model-Based Inference for Social Networks from Complex Sampling Designs
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* Mark Handcock, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 07/31/2018
* USD 212,500.00

This project will develop new statistical methodology for the analysis of social
networks from hard-to-study populations. This new methodology is expected to
result in more robust and statistically valid inferences from data on hard-to-
study populations. Traditional approaches to surveys do not work well when the
population under study is hard to find. Typical reasons are that the individuals
within the population are hard to identify within a larger population, or the
population is stigmatized and individuals therefore are less likely to
participate in the survey. In these cases, traditional methods are very
expensive to apply. Examples of such populations are unregulated workers, the
self-employed, new migrants, the homeless, and injection drug users. For such
populations, surveyors are starting to employ methods that use the network of
social relations amongst the population to facilitate participation in the
survey. While these methods are an effective way to collect data, it is a
challenge to make scientifically valid conclusions from data collected in this
way. This new methodology will be applied to a popular survey approach that is
used, for example, in public health departments across the globe to estimate
rates of HIV and other diseases. The methods and software developed as part of
this project have the potential to impact the disease rates estimated by public
health units and the policy decisions based on them.

Data about social networks reflect both emerging social structures and the lens
through which they are observed. There is a dearth of statistical methodology
for the collection and analysis of network data that enable understanding the
implications of these social structures. This project will further the
development of a general model-based framework for the analysis of social
networks in situations where the network is partially unobserved. The research
will develop scalable, composite, likelihood-based inference for a class of
models known as exponential-family random network models (ERNM). This work will
increase the range of applicability of these models. The investigators will
develop an ERNM-based likelihood model for respondent-driven sampling (RDS) and
new, richer designs, such as privatized network sampling. The model will be
validated via Monte Carlo simulation studies over a range of network sizes.
Secondary analyses of existing RDS datasets also will be conducted. Overall, the
research will provide a basis for scientific estimation in situations where the
social relations and/or individual characteristics either are not evident due to
the sampling design or non-response mechanisms. This will allow for the analysis
of data collected using new sampling designs that use social relationships to
improve statistical efficiency and robustness.