* 1357296
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: An Anthropological Investigation of the Relationship between Values, Land Use Decisions, and Market-based Mechanisms
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2014,10/31/2015
* Theodore Gragson, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 10/31/2015
* USD 20,633.00

This research will focus on how private landowner values and land-use decisions
relate to market-based mechanisms. The research will take place in the Bellbird
Biological Corridor (CBPC) located in western Costa Rica, an appropriate setting
for the work as this is a mixed-use planning region designed to encourage
sustainable development through market-based mechanisms including nature tourism
and payments for environmental services. Market-based conservation programs can
improve some indicators of ecological health and rural livelihoods, but the
mischaracterization of landowner values can have the paradoxical effect of
increasing landscape degradation.

The research integrates the nonmarket valuation method of a stated choice
experiment with ethnographic data from semi-structured interviews and focus
groups to arrive at a comprehensive understanding of the relation between
landowner values, land-use decisions, and the ecological integrity of the
landscape. Geographically weighted regression will be used to examine the
strength and variation in biophysical and socioeconomic drivers of forest growth
and relate this information to national and local sustainable development goals.

By combining quantitative and qualitative methodologies, this research will
intellectually contribute to understanding how market economics impact human
well-being. Through its attention to spatial scale, it will demonstrate how
individuals and communities position themselves to interact with market-based
mechanisms. The broader impacts of this research extend to environmental
education, tourism regulation, and payment for environmental services programing
activities being organized within the CBPC. It will also catalyze a new
initiative between the University of Georgia and the Bellbird Biological
Corridor to foster training opportunities for undergraduate and graduate
students across the region.