* 1357607
* Computational Methods for Inference in Nonstandard Testing Problems
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2014,11/30/2017
* Adam McCloskey, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 11/30/2017
* USD 183,797.00

This research will develop novel inference procedures for nonstandard hypothesis
testing problems that have garnered significant interest among econometricians
and statisticians. The first type of nonstandard problems on which it will focus
is broadly applicable in fields ranging from industrial organization to finance.
Examples include comparisons of competing forecasting models and inference in
moment inequality models that seek to reduce heavy assumptions imposed by the
researcher. The second type on which it will focus is applicable in nearly all
applied fields of the social sciences. For instance, some form of model
selection typically is used before a researcher reports the relationships
between economic variables estimated from a linear regression model. The
pervasiveness of both types of these problems presents substantial challenges to
inference in practice. However, their nonstandard nature often is ignored by
applied researchers, in part due to the computational complexity required of
valid inference. By introducing computationally simplifying techniques founded
in new theoretical results, the methods to be developed in this project should
further broaden the scope of interest in these nonstandard problems among both
econometric theorists and applied researchers, because they will avail
sophisticated test construction methods to end-users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project focuses on two leading classes of nonstandard hypothesis testing
problems in econometrics characterized by parameter-discontinuous limit
distributions. Though much progress has been made with regard to introducing
procedures that uniformly control asymptotic size in these contexts, the
computational burden of such procedures can be a major obstacle to their
implementation. This research seeks to develop methods to overcome this
practical limitation. The first class of these testing problems involves a null
hypothesis characterized by a finite number of inequalities. In order to
maintain correct asymptotic size and maximize a power criterion, existing
approaches to test construction in this context require repeated maximization
over an uncountably infinite number of simulated null rejection probabilities.
This research will establish theoretical results that substantially reduce the
computational burden of test construction by reducing the required search space
of null rejection probabilities to a finite set of points. The second class of
testing problems involves inference after model selection in the linear
regression model. Asymptotically valid tests are to be constructed quite
differently under conservative and consistent model selection and the
computation of tests under consistent selection can be substantially simpler.
The project seeks to exploit the relative computational ease of testing after
consistent model selection and establish computationally feasible, powerful, and
size-correct testing procedures for inference after model selection.