* 1357992
* EPRI: Vortex-Generator Arrays for Air-Cooled Condensers in Electric Power Generation
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2017
* Anthony Jacobi, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Ying Sun
* 05/31/2017
* USD 266,767.00

1357992 Jacobi

This project is part of a jointly funded effort by the National Science
Foundation and the Electric Power Research Institute to develop new electric
power generation systems that use much less water than do current power
generating plants. It is hard to overstate the importance of electric power
generation and distribution to modern societies, and it is clear that growing
power demands must be met within the constraints of limited resources and with
reduced environmental impact. Water is a key national resource, and the water
used in thermal-electric power plants represents 40% of the total annual draw
from fresh-water supplies in the United States. Almost all of this water is used
for cooling steam after it passes through the steam-turbine generators in the
power plant-this approach usually uses a cooling tower. An approach that cools
the steam without using water in a cooling tower exists; it relies on so-called
"Air-Cooled Condensers." Unfortunately, this technology increases the cost of
the power plant by up to five times, compared to a cooling-tower system. The
cost of electricity would rise sharply, were power plants required to use
current technology to save the cooling water. A new approach is needed to save
water and hold down the price of electricity, and this project is aimed at
providing the needed breakthrough.

The main idea is to use small wing-like structures (called vortex generators) on
a heat exchanger where steam is cooled by air. The vortex generators create a
strong swirling flow in the air used to cool the steam. Through this project the
potential of vortex generators to enhance the performance of air-cooled
condensers will be evaluated, and the fundamental knowledge needed to use them
effectively will be acquired. This new knowledge will lead to a new technology,
an electric power generation system which provides reliable, inexpensive
electricity and eliminates the need for drawing precious fresh water from our
limited supplies to do so.