* 1357151
* The Economic Effects of Caring for Adult Family Members
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Rebecca Glauber, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Toby Parcel
* 07/31/2018
* USD 102,553.00

This project explores the effects of caring for adult family members on
caregivers' economic well-being. In the US, nearly one in four people care for
an adult family member, partner, or friend, and the number is expected to rise.
Research has yielded a wealth of information on the health outcomes of providing
care, but we know less about the economic ramifications of providing
care.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Drawing on nationally-representative, longitudinal
data from the Health and Retirement Study, the project answers the following
questions: How does caring for an elderly family member - a spouse or elderly
parent - affect caregivers' employment decisions, earnings, savings, and wealth?
Do the effects differ for men and women, and what are the sources of such
differences? Do these different experiences have different effects on women's
and men's employment decisions and economic outcomes? Do the effects differ by
socioeconomic status? Do those with fewer resources, for example, take more time
off from work and pay larger earnings penalties? There are a range of possible
responses to caregiving dilemmas. This project explores these choices and their
economic ramifications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The findings from this project
enhance our understanding work, family, and aging. Insights gained through this
project could aid in understanding how to provide support for caregivers and
their care recipients. The project also includes graduate and undergraduate
students in all phases of the research, which helps to produce the next
generation of scientists and citizens who can meet the needs of our 21st century
aging society.