* 1357869
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Improving management of wildlife poaching risks: Using perceptions of risk and situational crime prevention to protect endangered wildlife
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2014,10/31/2015
* Meredith Gore, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 10/31/2015
* USD 28,500.00

This research assesses poaching risks associated with endangered wildlife,
examines stakeholder perceptions of risk, and measures situational factors
associated with poaching-related crimes. Wildlife poaching is a global risk that
threatens biological, ecological, economic, sociocultural and security systems.
The situation of African rhinoceroses and the communities and countries that
manage them provide an appropriate context to study the poaching of endangered
wildllife. The rhinoceroses and the places that manage them are facing increases
in the risks from the recent upsurge in poaching. In Namibia the rural economy
is heavily tied to wildlife resources through hunting for subsistence and trophy
purposes, as well as ecotourism. Rhinoceros poaching translates into significant
stolen benefits and decreased security for rural communities. This research
merges theory from risk and decision sciences, criminology, and natural resource
management to generate novel understandings about managing this global
environmental risk. The objectives of this research are to: (1) develop, test
and validate an integrated model of wildlife-related risk perception, and (2)
evaluate the situational crime prevention approach as a tool to manage wildlife
poaching risks. The researcher collects from individual surveys, existing
enforcement data, focus groups within management units (e.g., community-based
management areas, private reserves, national parks), and with wildlife
stakeholders (e.g., ecotourism operators, professional hunters) and enforcement
professionals (e.g., police officers, traditional authorities).&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Results have broad theoretical, methodological, and practical
implications for understanding and managing environmental crimes and risks.
Implications extend beyond the case of wildlife poaching to other global
environmental risks such as illegal fishing or logging. First, the study
provides an empirical test of methods and theories in risk and decision
sciences, natural resource management, and criminology outside the typical
western, developed-country context. Second, the knowledge that emerges from this
research will provide pragmatic, theory-based analysis of situational factors
affecting environmental crimes. Understanding these factors is key for tailoring
a suit of risk management responses that most effectively reduce the conditions
that facilitate poaching activities. Lastly, this research generates new
methodological and theoretical tools that can be used by researchers and
practitioners to study poaching of other species in different contexts.