* 1357073
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: An Anthropological Analysis of Agroecology, State Incentive Practices, and Sustainable Agriculture Initiatives
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2014,10/31/2015
* Justine Williams, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 10/31/2015
* USD 22,878.00

Justine Williams, under the supervision of Dr. Dorothy Holland of the University
of North Carolina at Chapel Hill will investigate the conditions under which
systems of agroecological farming can flourish. Although an increasing number of
government and non-governmental organizations are recognizing the urgency of
promoting environmentally sustainable agriculture, local farmers continue to
face many challenges in farming this way, not the least of which includes the
forces of the global economy. Through ethnographic investigation and mixed
qualitative and quantitative analysis, this research examines the interaction of
cultural, political and economic forces in shaping the realities of farming and
the perspectives of farmers. Through in-depth interviews, fixed answer surveys,
and 12 months of participant participation, the researcher will explore how
agricultural organizations in one site attempt to promote social and individual
commitments to agroecology through the creation of communities, collective
learning experiences and public recognition of success. The project seeks to
answer the questions: What kinds of farmers are most likely to develop enduring
commitments to sustainable agriculture? What actions can agricultural
organizations take to increase this number? And finally, how can agricultural
organizations create "sustainable farmer" identities? The research will use the
diverse set of farmers, and three prominent agriculture organizations that
interact with them, as a case study. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project brings a
social theory and cultural perspective to bear on a research field that is often
dominated by economic studies. In taking advantage of the researcher's academic
and agricultural contacts, it provides unique international insight into
questions of global importance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project sets the stage
for international learning opportunities for the researcher's future
undergraduate and graduate students. The researcher will also draw on her
previous experience in public communications to disperse and clearly explain
findings to a wider body of people outside of academia including agricultural
organizations, policy makers and the general public.