* 1357434
* The vertical propagation of internal waves through the ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2014,02/28/2017
* Thomas Peacock, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 02/28/2017
* USD 268,160.00

Overview: The vertical propagation of internal waves through a wide range of
density stratifications and vertical shear structures of the ocean is an
important problem in physical oceanography. A pressing matter is to develop a
better understanding of the flow of internal wave energy that propagates down
towards the deep ocean from the base of the mixed layer, as this has the
potential to impact ocean mixing and thus play a role in influencing ocean
circulation and climate. This issue is currently being very actively pursued in
regards to near-inertial waves in the Arctic Ocean due to the retreating summer
ice. At present, however, the conclusions of large-scale numerical models are at
odds with the observed seasonal cycle of near-inertial wave energy in the deep
ocean. Furthermore, there are other potentially important scenarios such as the
energy-flux and fate of high-frequency internal waves excited by Langmuir
circulation, and the transmission and reflection properties of complex double-
diffusive staircase structures, about which little is currently known.

Intellectual Merit: The intellectual merit of this project is in the advancement
and utilization of a semi-analytical method to reasonably model the propagation
of internal waves through arbitrary stratifications and vertical shear. The
method is designed to handle the challenging scenarios that can arise in the
ocean, in which the vertical scale of variations in the stratification and shear
are comparable to the vertical wavelength of the transiting internal waves. The
theoretical model will be systematically validated for increasingly complex
scenarios through comparison with laboratory experiments and numerical
simulations. The laboratory experiments and numerical model will enable
investigations of nonlinear regimes the linear theoretical model cannot access.
The modeling effort will be closely coordinated with past, present and future
field studies of the North Pacific and Arctic Ocean via a number of
collaborations, keeping it grounded in what happens in the ocean, and both the
Principal Investigator and his graduate student will participate in a 2015 NSF-
funded field study.

Broader Impacts: The broader impact of this research is insight into the
propagation and dissipation of internal waves through complex ocean
stratifications, thereby supporting investigations of mechanisms that influence
ocean mixing. Specifically, the investigators will improve understanding of, and
the ability to predict, the downward propagation and instability of internal
waves from the base of the mixed layer and through double-diffusive staircase
stratifications. The validated theoretical method, prepared as a MATLAB GUI with
user guide and made freely available, will provide a new tool for interpreting
field data and assisting in the planning of field studies. The project will
support the training of a graduate student, an undergraduate researcher and part
of the training of a postdoc at MIT. Graduate students, postdocs and faculty at
WHOI, Yale and University of Washington will also be trained in the theoretical
method. A fellow of the WHOI Geophysical Fluid Dynamics summer program will be
recruited to participate in experiments, and MIT-WHOI Joint Program students
will be recruited to produce short and inspiring educational videos on the ocean
through collaboration with the MIT+K12 program. The theoretical method and
experiments will be incorporated in a graduate course on environmental fluid
dynamics. The results of this study will be disseminated through journal
articles, invited seminars and a website.