* 1357034
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Short-Term Health Care Providers and Network Structure
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2015
* Clarence Gravlee, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 12/31/2015
* USD 23,100.00

University of Florida doctoral student Jessica-Jean Casler, supervised by Dr.
Clarence C. Gravlee, will explore how networks of health care access and
delivery are shaped by programs designed to improve the relationship between
patient and provider. The research will focus on the role of short-term health
care providers (STHPs). Short-term health care providers (such as medical school
student brigades) supplement local and state health care services in many lower-
income countries. Even with these additional providers however; the inability to
access adequate health care largely continues to affect the poor. Annual
influxes of short-term health care providers in lower-income countries suggest
that health care systems may be changing structurally and with them the ways
that patients and providers use health care services. This study will provide a
timely contribution to this global issue by examining: (1) how patients and
providers use short-term health care providers (STHPs), (2) whether the informal
structure of providers? networks resemble patient networks, and (3) the role of
STHPs in patients? health care networks.

To meet these goals, the Co-PI will recruit 30 households in Matagalpa,
Nicaragua representative of the socioeconomic, familial, and geographic
diversity in the city to participate in the study. The site itself is chosen
because of the high concentration of American medical students that visit it
during an STHP trip. Households will be visited bi-monthly over a period of
eight months as Ms. Casler the researcher conducts in-depth ethnographic
interviews with her participants and also records their most recent usage of
health care services. The Co-PI will map and interview all local health care
providers (as identified by the community), collecting information about how
they refer patients to different health care providers within the system. Using
this information the Co-PI will be able to create network usage patterns for
both patients and providers, determining any similarities between the networks
and identifying the role of STHPs in one of Nicaragua?s urban health care
systems.

This research is important because it will contribute to the development of
theory in both medical anthropology and the anthropology of development by
mapping patients' and providers' use of health care providers within larger
health care networks in a local setting. This study specifically explores the
relatively recent addition of STHPs to health care systems of the poor and will
also contribute to interdisciplinary social science research on health care
systems. Findings will also suggest how urban health care systems could more
efficiently use and organize the providers that typically comprise them. The
project also supports the training of a graduate student.