* 1357097
* Collaborative Research LTREB Renewal: Tropical rain forest ecosystem responses to climatic forcings
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/2014,02/28/2019
* James Kellner, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 02/28/2019
* USD 43,529.00

How tropical rain forests respond to rising temperatures and carbon dioxide
levels in the air has major implications for global climate change and
biodiversity conservation. Over the last 50 years, annual increases in
atmospheric carbon dioxide have been strongly affected by changes in the amount
of carbon stored in the land tropics, with greater tropical carbon dioxide
emitted from the forest in warmer years. Warming has been rapid across the
tropics and is intensifying, and the next five year period is likely to bring
new records. In spite of the global importance of tropical rain forests, there
are few field data to assess the sensitivity of these forests to changing
climate. The research in this project will extend for a further five years the
longest running study of tropical rain forest productivity and dynamics and
their relation to climate. The research is located in old-growth lowland rain
forest at La Selva, Costa Rica, in a network of plots designed for making
measurements at the landscape scale. The measurements are continuous since 1997
and will provide a further five years of annual field measurements of carbon
storage in the forests, and of how the forests are responding to changing
climate. Previous research in this project has shown strong negative effects of
increased temperature and drought stress, while positive effects of increases in
atmospheric carbon dioxide on forest productivity are by comparison very small.
Further measurements will enable researchers to address important and unanswered
questions about the future of tropical rain forests on a warmer plant with
higher levels of carbon dioxide.

The broader scientific impacts of this project include extensive research
training and development of unique long-term datasets. Already dozens of
undergraduates, graduate students and post-docs have participated. The project
has produced almost 100 peer reviewed publications and theses and has provided
the datasets needed to stimulate other related research. The next five years
will bring continued development of the project website as a principal tool for
completely open global access to all of the project data. In addition, the
researchers will continue to develop collaborations with educational and non-
governmental organizations to encourage use of project data in broader general
public settings.