* 1357139
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Role of Housing Stakeholders in the Recovery of the U.S. Housing Market
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2014,11/30/2015
* Andrew Orta, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 11/30/2015
* USD 21,705.00

Ms. Elizabeth Youngling, under the supervision of Dr. Andrew Orta of the
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign will explore how networks of
stakeholders work to redeem values diminished by economic crisis. In the wake of
the mortgage crisis, the project asks how variously positioned housing
stakeholders (realtors, mortgage bankers, housing counselors, and homeowners)
come together to redeem the social and economic value of homeownership in the
post-2008 economic environment. The research will be conducted in Chicago,
Illinois, a city still struggling with the long-term effects of the mortgage
crisis. Focusing on the daily practices of housing professionals and the
homeowners they serve, the researcher will conduct twelve months of research at
key sites in the production and promotion of homeownership: mortgage banks,
realty offices, and housing organizations. Her research methods will include
semi-structured interviews, participant observation, focus groups, and textual
analysis of documents related to the history of homeownership in the United
States since the Great Depression.

By framing the housing market as a meeting point for different values,
interests, and scales of action, the research explores the intersections between
macro-level financial processes and their micro-level effects. The study will
contribute to scholarship on the political and cultural economies of
homeownership, social mobility, holistic understandings of social and economic
value, and role of economic institutions in shaping everyday life. The broader
impact of the project lies in its attention to the post-crisis reproduction and
transformation of the U.S. housing market, which has been an essential component
of U.S. economic prosperity and social mobility for over half a century. The
research will inform our understanding of the inner workings of a key dimension
of the U.S economy and society during a period of cultural, political, and
economic change. The results will be made available to academic, practitioner,
and general audiences.