* 1357327
* Collaborative research:   Nearshore larval transport: physical and biological processes
* GEO,OCE
* 01/15/2014,12/31/2018
* Nathalie Reyns, University of San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 12/31/2018
* USD 342,987.00

Providing an award for this study will provide essential knowledge required for
management of coastal resources. This study addresses near shore cross-shore
larval transport processes that operate over wide geographic areas in open coast
settings, namely larval transport by wave circulation / Stokes drift, and by
internal tidal bores. Larval transport by wave circulation / Stokes drift is a
ubiquitous process that has not been studied observationally, and it is not
known how internal tidal bores deliver larvae to intertidal habitats. This
project will examine near shore (region between 20 m depth and intertidal)
physical and biological processes that account for the delivery of larvae to
adult habitats. The study system in Southern California shares similarities with
most other temperate areas and we will study marine taxa that are widely
distributed and successful in a variety of environments.

Intellectual Merit: Recent studies suggest that larval transport in the near
shore zone plays a central role in larval dispersal and connectivity of shallow
water species. These recent advances, however, have not been matched with
process-oriented studies addressing circulation and behavioral processes at the
appropriate temporal and spatial scales, and only a few larval transport
mechanisms have been considered for near shore open coastlines. Recent advances
in our understanding of hydrodynamic processes driving cross-shore flows and
growing awareness of the importance of the processes to larval transport,
however, make this study timely. The investigators hypothesize that a series of
physical and biological events results in the delivery of invertebrate larvae to
the intertidal habitat. These events include physical transport due to wave
circulation / Stokes drift near the surface and internal tide circulation near
the bottom, alteration of behavior for terminal larval stages, and larval use of
"adaptive" behavioral responses to exploit event-dependent flows. Further, they
suggest that the predominance of wave circulation / Stokes drift and internal
tide circulation varies seasonally, with internal tidal bores important in
spring/summer, when the water column is well-stratified, and wave circulation /
Stokes drift more pervasive in fall/winter, coinciding with winter storms. The
hypotheses in this study will be tested with estimates of physical transport,
larval supply and settlement. These measurements will be combined with use of
adaptive sampling to test the dependence of larval vertical distribution on
changes in hydrodynamic conditions.

Broader Impacts: Results from this study will have important ecological
implications as wave circulation / Stokes drift and internal motions may
represent critical and regular transport mechanisms for larvae of marine
organisms that must return to near shore habitats to complete their life cycle,
thereby impacting population connectivity and management strategies used by
coastal planners (e.g., ecosystem-based fisheries management, placement of
Marine Protected Areas). The investigators will disseminate their results to the
public through lectures and the development of a website. Furthermore, this
project has a strong educational component, involving undergraduate and/or
graduate students from two institutions (WHOI and University of San Diego). The
research will be integrated into courses taught by all co-PIs at their
respective institutions, but an integral component of this research is to
enhance student experiential learning with cutting-edge research experiences at
USD (a liberal-arts university). Sampling as part of this project will be
incorporated into a field-based Marine Community Ecology course for upper-
division undergraduates and students will be required to participate in at least
one research cruise. The investigators also plan to offer competitive
undergraduate student stipends for summer research at USD. To disseminate
results, participants will be required to participate in the annual
Undergraduate Research Conference, highlighting student-faculty interactions
held at USD.