* 1357209
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Expanded Group Affiliation, Trust and Prosociality
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2014,11/30/2016
* Michael Gurven, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 11/30/2016
* USD 15,249.00

UC Santa Barbara doctoral candidate Anne Pisor, supervised by Dr. Michael
Gurven, will undertake research on how cooperative intent and trust toward out-
group members change as individuals strategically shift their group memberships.
Trust and cooperation across groups are critical to cross-population
collaboration, required for the success of internationally funded development
projects such as roads and dams, yet previous research has demonstrated that
such sentiment is difficult to achieve in culturally, ethnically, and
linguistically diverse social contexts. Further, some investigators have found
that trust of and cooperation towards out-group members increases with
integration to national society and economies, while others have found that it
declines. Motivated by research from across the social sciences, this project
will investigate whether strategic shifts in group membership are the missing
variable in work connecting cooperation and trust to socioeconomic integration.
The researchers predict that it is not exposure to out-groups, but an
individual's valuation of these groups and their members, that changes these
sentiments.

This project will employ ethnographically-informed interviews, economic
experiments, and participant observation to explore this prediction with three
populations of horticulturalists from the Bolivian lowlands. These populations
were selected because they differ both across households and across communities
in their degree of socioeconomic integration. Bolivia is an ideal place to
conduct this research as it is both ethno-linguistically diverse and undergoing
rapid socioeconomic change. However, the methods used are designed such that
they can be modified for other contexts. Because of the systematic approach of
this project and its integrative nature, results will be of broad interest both
across the social sciences and outside of academia. Measuring the scope of group
affiliation and its relationship to cooperation and trust may improve the
ability of international organizations to match development projects to
communities where collective action is likely to take place.