* 1357401
* Latent Variable and Long-Memory Models
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2017
* Susanne Schennach, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 06/30/2017
* USD 198,773.00

The proposed work is divided into two projects. The first project develops
computationally efficient statistical inference techniques for classes of set
identified models. Such models are helpful because they seek, under minimal
assumptions, to usefully constrain the possible values of a model's parameters
while avoiding the unnecessarily strong assumptions that would be needed to
isolate a unique solution. Specifically, this project considers set identified
models that arise from the presence of unobservable variables in the model and
that have characteristics that traditionally demand a high-dimensional
treatment. The methods proposed aim to express asymptotic properties in terms of
a combination of simpler low-dimensional building blocks and may thus offer
considerable advantages over existing generic brute-force simulation methods.
The second project explores a connection between two apparently disparate
concepts: (i) long memory (i.e. shocks have persistent effects on a dynamical
system) and (ii) network structure. This project demonstrates that long memory
can naturally arise when a large number of subsystems with a short memory are
interconnected to form a network such that the outputs of each of the subsystems
are fed into the inputs of others. This results in a collective behavior that is
richer than that of individual subsystems. The long-memory behavior is found to
be primarily determined by the geometry of the network rather than by the
specific dynamic response of individual subsystems. These finding are
interesting because, although long-memory processes are routinely used in time
series modeling, a simple constructive explanation for their occurrence had so
far remained difficult to find.

Set identified models are becoming widely used in statistics and economics, and
this trend will likely continue, especially if inference methods can be made
simpler and computationally more efficient. Fields as diverse as medicine and
climate change could also benefit from formal methods acknowledging that some
parameters cannot be precisely known but can plausibly be bounded. Understanding
how network structure influences the dynamics of an economy is a central
question, especially in the context of the recent credit crisis. The collective
behavior of networks has clear applications in social sciences in general,
including psychology, the study of social media, and even computer networks,
which are being increasingly relied upon for infrastructure management and
logistics.