* 1357230
* Fluctuating Family Engagement on Youth Case Outcomes in Social Control Settings
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2014,04/30/2018
* Leslie Paik, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Toby Parcel
* 04/30/2018
* USD 151,887.00

SES-1357230 Leslie Paik CUNY City College

Family involvement is critical for positive adolescent youths' outcomes in
social control settings, but our understanding of how families get involved is
still unclear, especially in situations where adolescents are also held
responsible for their actions. Judges set conditions for juvenile delinquents to
fulfill on their own, but also expect parents to help those youths meet those
conditions. Health practitioners encourage adolescents to start managing their
health-related conditions such as obesity or diabetes by themselves; yet parents
are still involved in buying food for the family, filling prescriptions, or
taking youths to appointments. These competing messages can lead to confusion
among adolescents, parents and staff as to who is expected to do what,
ultimately affecting youths' case outcomes.

This project offers a more nuanced and clearer understanding of family
involvement in social control settings by conducting a qualitative comparative
study of 60 families in court and health care settings. In looking at how
families engage in their youths' cases and the impact of that engagement on the
youth's case outcomes over time, the project studies family involvement as a
fluid concept shaped by parents' and youths' interactions with staff, their
perceptions of the institution and their involvement in other institutions. The
study includes interviews with 30 families whose youths have delinquency cases
in Family Court and another 30 whose youth go to health institutions for medical
conditions such as diabetes or obesity; it also will observe 20 families (10 per
setting) over 12 months. The project advances research by providing a new
perspective on family responsibility for youth outcomes that more clearly
demarcates the parameters of that responsibility, versus that of youths and
institutional staff. The comparative focus highlights the organizational context
to family engagement and the expanding yet ambiguous scope of parental
responsibility in contemporary society.

Broader Impacts

Research findings will provide insight for organizations seeking to solicit
family involvement in their youths' cases by identifying the mechanisms by which
youth and families might engage, disengage or reengage in institutional
interventions. They also will illuminate the ways in which racial, gender and
class inequalities can be perpetuated through these institutions and people's
general mistrust of such institutions is fostered.