* 1357194
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: An Ethnography of Collaboration in Agroforestry Science
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2014,11/30/2016
* Annelise Riles, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 11/30/2016
* USD 25,165.00

Damage to the environment continues to threaten agricultural productivity
throughout the world. But policies to prevent further harm or mitigate existing
damage can be difficult to develop and to enforce. Scientists have established
that a major barrier to sustainable agricultural productivity is that policy
makers, citizens, and scientists often have different priorities and means to
achieve them. The goal of this year long, dissertation research project is to
shed light on how these challenges are negotiated in practice. Taking an
ethnographic approach to the real-world conduct of science and its translation
into policy, the researcher will examine in fine detail the daily conduct and
outcomes of collaboration among scientists from different fields, and between
scientists, bureaucrats, and farmers.

The Cornell University doctoral student, Timothy McLellan, advised by Dr.
Annelise Riles, will undertake the research at the Agricultural Ecology
Institute, a non-governmental organization devoted to modern scientific research
on the effects of traditional agricultural practices on the environment.
Institute scientists from different fields collaborate with each other to carry
out research; with local indigenous farmers, to advise them on the effects of
their activities on the environment; and with government representatives who are
charged with overseeing the development and implementation of environmental
regulation. The Institute is located in China, a choice of site that will make
these different and sometimes difficult relationships more visible and amenable
to study than they might be elsewhere. Mr. McLellan will observe the Institute's
work and carry out extensive interviews with the Institute's staff. He will
follow a selection of long-term projects, participating in research meetings,
field surveys, and other scientific activities. In order to understand how
farmers view the scientists, he also will devote 3 months to living in one of
the indigenous communities.

This kind of intensive research at the local-level is characteristic of
ethnographic research. It allows the researcher to understand not only what
people do but also the categories they have for their work and each other, which
affect their activities in ways that are not visible in more superficial survey
research. There has been an increasing call for scientists to do a better job of
communicating their research to the public and make it useful to policy makers.
This project will look closely at what happens when they try to do exactly that.
Findings should be helpful to policy makers charged with environmental
protection; to scientists who study environmental impacts; and to people who
must deal with both.