* 1357477
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Role of NGOs and Human Rights Initiatives in Democratization
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* James Eder, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 05/31/2015
* USD 10,748.00

Arizona State University doctoral candidate, Angie Abdelmonem, under the
guidance of Dr. James Eder, will investigate how non-governmental organizations
(NGOs) and grassroots social movements engage international human rights
discourses in democratization efforts. The research takes place in Cairo, Egypt,
which despite being an important focal point for recent democratization social
movements, there is very little credible formal scientific exploration of
unfolding processes on the ground. The researcher's unique training and ongoing
work in the area allow for a feasible research project, which through
participant observation with three Egyptian NGOs and social movements,
interviews with activists, volunteers and local citizens, and surveys among
neighborhood residents, will underscore the strategies employed, as well as
successes and challenges faced, by civil society entities in making the public
sphere safe for participation by socially marginalized individuals. There is a
critical need to understand these dynamics in the current context of political
upheaval and democratic transition in Egypt, where the participation of
historically marginal groups in the public sphere is actively being contested
and defined.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study builds on the growing literature on
NGOs and human rights in anthropology and is significant in providing a unique
understanding of the politics of transnationally inspired social change. By
emphasizing the voices and lived experiences of local NGO workers and residents,
it will reveal complexities around citizen action in constructing new ideas of
civil social participation in public and an increasingly globalizing society.
This project will further allow scientists to understand how NGOs and other
actors assess and reconfigure democratization efforts. Understanding how NGO
discourses and programming are increasing access to the public sphere and
improving daily realities is fundamental to finding solutions toward the
creation of sustainable democracy. The project also contributes to the education
of a graduate student.