* 1357556
* Religious Orthodoxy and New Media Technologies
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2014,01/31/2019
* Ayala Fader, Fordham University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 01/31/2019
* USD 135,442.00

Ayala Fader of Fordham University will investigate the impact of new media
technologies on skepticism and protest within ultra-Orthodox religious
communities. The project analyzes the practices of a community of ultra-Orthodox
Jews in Brooklyn who privately question whether the Torah is the word of God,
yet remain within their stringently religious communities. At the same time,
these ultra-Orthodox individuals anonymously critique their communities online
and secretly explore the secular world online and offline. Over the past decade,
communal authority figures have increasingly blamed the Internet for this
conflict, calling the current moment a "crisis of emune (faith)" and even
claiming that the Internet may prove more dangerous to Jewish continuity than
the Holocaust. Fader will conduct research from three perspectives: that of
communal leadership who try to strengthen faith; ultra-Orthodox individuals who
secretly use digital media in multiple languages (Yiddish, English and
Yinglish); and in civil child custody cases when one parent has left his/her
religious community. Data collection will draw on methodologies from cultural
and linguistic anthropology and include online materials, audio-recordings made
in ethnographic interviews, participant observation and transcription with
community consultants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project contributes to research
on conflict and change within ultra-Orthodox religious communities in the
digital age. The focus is the consequences for those who lose faith in a
nonliberal religious belief, yet simultaneously reject secularism. In a world
increasingly polarized by religion, the project interrogates a case study, which
blurs the boundaries between belief and doubt, morality and immorality, the
secular and the religious.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to provoke
conversations between the academy and the public about contemporary religion,
morality and digital media. Dissemination and pedagogical impact will include
student training, conference presentations, publications and presentations to
local community groups.