* 1357758
* Decentralized Exchange: Theory and Market Design
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Marzena Rostek, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 06/30/2018
* USD 266,116.00

Over the last couple of decades, markets have seen a dramatic shift of trade
toward new types of trading exchanges being created along with traditional,
centralized, public trading venues. The shift in trade away from centralized
exchanges towards these new types of decentralized trading platforms is common
not only for assets and goods with units as heterogeneous as real estate, but
also for assets that are similar in nature. Most bonds, foreign exchange, and
more recently stocks, are traded over the counter. In addition, new types of
securities such as bespoke (personalized) products are being introduced, which
do not exist in centralized exchanges. The small but growing research on
decentralized trading has emphasized frictions that arise due to
decentralization of trade - associated with search for trading partners,
information asymmetries amongst traders, or counterparty risk. &lt;br/&gt;The
proposed project has two broad objectives. The first is to understand the
potential for decentralized markets to improve efficiency, compared to
centralized trading environments. What are the economic mechanisms in
decentralized markets that do not have centralized market counterparts? The
second is to develop general principles for market design and product (security)
design in decentralized trade settings. &lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of
this project is a deeper understanding of the functioning of decentralized
markets. This research will introduce a flexible framework and equilibrium
analysis for relationships and market structures that cannot be studied as
graphs (bilateral links) without loss, and are more appropriately represented by
a generalization of graphs known as hypergraphs.&lt;br/&gt;It is expected that
the techniques produced by this project will enhance practical design in high-
stake applications and facilitate research by theorists studying networks as
well as applied economists, statisticians, and other social scientists
(academics and practitioners), and policymakers. In particular, the proposed
research will develop specific recommendations concerning the functioning and
regulation of markets that policymakers and market designers face in
implementation of the post-crisis changes in over-the-counter markets mandated
by the Dodd-Frank act.