* 1357042
* Collaborative Research:   Differential contributions of archaeal ammonia oxidizer ecotypes in relation to their changing environment
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2018
* Francisco Chavez, Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 03/31/2018
* USD 361,916.00

ABSTRACT Overview: Because the first and rate-limiting step of nitrification,
ammonia oxidation, was long believed to be restricted to a few groups within the
domain Bacteria, the discovery of ammonia-oxidizing archaea (AOA) - members of
one of the most abundant microbial groups on the planet (now known as the
Thaumarchaeota) - has seriously challenged our understanding of the microbial
ecology and biogeochemistry of the nitrogen cycle. AOA are now believed to be
responsible for the majority of nitrification in the sea, and occur in the
marine water column as two taxonomically distinct groups, namely the Water
Column Group A (WCA) and B (WCB) ecotypes. An open question in marine
biogeochemistry is whether the taxonomic definition of WCA and WCB and their
observed distributions correspond to distinct ecological and biogeochemical
niches. To fill this critical knowledge gap, this project will examine linkages
between patterns of ecotype-specific archaeal ammonia monooxygenase (amoA) gene
abundance and expression and 15N-based nitrification rates across multiple
depths (0-500m) and two stations within the Monterey Bay Time Series (MBTS).
Acquiring quantitative expressional and biogeochemical activity data from a wide
array of water column samples from the MBTS, bimonthly over the course of two
years, will yield valuable new insights into how archaeal ammonia oxidation and
AOA ecotype dynamics are influenced by changes in ocean conditions.

Intellectual Merit: The discovery of AOA has served to refocus attention on
nitrification in the ocean; however, there are still an alarmingly low number of
direct measurements of oceanic ammonia oxidation rates. This paucity of data has
made it difficult to accurately quantify the degree to which nitrification
supports primary production in the global ocean. One major goal of this project
is to ascertain whether a quantitative relationship between the abundance of AOA
genes and transcripts and instantaneous rates of nitrification exists for the
coastal ocean. Prior collaboration indicated a strong correlation between
15N-based nitrification rates and archaeal amoA gene copies in surface waters of
northern Monterey Bay. This study will acquire a more holistic understanding of
this relationship by performing these measurements as part of the MBTS, not only
at depths in the euphotic zone - where the biogeochemical importance of
nitrification is hotly debated - but also within disphotic and aphotic waters of
the mesopelagic. By conducting this research as part of the 23 year MBTS, the
resultant dataset will be incorporated into a larger oceanographic framework.
These efforts will also directly connect to a goal of the MBTS to determine
spatiotemporal patterns in new and regenerated primary production by providing
new quantitative insights into processes responsible for regenerated nitrogen
production in the photic zone. Additionally, the extensive collections of
microbial sequence and biogeochemical data generated through this study will
provide a valuable resource to the scientific community and, ultimately, help
reveal new information about the ecology and factors regulating nitrification in
the ocean, greatly advancing our ability to model its role in N and C cycles
under present and future conditions.

Broader Impacts: Nitrification in the oceanic water column has implications
extending from local effects on the structure and activity of phytoplankton
communities (i.e. primary producers) to broader-scale impacts on the speciation
of nitrogenous nutrients and production of nitrous oxide (N2O, a potent
greenhouse gas), all of which have important societal implications. This project
will provide critical information regarding how the diversity, abundance, and
activity of the underlying AOA communities are influenced by complex and
fluctuating environmental conditions in Monterey Bay - one of the most
productive and biologically diverse regions of the global ocean. This project
will result in the training and mentorship of a graduate student (Stanford) and
a postdoctoral researcher (MBARI). Trainees will interact extensively with both
PIs, who together represent diverse career stages and scientific perspectives,
spanning microbial ecology, biogeochemistry, and oceanography. Undergraduate
students will participate in this project, as well as high school interns.
Aspects of this project will also be incorporated into the 4-week Hopkins
Microbiology Course, focused on Monterey Bay as a natural laboratory for
examining the ecology, physiology, and evolution of marine microbes.