* 1357347
* Investigating The Relationship Between Environment And Social Organization In A Borderland Community
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2014,02/28/2019
* Alice Yao, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/28/2019
* USD 232,754.00

Dr. Alice Yao, of the University of Chicago, along with colleagues in China,
will undertake research to study the impact of imperial expansion on the
political economy and local environment of borderland societies. Previous
scholarship on empires has focused on the integration and management of ethnic
differences in the border zone through the creation of local dependencies on the
central state. Enhanced agricultural production and interregional trade
networks, in particular, are considered key strategies through which empires
build and develop frontier zones, providing economic incentives that draw and
incorporate conquered peoples. Archaeology is well placed to break new ground by
focusing instead on individual nationalities, existing economic systems, and
ecologies which defined the conditions and limits of imperial projects and
development. Why does the implementation of imperial projects gain traction in
certain frontiers but incite revolts in others? Although the term "empire" is
rarely used in reference to current political entities, the underlying concept
is still relevant to understanding the phenomena which confront the United
States today. In regions such as Africa where multiple ethnic groups are present
and their distribution often does not correspond to the borders of recognized
nations, the issue of "borderlands" and and boundaries if of
significance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Yao and her research team will
examine how state agricultural projects, infrastructures, and technologies were
deployed on the ground and of the local actors and decisions which shaped their
adoption, feasibility, and control. The research will be conducted in the Lake
Dian basin of southwest China, a geographically distant but important border
area in the formation of China's first empire under the Han State. At the
crossroads between Chinese state and mainland Southeast Asia, the region opened
up communication routes and raw resources crucial to the expansion of an
imperial economy. The researcher will lead a team of archaeologists,
limnologists, and environmental scientists to illuminate the region's changing
cultural, ecological and land use history from the pre-conquest to imperial
period. Combining excavations at ancient settlements with the extraction of lake
cores, the collection of ancient occupation and environmental records will
permit rigorous evaluation of changes in patterns of land use, exchange,
production, and consumption over this transitional period. This
interdisciplinary dataset will thus examine frontier and imperial relations as
they evolved in the context of complex ecological and environment factors. The
team will generate new comparative methods for the study of frontier relations
while the collaborative focus of the project will also create and enhance
educational and training opportunities for students.