* 1357449
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Producing Collaboration through Community-level Processes of Water Management and Infrastructure Planning
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2014,11/30/2015
* Laura Ogden, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 11/30/2015
* USD 5,092.00

Florida International University doctoral candidate Suzana D. Mic, supervised by
Dr. Laura A. Ogden, will undertake research on how collaborative governance is
produced and maintained in the context of increasing political and environmental
stressors. She will do this by gathering data on the community-level processes
of water management and infrastructure planning under conditions of anticipated
climate change. The research will be carried out in Miami, Florida, which was
chosen because it is one of the world's most vulnerable urban regions in terms
of assets threatened by rising sea levels. Miami also has a long history of
successful water system management that has transformed a former swampy
environment into a human-managed and human-centric ecosystem. Miami has been
invoked as a model by other municipalities facing similar problems.

The researcher will use a range of ethnographic methods to collect the micro-
level data needed to understand not only the water management outcomes but also
the social, cultural, and political processes that produce those outcomes. Her
data will include semi-structured interviews with scientists, environmental
activists and planners in the Miami area. She will attend public meetings,
planning forums, and board meetings. She will collect and analyze recordings of
past climate change planning activities to further examine the socio-political
relations, conflicts and points of accord involved in these efforts. In
addition, she will review documents at the Florida State Archives related to the
history of Miami's water management. Data will be coded and analyzed with
qualitative data analysis software to understand how the historical and
contemporary processes of water management affect the community's adaptation to
the challenges posed by climate change.