* 1357332
* Estimating the Impacts of a Microfranchising Intervention
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2016
* Pamela Jakiela, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 12/31/2016
* USD 113,092.00

Estimating the Impacts of a Microfranchising
Intervention&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Integrating
youth into the formal labor market is a major challenge facing developing
nations. High levels of unemployment, especially among young adults, have led
policymakers to advocate credit programs aimed at promoting entrepreneurship.
However, evidence on the overall impacts of such programs has been decidedly
mixed, particularly among women. In light of this evidence, we are conducting a
randomized impact evaluation of a new policy intervention: microfranchising. The
evaluation will measure the impacts of a microfranchising intervention designed
specifically for young women. Microfranchising, which connects unemployed
participants with businesses via small-scale, multi-person franchises, is a
recent policy innovation whose efficacy has not yet been convincingly
demonstrated. By eliminating the need to develop a novel business model, but
leaving participants to manage their own time and entrepreneurial effort,
microfranchising strikes a middle ground between full entrepreneurship and
conventional salaried employment. &lt;br/&gt;Conceptually, a microfranchise has
features in common with both a formal sector job and self-employment: while
microfranchisees do not need to devise business models of their own, they work
with very little managerial supervision and considerable latitude for
creativity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will evaluate the second
wave of the Girls Empowered by Microfranchise (GEM) Project. The evaluation
estimates the impact of the microfranchising program on young women's labor
supply, income and expenditures, savings, empowerment and self-actualization,
and overall well-being. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A randomized design compares the
microfranchising program to both the control group which receives no
intervention and the treatment. Random assignment of applicants to treatment
will generate unconfounded estimates of the impact of the program on girls in
the treatment group. To explore potential spillovers, the baseline data
collection will include detailed questions on local friendships which allow the
PIs to map each girl's social network, and determine the number of friends in
the program who were randomly assigned to the treatment group(s).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The randomized design allows the PIs to credibly estimate
the impact of the microfranchising program on participants, generating cleaner
evidence of program effects than a non-experimental study could provide. The
design also allows for the estimation of the indirect effects of the program on
pre-existing businesses within the treated sectors.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Providing increasing numbers of unemployed and
underemployed youth with viable income-generation strategies is a pressing
policy priority, particularly in light of the perceived failure of microfinance
to live up to its promise as a radical tool for transforming the lives of the
poor through entrepreneurship. Microfranchising provides a potential alternative
to microfinance which relaxes the need to develop a new business model before
starting a business. Thus, the first ever impact evaluation of a randomized
microfranchising intervention is likely to be of substantial interest to
policymakers and development professionals. Yet, no rigorous evaluation of a
microfranchising program exists. As a result, this research is likely to have
broad policy impacts.