* 1357284
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Social Impacts of Rapid Urbanization in a Context of Economic Liberalization
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2014,11/30/2015
* David Nugent, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 11/30/2015
* USD 16,380.00

Emory University doctoral candidate Sujit Shrestha, under the guidance of Dr.
David Nugent, will conduct ethnographic research on the social impacts of rapid
urbanization in contexts of economic liberalization. Around the world,
populations of urban poor have been increasingly concentrated in squatter
settlements. The researcher will explore this transformation in Kathmandu, an
appropriate context for investigating such socioeconomic changes because it
represents a site where economic liberalization practices have been pursued
following a period of political instability. The researcher asks how individuals
living in squatter communities, given their vast ethnic and social diversity,
cooperate politically in a context that is otherwise characterized by a highly
ethnicized national political environment. This project details the political
processes through which groups of marginalized urban squatters struggle to
assert various claims such as landownership and demands for secured housing. The
researcher will employ participant observation, interviews, archival research,
and discourse analysis to collect ethnographic data from squatter groups,
governmental agencies, as well as other key actors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research project has the potential to make significant theoretical contributions
to our understanding of rapid urbanization, an important theoretical field given
the growth in proportion of the world's population that is living in cities. The
researcher will also investigate how broader processes such as economic
liberalization and urbanization acquire counterintuitive meanings for specific
marginalized groups and how the groups involved then contest the contradictions
thus effected. The project will advance scientific understandings of governance,
socioeconomic change, and urban citizenship. The analysis of the connections
between competing modes of citizenship, local politics, and urbanization in the
developing world will be of particular interest to scholars, policymakers, as
well as others engaged in the field of development. The project also contributes
to the training of a graduate student.