* 1357041
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: A network analysis of immigration and its effects on common-pool resource management
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2014,11/30/2016
* Monique Borgerhoff Mulder, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 11/30/2016
* USD 18,749.00

This project investigates the impact of immigration on common-pool resource
(CPR) management. The research will take place in Puerto San Carlos, a rural
fishing village in Baja California Sur, Mexico, an ideal location to explore the
impacts cof ommunity diversity on fisheries management outcomes because of the
increased reliance on fisheries, the substantial migration to the region, and
the presence of unsustainable management practices. Using a combination of
ethnographic methods, social network analysis and experimental games, this
project will compare the attributes, behaviors, and social integration of long-
term resident fishers and recently arrived fishers to explore the relationship
between immigration, social ties, and potential environmental impact. Results
from this project can help clarify the currently inconsistent relationship
between community diversity and cooperation, as well as question the widespread
perception that immigrants inevitably are linked to environmental degradation.

The inconsistent relationship found in the scientific literature between
community heterogeneity (i.e., diversity) and cooperation stems from two
factors: a vague definition of heterogeneity, and poor specification of the
mechanisms whereby heterogeneity affects cooperation. To remedy this situation,
this project analyzes specific types of heterogeneity linked to environmental
outcomes and their relationship to social ties. Additionally, the ambiguous
environmental consequences of immigration may stem from the fact that immigrants
are not necessarily dramatically different and marginalized outsiders.
Questioning past assumptions about heterogeneity and its effect on resource
management simultaneously questions assumptions about the environmental impact
of immigrants.

Despite the general perception in policy and the media that immigrants threaten
the sustainable harvesting of natural resources, immigration is rarely addressed
in fisheries and coastal management policy. This study will directly address the
intersection of immigration and fisheries management, and contribute to
remedying this significant policy oversight. Research findings will be shared
with local residents and organizations, as well as the growing interdisciplinary
network of U.S. and Mexican scholars investigating social-ecological systems
within Baja California. To support local capacity for research and education,
research assistant positions for local students will be created in collaboration
with local organizations.