* 1357079
* Time-dependent Creep Model of the Central Creeping Section of the San Andreas Fault From 21 Years of InSAR, GPS and Repeating Earthquakes
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2018
* Manoochehr Shirzaei, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Margaret Benoit
* 04/30/2018
* USD 262,322.00

The proposed work will address the advanced analysis, full integration, and
careful interpretation of space-geodetic and seismic data over the central
creeping section of the San Andreas. To this end, three time series of the
surface deformation, using C-Band, L-Band and X-band SAR data and spanning
period 1992-2013, will be generated. The SAR images are acquired by ERS1, 2,
Envisat and ALOS and Cosmo-SkyMed satellites, which will be jointly explored
with a dense network of GPS data and catalogue of repeating earthquakes, through
a time-dependent inverse modeling scheme. This modeling scheme allows resolving
the 4-dimensional distribution of slip in the upper crust. It also enables us to
conduct a systematic and detailed study of the spatial and temporal association
of the aseismic slip pulses and events. This project, in particular, is focused
on exploring the nature of interactions between seismic and aseismic deformation
processes that occur in the fault zone and characterizing the kinematic models
of creep pulses along the Central San Andreas Fault (CSAF). Characteristic
repeating earthquakes will provide unique information on transient activity in
the Earth?s crust. Fault slip is tied to the mechanical properties of the fault
zone rocks and adjoining crustal blocks and the proposed activity can also
evaluate the first order changes of crustal properties. The time-dependent
kinematic model of transient slip will also allow investigating the possible
relationships between long-term, and short-term transient
behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An improved understanding of the spatially and
temporally varying deformation field of fault zones to great depth is critically
important for understanding active tectonics, fault-fault interaction and the
occurrence of large earthquakes. To this end the results from this NSF funded
project will allow us to assess the role of aseismic fault slip transients in
earthquake occurrence and clustering. We anticipate long-term societal benefits
from improved understanding of aseismic slip transients, their relation to
regional strain anomalies, and improved models of the earthquake cycle that
should improve earthquake forecasts and intermediate to longer-term predictions.
This project will also provide partial support for an early-career scientist as
well as valuable research experience for two graduate students who are planned
to directly involve in this project. The issues and results obtained from this
research project will be incorporated in undergraduate and graduate teachings.
&lt;br/&gt;