* 1357811
* Search, targeting and media
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2014,12/31/2018
* Simon Anderson, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 12/31/2018
* USD 145,875.00

Search, targeting, and media. The project innovates 3 topical themes. The
intellectual contribution of the proposal is to push forward the economic
analysis of the Internet and new communication technologies. The broader impact
is in engaging new techniques and models to analyze these modern communication
phenomena that encompass Marketing and Media, and in highlighting the inherent
differences among firms.

First, consumers searching on the web frequently follow the order in which
sponsored links are presented. Moreover, firms pay more for higher slots via a
position auction conducted by the search engine. A tractable model of pricing
under directed search is proposed and integrated with a position auction for
better slots (which rationalizes the way consumers search). Although the
position auction induces the right order of searching, firms tend to price so as
to discourage further exploration, and thus consumers don?t search enough.
?Better? firms (with higher quality products) tend to bid more for earlier
positions, even though product prices tend to increase in the order of search.
Bids for slots factor in the position interdependence across firms because
product prices and profits depend on the qualities of products both before and
after in the sequence of positions.

Second, targeted advertising will imminently transform marketing by inducing
competition for individual consumers. Analyzing the impact of such targeting is
rendered tractable because it is shown that expected profits per consumer
(technically, in a mixed strategy equilibrium of both prices and advertising)
can be characterized in a simple familiar form. Using this ingredient enables
the study of price competition among firms that rationally anticipate subsequent
poaching and retention through targeted advertising. In a benchmark first case,
market base prices are neutral to targeting costs, so firms lose and consumers
gain through the subsequent extra competition. However, in broader contexts
firms can be better off despite extra marketing expenses when targeting
facilitates higher base store prices because the margin of competition is
shifted. Consumers are then worse off in aggregate, and further market
inefficiency is induced through poaching.

The third theme engages competition policy for media markets. The common
business model of financing through ad revenue is known as a ?two-sided? market
structure because two groups (consumers and advertisers) are brought together on
a media platform (web-site, magazine, TV program, etc.) The project exploits a
novel ?aggregative game? approach to such two-sided media markets that ties
together the impacts of platforms? actions on both sides of the market and shows
they are diametrically opposed. This is the ?see-saw? effect that structural
changes adversely affecting one side of the market can benefit the other side.
In this context, a merger worsens viewer welfare in the classic way of modeling
media economics, but can improve their welfare in an alternative specification
when ads clutter viewer attention. In both cases, the effects on advertiser
profits go in the opposite direction. The analysis is noteworthy for delivering
results on mergers of heterogeneous firms, and in a two-sided setting on top.

All three themes make foundational contributions in proposing how to progress
tractably, and highlight the fundamental role of firm heterogeneity that
characterizes markets and their performance. The search framework delivers a
full-fledged integration of position auctions and pricing with sequential
directed search. This set-up describes the search environment on the Internet,
and should open the way for further research development. The targeting work
sets the stage for structural empirical analysis of big data and its use by
firms in targeting. The aggregative game framework applied to two-sided markets
stresses impacts of market structure changes on three groups of economic actors
(viewers, advertisers, and platforms) and shows how these impacts are tied
together.