* 1357047
* Near-Inertial waves
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* William Young, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 06/30/2018
* USD 855,945.00

Overview: The wind over the ocean generates oscillations called near-inertial
waves (NIW). The subsequent downwards and equator-ward propagation of these NIWs
is a main path for mechanical energy from the wind to travel from the surface
into the deep ocean. Via wave-wave interactions and scattering, NIWs and
internal tides energize the remainder of the internal wave band. Moreover, NIWs
control the local stability of the water column that is relevant for breaking
and mixing throughout the ocean's depths. A main dynamical reason for the
dominance of NIWs which contain about half of the kinetic energy in the ocean is
that the inertial frequency is the lowest available to the internal wave band,
and the quasi-horizontal oscillatory motion of NIWs offers little impedance to
surface wind stress and stratification. Because of their volatile response to
atmospheric (wind) forcing, NIWs cannot be described as part of a "universal"
wave spectrum of internal gravity waves and different approaches and theories
are needed.

Intellectual merit: A theoretical and computational effort will be directed at
three problems related to the generation and propagation of ocean near-inertial
waves (NIWs): (a) the interaction of NIWs with geostrophically balanced eddies,
particularly the exchange of energy between eddies and NIWs; (b) the windy
generation of NIWs, the role of the beta-effect versus eddy vorticity gradients
in accelerating vertical radiation, and the reflection of NIWs from seafloor
topography with bottom slopes that are comparable to, or larger than, the wave
slope; (c) the interaction of surface gravity waves with NIWs and the
partitioning of wind stress between the two modes during the generation process.
The processes above control the rate at which the wind works on the ocean
internal wave field, the damping of mixed-layer near-inertial oscillations and
the downward and equatorward radiation of NIWs. These mechanisms act on time
scales ranging from a few seconds (gravity wave frequencies) to weeks (surface-
intensified geostrophic eddies). Theoretical developments involve multi-scale
analysis, stochastic modeling and averaging. Although parameterization is not an
immediate goal of this project, the process-oriented work proposed here is
essential to the incorporation of internal-wave physics into comprehensive
circulation models.

Broader impacts: Ocean mixing rates cannot be characterized by a single
universal diffusivity and thus it is essential to understand how spatial,
temporal and environmental factors affect the supply of energy to the near-
inertial peak. This peak contains most of the shear variance that determines
Richardson numbers relevant for ocean mixing. Thus this problem is central to
modeling and diagnosing the ocean's role in climate, the ocean carbon cycle, the
nutrient supply to the euphotoic zone and the intentional deep-water disposal of
carbon and other industrial waste products. Understanding the role of internal
gravity waves in this context is a long-term goal of the proposal. The project
involves both theory and numerical modeling on important current problems in
physical oceanography suitable for a doctoral thesis for a physical
oceanographer or an engineer. The project involves an international
collaboration and will contribute to an effort to attach a phase-averaged NIW
model to the Regional Ocean Model System. The project will improve the Wikipedia
article "Stokes drift" and expand the stub "Coriolis-Stokes force" into a full
entry.