* 1357121
* Inferring Ocean Mixing Rates from Hydrography and Turbulent Energy Sources
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2014,02/28/2018
* Steven Jayne, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 02/28/2018
* USD 413,458.00

Overview: Ocean mixing occurs at the smallest ocean scales down to the molecular
level, yet in aggregate, it exerts influence over the large scale ocean
circulation, including the overturning circulation, the timescale of response to
atmospheric changes, and the uptake of heat and carbon. The goal of the project
is to map ocean mixing rates globally in a way that synthesizes direct
observations of mixing, hydrographic observations, ventilation rates, and
turbulent energy sources. The approach of the project is to combine techniques
for inverting hydrography with the inclusion of age tracers and a small-scale
mixing parameterization in order to estimate global mixing rates and to reduce
its remaining uncertainty. An hydrographic inversion technique that diagnoses
ocean mixing rates robustly, the inclusion of constraints from small-scale
processes such as tidal mixing and the sources of energy for mixing, and
application of the inversion method to already-collected observations from
around the world ocean will be developed. This project is relevant to
understanding how the ocean transports tracer quantities, and the interaction of
physical, biological, and chemical processes as captured in the age tracer,
radiocarbon.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Ocean mixing rates have
been previously estimated from at least four different sources of information:
1) direct observation of micro- and fine-scale structure, 2) parameterizations
of mixing based upon knowledge of ocean processes such as tides, internal waves,
and turbulence, 3) inversion of large-scale hydrographic observations and
geostrophic balance, and 4) consideration of age tracers such as radiocarbon and
their record of advective versus diffusive transports. Significant uncertainties
are inherent to each of these estimates, and an original method will be
developed to estimate mixing rates that takes into account information from
these four sources simultaneously with a mathematically-rigorous inverse
technique. Too few in-situ measurements will be made in the near future to
determine the spatial variability of ocean mixing, so the best hope to break
this impasse is to synthesize the many forms of already-collected data in a
modeling and analysis framework. The resulting global three-dimensional maps of
diffusivity will be related to specific bathymetric features and ocean
processes, which are envisioned to lead to process studies that focus on
particular regions. The global spatial map will also serve as a present-day
benchmark of the best current maps of diffusivity, and will serve as a guide by
which to plan new in-situ measurement campaigns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: Improved estimates of ocean mixing rates are especially important to
reconstruct and predict the ocean uptake of heat and carbon, and the
determination of how actively the ocean participates in climate variability. The
spatial distribution of ocean mixing influences just how well the ocean
circulation acts to isolate the abyss, with relevance to the fate of carbon that
has already been sequestered but can potentially re-emerge in the next few
hundred years. The resulting global mixing rates can be prescribed in climate
simulations and may reduce a major uncertainty in ocean component of these
models. A more realistic simulated ocean is key on the long timescales inherent
to many climate processes. The output of the project will be exported to a
complementary NSF-funded project of the KeckCAVES team at UC Davis, where
collaboration with computer scientists will help visualize the results in a way
that will broaden participation in science and broadly disseminate climate
science to the general public. In addition, this project would primarily support
a young investigator in the beginning stages of building a research group.