* 1357488
* Collaborative Research: A New Infrastructure for Monitoring Social Class Networks.
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* David Grusky, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 08/31/2018
* USD 116,924.00

SES-1357488&lt;br/&gt;David Grusky&lt;br/&gt;Stanford
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SES-1357442&lt;br/&gt;Michael
Macy&lt;br/&gt;Cornell University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the last 15 years,
an ever larger and more diverse population is choosing to interact using social
media that record the digital traces of their communications, a development that
opens up unprecedented opportunities to study the network foundation of social
class relations. Although there is a long tradition of research examining
whether social classes in the United States are well-formed, it has been based
exclusively on survey and Census data and, by necessity, has ignored the network
foundations of class structure and formation. This research takes advantage of
the rising amount of interaction with social media to examine that network
structure at population scale. The resulting methods will provide the basis for
a new and novel research infrastructure for investigating inter-personal
interaction within and between social classes in the United
States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By using data from a complete crawl of U.S. Twitter
users, it becomes possible to measure class barriers to interpersonal
interaction. The centerpiece of this approach is the development of methods to
measure the class situation of users with profile data, lexical analysis of
message content, and housing valuations for geo-located users. To supplement and
validate these behavioral measures, a survey will be administered to a random
sample of network edges. A similar analysis of Facebook users will be carried
out. The resulting data will be used to complete the first network-based
analyses of the extent and patterning of the U.S. class structure. In
conventional ?static analyses? of the class structure, the size of inter-class
differences in behaviors and attitudes (e.g., childrearing practices, political
attitudes) is emphasized, while the patterning of inter-class contact and
networks that link classes together is ignored. The key question, therefore, is
whether the proposed network analyses of class yield a different portrait of the
structure of social classes than the static analyses that have dominated decades
of class research in the U.S. At the same time, some network-based analyses of
class have been attempted in the past, analyses that have relied on an
idiosyncratic range of network behaviors that may be discerned with survey
methods (especially, assortative mating where people marry persons with similar
education and occupational characteristics, and intergenerational social
mobility). The analyses undertaken here will reveal whether social media reduces
class barriers to interaction relative to the level of class homophily (the
tendency of people to associate with similar people) revealed in face-to-face
networks available in survey data. These analyses will provide the foundation of
a new network-based analysis of class structure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If class barriers are comparatively weak in on-line
interactions, standard measurements of class structure will provide an
increasingly misleading portrait of civil society and its inclusiveness. It is
also plausible, however, that the powerful search algorithms of online platforms
allow people to efficiently cull for alters who are similar to themselves. If
the latter proves to be the case, it means that the rise of new social media
are, contrary to the conventional view, increasing class homophily and
polarizing class relations. The research also has a methodological payoff.
Because a network-based analysis of social class structure requires high-quality
measurements of the class situation of media users, much of the research will
focus on developing the methods that make such measurement possible. The social
class of users and alters will be imputed by (a) linking geo-located users to
their neighborhoods and housing values, (b) exploiting available profile data,
(c) carrying out a lexical analysis of message content, and (d) administering
surveys to users. These methods, which may be extended to carry out analogous
imputations of race, gender, and other ascribed traits, will be of use to
researchers in the social sciences, computer science, information science, and
other disciplines facing the stock situation in which direct information on
individual traits is scarce. The project will also provide new research
opportunities for graduates and undergraduates at Cornell University and
Stanford University.