* 1357276
* Collaborative Research: A Multi-State Investigation of Small Group and Mass Public Decision Making on Fiscal and Scientific Controversies through the Citizens' Initiative Review
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2014,03/31/2017
* John Gastil, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Leland
* 03/31/2017
* USD 301,658.00

In 2010, the Oregon state government authorized the first Citizens' Initiative
Review (CIR), which convened two random samples of twenty-four registered voters
for five days of deliberation on a pair of statewide initiatives. At the end of
their deliberations, each citizen panel wrote a one-page analysis that went into
the official pamphlet sent by the Secretary of State to every registered voter.
Starting in 2014, the CIR's organizers are attempting to transform this process
into a more cost-effective and scalable means of informing public decision
making that extends beyond Oregon. Changes to the CIR's design and issue-focus
permit a study on the limits and potential of democratic deliberation, with a
focus on scientific controversies. A multi-method investigation of the 2014 CIR
will employ direct observation, transcript analysis, and panelist surveys. Case
study analysis of four separate CIR panels will assess the democratic and
deliberative quality of lay citizen decision making on scientifically complex
issues via streamlined, digital discussion procedures. Additional studies will
examine how the wider public incorporates the CIR's information and
recommendations into its decision making. A multi-state usability study of the
voter pamphlet will provide a more refined picture of how voters use and
understand the CIR's one-page analysis. An online survey experiment will
incorporate findings from the usability study into an online voter guide to test
how proposed alterations to the CIR's design shape the public's trust in the
CIR's issue analyses. Finally, a mail survey will test the efficacy of
distributing CIR findings via conventional media channels. Our research will aid
civic reformers designing deliberative processes, as well as legislators
considering the adoption of the CIR and similar designs. Our collaborative
research model also advances the professional development of the numerous
graduate students and junior faculty working on this project.