* 1357162
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics:   Institutional Adaptation to a Heterogeneous Common Pool Resource: Management of the Critical High Plains Aquifer in Kansas
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2014,02/29/2016
* Gary Libecap, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Georgia Kosmopoulou
* 02/29/2016
* USD 15,288.00

Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: Institutional Adaptation to a
Heterogeneous Common Pool Resource: Management of the&lt;br/&gt;Critical High
Plains Aquifer in
Kansas&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT:
Tens to hundreds of feet declines in water table elevation in western Kansas
since the widespread adoption of groundwater irrigation in the 1950s has led to
concern about competitive overdraft of the aquifer and the economic future of
the entire region. Like many regions worldwide, the agricultural economy of
western Kansas is critically dependent upon groundwater. Economic theory
suggests that the common nature of the groundwater resource can lead to
insufficient incentives for groundwater conservation absent pumping
restrictions. In-depth study of institutional and hydrologic factors is required
to understand the nature and possible solutions to groundwater depletion in
western Kansas and around the world. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Groundwater
management districts are prevalent throughout the United States to help address
overdraft. Understanding what problems districts in Kansas are faced with and
why depletion may still occur informs improved groundwater management policy
throughout the US and potentially in the developing world where institutional
control is in the early stages of development. The proposed work will
demonstrate to resource managers and policymakers how physical properties of a
hydrologic system are translated into incentives to support or oppose
management. This work aims to shed light on how effective local management is
and the factors that influence its success.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;BROADER
IMPLICATIONS: This project addresses three critical questions for groundwater
management worldwide: (1) How do the hydrologic variables of recharge, specific
yield, hydraulic conductivity, and saturated thickness affect economic outcomes
of farm size, farm value, and crop choice? (2) How do physical factors impact
incentives to control pumping externalities through more complete property
rights definition? (3) How do different management regimes control pumping
externalities and change economic outcomes? We collect and analyze new data to
answer these questions: parcel sale and characteristic data to match economic
data at the section (square-mile) level with hydrological data already
available; and institutional data on the emergence and management of groundwater
districts in Kansas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project offers a unique approach
to the economics of groundwater management by including spatial hydrologic
variables in an empirical framework. While economic discussions of soil erosion
control districts and irrigation districts exist, groundwater management
districts have not been adequately examined. They are critical for aquifer
protection and are the focus of this project. Common management regimes exist in
a variety of forms throughout the US and world. Recent work has demonstrated the
importance of aquifer heterogeneity and spatial externalities in management
success, and this proposal builds on these insights by testing the impact of
these factors on economic outcomes. While hedonic methods have been applied to
surface water rights, little has been done to extend this analysis to
groundwater or to determine the effect of physical groundwater characteristics
on farm value as is proposed here. Changes in farm values related to the
adoption of groundwater management regimes should affect individual incentives
for engaging in such management. This research examines that relationship. The
proposal moves beyond the broad and abstract social planner paradigm to look at
incentives of individual users to cooperate in groundwater pumping controls and
the effect these incentives have on management outcomes. By taking an
interdisciplinary approach, this project demonstrates the economic significance
of hydrologic phenomena. It also provides a framework for economists to take
advantage of hydrologic data to empirically address physical system
heterogeneity in management success.