* 1357481
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Socioeconomic Variance in Labor and Family Responses to Globalization
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2014,11/30/2016
* Dario Valles, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 11/30/2016
* USD 20,348.00

Dario Valles, under the supervision of Dr. Micaela di Leonardo of Northwestern
University, will explore how American workers and families adapt to the
pressures of globalization, and how those responses might vary across a range of
socioeconomic categories. The explosion of the global service sector, in tandem
with women's increasing labor force participation, has resulted in a global
"care deficit." This has resulted in the reorganization of households and the
creation of new labor markets. This research examines why and how migrant family
child care workers in global cities provide subcontracted care to young children
of working parents. Family child care (FCC) has been selected as a point of
inquiry as it has become one of the fastest growing occupations in the U.S.,
with an estimated 2.3 million workers and many more working informally. The
researcher focuses on childcare providers who service women and families in low-
wage service work, an important sample population as previous scientific studies
have tended to focus on upper middle class and affluent families. The researcher
will conduct 12 months of ethnographic research, using participant observation,
interviews, life histories, material and discourse analyses, and archival and
statistical data collection. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ethnographic inquiry into
family child care is critical to the ways in which everyday household practices
are entwined with social and political economic hierarchies, practices of
affective care and labor and constructions of family. At the same time, the
experiences of these providers offer insight into change in the face of rapid
economic dislocations. This project will bring new light and dialogue around
continued local and global socioeconomic inequalities, shifting social and
cultural concepts, and transformations in the role of the state, and reveal how
low-wage workers engage these realities through their labor, household, and
socioeconomic practices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The U.S. is behind many countries
in providing child care support for families with children. While other
countries recognize the economic burden of child care, particularly for low-wage
families, the U.S. does not been able to adequately address this child care
deficit. The research will help policymakers understand the dynamics that can
contribute to the maximization of labor productivity, thereby improving the
economic competitiveness of the U.S. The project will also support the training
of a graduate student.