* 1357887
* IRES: U.S.-Netherlands Collaborative International Research Experience for Students in Mass Spectrometry and Ion Spectroscopy
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Peter Armentrout, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 08/31/2019
* USD 250,000.00

In this International Research Experience for Students (IRES) project, U.S.
graduate and undergraduate students under the supervision of Professors Mary T.
Rodgers of Wayne State University and Peter B. Armentrout of the University of
Utah will participate in international collaborative research projects with
Dutch counterpartners and institutions to investigate the roles of metal ion
interactions in biology, energy and catalysis, and the environment. The
biological, catalytic, and environmentally oriented mass spectrometry and
spectroscopic studies they carry out are expected to add to the rapidly growing
and evolving research areas that interest a broad community of researchers. Each
U.S. cohort will be assigned collaborate on several projects, with each student
acting as the lead researcher on a particular project. Outcomes from this IRES
are expected to contribute to the underpinnings of these methodologies and add
to their continuing development, while contributing to STEM workforce
preparation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Twice a year for three years, U.S. student
cohorts will travel to the Netherlands for month long research visits to
participate in cooperative research projects that make use of unique Dutch
instrumentation (laser systems and mass spectrometers) and cyber infrastructure
at the Free Electron Lasers for Infrared eXperiments (FELIX) facility at the
Radboud University Nijmegen. The FELIX facility in the Netherlands is an
international user facility supported by an advanced technical staff as well as
faculty, students, and postdoctoral fellows associated with the university.
Planned experiments are designed to measure directly the infrared spectra of the
metal-ligand complexes, thereby providing structural and mechanistic information
through the analysis of the observed photodissociation pathways along with
concomitant theoretical work. Because the FELIX facility welcomes a wide variety
of researchers from around the globe, IRES participants should benefit from an
exceptional, early career opportunity to interact with Dutch partners as well as
researchers from other institutions and countries. Theoretical calculations,
additional data analysis, and preparation of the results for presentation will
continue after the students return to the U.S., culminating in the expected
outcome of scientific publications, under the guidance of the U.S. PIs and Dutch
mentors. Pre- and post visit surveys along with a three-year follow-up survey
will be administered to assess the success of this IRES program. A website for
this U.S.-Netherlands IRES program will make the results of the program
available to participants, the broader scientific community, and the public.