* 1357907
* Collaborative Research: Reputational Equilibrium Refinements of Bargaining Games with Asymmetric Information
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2016
* Dilip Abreu, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 06/30/2016
* USD 69,012.00

Bargaining between two agents is one of the most central economic problems, and
it often occurs under asymmetric information: one or more of the agents lack
some relevant information about the opponent (how she weighs current versus
future consumption, how much she values some commodity to be exchanged, what
other options she might have, and so on). Despite the importance of this
problem, it resists traditional economic analysis, and economists do not view
the models currently available as offering adequate treatments of the subject.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal studies a number of bargaining situations
when players have the possibility of building reputations for being "tough". We
hope to show that in the case of one-sided asymmetric information about a
player?s patience, very modest assumptions suffice to produce strong predictions
about behavior. Turning to one-sided asymmetric information about valuations,
the goal is to allow for a rich variety of behavioral perturbations and still
obtain strong conclusions. We hope that the results of this research will
ultimately help in the study of two-sided asymmetric information: neither player
is sure about how much the other values an object to be sold, for example. The
literature offers virtually no guidance about what to expect in such situations
and this proposal moves research toward areas considered impenetrable by
generations of researchers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of the
proposal rests on the potential for the results to be applied to real-world
bargaining situations. The economic and political landscapes are littered with
important examples, from collective bargaining between union and firm to
negotiations between a country and its neighbor regarding timber, pipelines,
tariffs, or defense accords. Understanding the basic underlying principles would
improve our ability to predict outcomes, and to design policies and institutions
to promote more favorable results.