* 1357243
* How Minerals Control Hydrothermal Organic Reactivity
* GEO,OCE
* 01/15/2014,12/31/2016
* Ian Gould, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 12/31/2016
* USD 448,932.00

Fluids circulating through the seafloor at seamounts, continental shelves, mid-
ocean ridges, and elsewhere contain dissolved organic compounds that, during the
course of their transit through the ocean crust, are exposed to elevated
temperature-pressure environments where they are transformed into other organic
molecules. These organics not only feed microbes in the deep biosphere but their
reactions with minerals change them into other organic molecules. Such similar
reactions and transformations that happened in the ocean crust back during the
earliest days of our planet are likely to have played a major role in the
formation of the essential organic components that resulted in life on Earth.
This research carries out a series of high temperature and pressure experiments
(200 to 350 C and 70 to 100 MPa, respectively) in which well-characterized,
dissolved, isotopically-labelled, aqueous organic and chiral compounds are
reacted with a variety of common seafloor hydrothermal oxide and sulfide
minerals to examine the resulting changes in organic compounds and their rates
of transformation. Transformations and rates of reaction will be examined both
as a function of temperature and pressure as well as a function of the catalytic
properties of the minerals in terms of surface area, charge distribution, and
semi-conductor properties. Resulting data will be used to determine fundamental
thermodynamic and kinetic parameters that can be used to make and test
predictions and examine the implications of water-rock interaction and mineral
catalysis as they apply to the development of organic molecules in the ocean
crust. Experiments mimicking seafloor hydrothermal systems will be run as a
function of pH, ionic strength, and redox state. Both hydrothermal gold bag
(Dixon bomb) and static gold capsule experimental apparatuses will be used.
Experiments will be designed using aqueous speciation modeling codes (e.g.,
SUPCRT and EQ3/6). Organic solutes, mineral reactants and products, and
dissolved gases from the static and gold bag experiments will be analyzed by
high precision gas chromatography and gas chromatographic mass spectrometry.
X-ray diffraction, scanning electron microscopy, and scanning transmission
electron microscopy. Preliminary experiments have already demonstrated proof of
concept in terms of experiments being successful and yielding interpretable
results. Broader impacts of the research include significant integration of
research and education by using the research to transform how undergraduate
geochemistry, organic chemistry, and astrobiology students are taught at Arizona
State University. Research will be incorporated into courses and a series of
podcasts and videos on themes relating to submarine hydrothermal systems and
hydrothermal organic geochemistry will be developed as part of course offerings.
These will then be improved through student crowd sourcing and posted for public
consumption on the Internet. Results of the project will be applicable broadly
across the academic sector into the fields of chemistry and hydrology as well as
geothermal and materials science. The fundamental thermodynamic parameters and
rate constants to be derived will have a potentially large impact in the
chemical and petroleum engineering industrial sectors.