* 1357781
* Collaborative Research: Inflation Dynamics During the Financial Crisis
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2014,02/28/2017
* Simon Gilchrist, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 02/28/2017
* USD 242,162.00

From a macroeconomic perspective, one of the most puzzling aspects of the
2007-09 financial&lt;br/&gt;crisis and the ensuing slow recovery is the relative
stability of inflation. Despite a large and sharp&lt;br/&gt;contraction in
output in the second half of 2008 and the persistently high level of resource
slack&lt;br/&gt;over the past several years, the U.S. experienced only a modest
degree of disinflationary&lt;br/&gt;pressures-both at the wholesale and retail
levels-behavior that is difficult to explain with&lt;br/&gt;canonical models of
aggregate inflation determination. This project studies the extent to
which&lt;br/&gt;the massive tightening of financial conditions at the height of
the crisis in the latter part of 2008&lt;br/&gt;may help explain why inflation
did not fall as much as expected during the financial crisis and
the&lt;br/&gt;subsequent recovery. The underlying hypothesis posits that some
firms may strategically set low&lt;br/&gt;prices to attract customers, behavior
implied by the "customer-markets theory," which&lt;br/&gt;emphasizes the idea
that price setting is a form of investment that builds the future customer
base.&lt;br/&gt;According to this theory, firms will in normal times maintain
low prices relative to their&lt;br/&gt;competitors in order to attract new
customers. In turn, this implies low current mark-ups and&lt;br/&gt;hence lower
cash flows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;However, in times of widespread financial
distress-when external finance becomes prohibitively&lt;br/&gt;costly or even
unavailable-financially vulnerable firms will sacrifice their customer base
by&lt;br/&gt;raising prices to stabilize current revenues and bolster their
liquidity positions. Thus in periods of&lt;br/&gt;acute financial distress,
inflation may actually rise despite a drop in economic activity and
the&lt;br/&gt;emergence of a significant degree of resource underutilization.
The possibility that inflation and&lt;br/&gt;output move in opposite directions
in response to an adverse demand shock also challenges&lt;br/&gt;conventional
thinking regarding the appropriate course of action for monetary policy
during&lt;br/&gt;financial crises.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To examine this
hypothesis empirically, the project merges firm-level financial data with
the&lt;br/&gt;corresponding firm-level inflation rates computed from the
confidential price data collected by&lt;br/&gt;the Bureau of Labor Statistics
(BLS). Preliminary results indicate that financial factors had
a&lt;br/&gt;significant effect on inflation dynamics during the 2007-09 crisis.
Consistent with the hypothesis,&lt;br/&gt;financially "weak" firms raised prices
in the latter part of 2008, whereas their financially
"strong"&lt;br/&gt;counterparts lowered prices in response to a drop in
aggregate demand. To date, the implications&lt;br/&gt;of this mechanism for
aggregate inflation dynamics have remained largely unexplored, and
this&lt;br/&gt;study provides some of the first systematic evidence on how
financial conditions influence the&lt;br/&gt;price-setting behavior of firms
through the incentives to set prices in a manner that preserves
their&lt;br/&gt;liquidity and balance sheet capacity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
the extent that this channel is quantitatively important, the analysis in this
project has a direct&lt;br/&gt;bearing on gauging the likelihood of destructive
large-scale disinflations during financial crises. It&lt;br/&gt;also has
important implications for the conduct of monetary policy by arguing that policy
makers&lt;br/&gt;should take into account the interaction between changes in the
quality of the firms' balance&lt;br/&gt;sheets and their price-setting behavior
when deciding on the future course of nominal interest&lt;br/&gt;rates. In
addition to developing the matching algorithm that links BLS' researcher
databases with&lt;br/&gt;outside firm-level data sets, the project also provides
a new measure of local bank credit-supply&lt;br/&gt;conditions based on the GPS
coordinates that may be used in conjunction with future BLS&lt;br/&gt;studies,
opening up a whole new set of research possibilities on the spatial interaction
between&lt;br/&gt;financial conditions and firm behavior.