* 1357388
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Seismic Politics: The Scientific Development of an Early Alert System Infrastructure in Mexico
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2014,11/30/2015
* William Maurer, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 11/30/2015
* USD 15,120.00

University of California at Irvine doctoral student, Elizabeth Reddy, supervised
by Dr. William M. Maurer, will undertake research in Mexico City on the
relationship between science and public safety. Mexico City, subject to frequent
and powerful earthquakes, is host to an innovative earthquake early alert
system. The Sistema Alerta Sismica (SAS) is comprised of a coordinated set of
sensory devices and radio transmitters. These are connected to alert machines in
hospitals, schools, media outlets, and sometimes even private homes. Beginning
in 1991, when SAS sensory devices register significant earth motion, they
automatically send signals to alert machines in Mexico City that, in turn, issue
a loud warning, sometimes up to sixty seconds before an earthquake reaches the
city. This warning, which depends on the relative speeds at which earthquakes
and radio waves move, provides a valuable opportunity for people to take
shelter. However, the sensory network and its alert system are severely limited
in scope. Because the SAS can only provide alerts for certain earthquakes, it
has been subject to a great deal of scientific and public debate.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the process of developing the SAS, maintaining it, and
advocating for it, engineers and scientists must mobilize ideas about the social
world as well as their technical expertise. This research is designed to explore
how these groups navigate the rigorous and possibly conflicting demands of their
expertise and imperatives of public safety: particularly how they engage with
concepts relating to risk, how they account for particularly Mexican social and
technical factors, and ways that institutional imperatives and policy mandates
affect their work. As they knit together cutting-edge geophysical and
engineering knowledge with public risk management, they undertake work that they
themselves describe as challenging in the extreme. To gather the data necessary
for this investigation, the researcher utilizes archival resources, participant
observation, surveys, social network analysis, interviews, and oral histories.
Her findings will speak to production of social politics of seismic risk in
Mexico, and has implications for ongoing research on science in the public
sphere.