* 1357278
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Impact of Family Dynamics on Health in Low Income Communities Undergoing Rapid Socioeconomic Change
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2014,10/31/2015
* Stephen Schensul, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 10/31/2015
* USD 25,184.00

University of Connecticut doctoral student Marie A. Brault, under the guidance
of Dr. Stephen L. Schensul will undertake research on the impact of family
dynamics on marriage and outcomes for young women in low income communities
undergoing rapid socioeconomic change. The research will take place among
adolescent women (ages 15-25) in Mumbai, India, a group who, like the 600
million adolescent girls who marry soon after menarche in low- and middle-income
settings, are often limited in their education, social mobility, access of
health knowledge and health care. The aims of this project are to: describe
young women's birth family dynamics and pre-marital social networks and the
impact of these on their mobility and knowledge before marriage; examine how
young women's birth family experiences impact transitions to and relationships
with their husbands and in-laws; and identify the ways sociocultural and
biological factors impact health in a globalizing urban community.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will employ qualitative (in-depth interviewing
with young women and key informants, content analysis, and social network
analysis ) and quantitative (survey and biomarker) methods. The multi-level
perspectives and unique methodological approaches used will provide an
understanding of the individual, socio-cultural, and global factors impacting
the transition through adolescence and marriage in the context of the rapid
socioeconomic changes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The data obtained will provide the
basis for a doctoral student's training as well as presentations and
publications that can elucidate the challenges for married adolescents in India
and elsewhere, and contribute to improving their quality of life. Results will
be communicated to researchers in India, providing the opportunity for national
dissemination of research results. Findings will also be presented in the study
communities. Thus, research will be disseminated to multiple audiences.