* 1357565
* IRES: US/UK Multidisciplinary Collaboration in Magnetics
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2014,05/31/2019
* David Jiles, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Roxanne Nikolaus
* 05/31/2019
* USD 242,043.00

Technical abstract&lt;br/&gt;Cardiff University is one of the leading
universities in the field of magnetics research in the UK and Europe. It is also
home to several eminent faculty members in magnetics. Cardiff University and
Iowa State Universities have had long-standing research collaborations and the
PI and co-PI?s have all worked at Cardiff University and have good network
connections with the current faculty and staff members. Cardiff University, and
in particular the Wolfson Centre for Magnetics, offers resident expertise and
access to advanced measurement facilities in magnetics. American students will
gain good research experience from the work they will carry out at Cardiff
University as well as the valuable broadening experience that comes from working
in a foreign country. &lt;br/&gt;The following five research topics match
expertise and interests at both Iowa State University and Cardiff University and
should attract a large number of applicants to the program: Magnetocaloric
Materials; Magnetostrictive Materials; Non-Destructive Evaluation (NDE);
Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation (TMS); Unified Theory of Hysteresis in
Magnetic Systems. &lt;br/&gt;Five students, two graduates and three
undergraduates from colleges and universities across Iowa and who are permanent
residents of the United States will be chosen for international research
experience under this grant. Special efforts will be made to recruit under-
represented minority or female students in STEM subjects. The students will
spend ten weeks each summer at Cardiff University and two weeks at Iowa State
University. The graduate students will be allowed to choose the research topics
which will be closely related to their thesis. The undergraduates will be
selected from Electrical &amp; Computer Engineering, Materials Science &amp;
Engineering, Mechanical Engineering and/or Physics departments of Iowa State
University and community colleges in Iowa. These undergraduate students will
preferably participate in the summer months at the end of their junior year in
order to enable them on their return to the United States, to take up senior
design projects in similar areas if they wish. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-
technical abstract&lt;br/&gt;Iowa State University and Cardiff University in the
United Kingdom will collaborate to offer 10 week research opportunities each
summer for three years. The project will include 2 graduate students and 3
undergraduate students who will study at Cardiff University each year. The
students, who will be permanent residents of the United States will be recruited
from colleges and universities across Iowa. Special attention will be given to
recruiting women and under-represented minority students in STEM subjects from
colleges. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Wolfson Centre at Cardiff University is one
of Europe?s leading research institutes in magnetics. The topics chosen for the
research are areas of common interest between Iowa State University and Cardiff
University. These include: magnetocaloric materials, magnetostrictive materials,
non-destructive evaluation, transcranial magnetic stimulation and computer
modeling of hysteresis in materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
provide outstanding opportunities for students to gain research experience at a
leading international research center in another country - the Wolfson Centre
for Magnetics at Cardiff University, UK. These exciting, cutting edge projects
will also motivate home grown undergraduate students to take up graduate
studies, and graduate students to think about careers in research &amp;
academia. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PIs will promote the program by making visits to
high schools in Iowa to help inspire the students to consider STEM subjects at
university by demonstrating the various career options and opportunities for
international travel in connection with participating in ground breaking
research. &lt;br/&gt;