* 1357867
* Collaborative Research: Preferences and Equilibrium in Laboratory Financial Markets
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2018
* Ryan Oprea, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Hyun Hong
* 04/30/2018
* USD 324,477.00

General Equilibrium (GE) theory is the mathematical framework that economists
use to understand how markets generate prices and distribute resources within a
society. However, GE is impossible to directly test in the field because a
primary input, the preferences of individuals, is private information not known
to outside analysts. Working in the laboratory over several decades, some
economists have instead tested aspects of GE theory by inducing artificial
preferences. In parallel, another group of economists has studied how to measure
the actual preferences of individuals, using a different body of theory called
'Revealed Preferences' that infers individual preferences from choices made in
the face of varying prices and income levels. Remarkably, these two poles of
economic research have never been brought together empirically and studied
jointly: economists have not systematically investigated whether revealed
preferences lead to the market outcomes predicted under GE. Our research will
begin to fill this gap through a series of new experiments. This research will
give us new insight into the predictive power of GE theory and a new, deeper
insight into the functioning of interconnected markets, especially financial
markets. Our first project begins with a slight variation on a prominent
revealed preference approach to portfolio choice. Subsequent projects
incrementally transform simple preference elicitation into state-of-the-art
market trading institutions. Individual decision-making tasks are gradually
transformed into full-blown interactive markets, but the mechanics of making
choices remains nearly identical throughout, allowing us to reliably compare
behavior across settings. A suite of new software tools, called Edgeworks, will
implement the entire sequence in a unified visual framework. This research will
give insight into the efficiency and stability of interdependent (multi-good)
markets, especially important aspects of financial markets. It will also help
reveal the robustness of elicited preferences in the face of market experience,
including recently controversial aspects such as small stakes risk aversion and
reference dependence.