* 1357554
* Doctoral Research Dissertation: An Experiment to Examine the Effect of Visual Grouping in Helping Respondents Navigate Skip Patterns
* SBE,SES
* 06/15/2014,05/31/2015
* Jolene Smyth, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 05/31/2015
* USD 15,994.00

Mail surveys are becoming more popular among survey researchers because they can
achieve better coverage and response rates at a lower cost than can be achieved
with telephone surveys. However, there are still challenges when using mail
surveys. This research project will examine a common design challenge that has
received only minimal research attention: how to get respondents to correctly
navigate skip patterns without computer or interviewer assistance. The study
will advance the visual design literature within survey methodology from its
previous focus on individual items to a new focus on how visual design can be
used across questions. As such, it has the potential to broaden our
understanding of how visual design can be used to design good questionnaires,
not just good questions. Researchers from multiple disciplines and across all
survey sectors will be able to utilize findings from this research in their own
surveys to minimize skip errors, thereby reducing missing data and increasing
statistical power. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award,
support is provided to enable a promising student to establish a strong,
independent research career.

Failing to correctly navigate skip patterns in mail surveys without computer or
interviewer assistance often results in missing data. Recently, survey
methodology has incorporated knowledge from the vision sciences and cognitive
psychology into understanding how visual design can be used strategically in
questionnaire design. This study uses an experimental design to examine the
effect of visual design features that create stronger grouping and subgrouping
among items within skip patterns on skip errors in a mail survey. The survey
will be administered to a sample of Nebraska residents drawn from the
Computerized Delivery Sequence File. Specifically, this study will examine how
grouping questions through enclosure or common region and indentation affects
the rate of skip errors. There will be four forms sent out. The control form
will have all of the questions located in the same continuous region (as
established by a common shaded background) and all questions started at the left
margin. The second form has the same continuous region but all follow-up items
will be indented. The third form will have all questions start at the left
margin, but the follow-up items will be in a separate background region from the
initial feeder question. Finally, the fourth form will examine the combined
effects of grouping through the use of both enclosure and indentation. Rates of
skip errors for each objective will be examined across respondent
characteristics (i.e., age, education, literacy) and question types (i.e.,
number of response options, number of follow-up questions).