* 1357168
* Collaborative Research: The effects of diatom-produced polyunsaturated aldehydes on the microbial food wed in temperate and polar waters
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2014,12/31/2018
* Peter Lavrentyev, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 12/31/2018
* USD 420,515.00

Overview: This project will conduct a set of field/laboratory experiments to
address the following hypotheses with respect to microzooplankton (consumers
between 20-200 Âµm) and diatom- produced polyunsaturated aldehydes:&lt;br/&gt; I.
Aldehydes will impair microzooplankton herbivory on diatoms and non-diatom
phytoplankton. &lt;br/&gt; II. Aldehydes will reduce the growth rates of
microzooplankton and non PUA-producing phytoplankton. &lt;br/&gt; III. In the
presence of aldehyde-producing diatoms, copepods will switch to
microzooplankton, whereas non- (mildly)- toxic diatoms will be an important food
source for copepods. &lt;br/&gt; IV. The effects of aldehydes on
microzooplankton and copepods will depend on the grazers' prior exposure to PUA.
&lt;br/&gt;The experiments will include natural plankton, captured copepods,
cultured Skeletonema marinoi (SM), including its aldehyde-producing strain, and
synthetic aldehydes. To gain insights into complex interactions within
planktonic communities, detailed information on their composition, abundance,
and dynamics will be obtained using microscopy, flow-cytometry, and cytological
methods. This approach will allow the PIs to draw conclusions about the role of
diatom-produced aldehydes in phytoplankton-microzooplankton- copepod trophic
interactions. The PIs will coordinate efforts and exchange information with the
PUA study group at the Stazione Zoologica Anton Dohrn (Naples,
Italy).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: Diatoms are dominant
autotrophic plankton in the ocean. Recent evidence indicates that
microzooplankton are the dominant herbivores, whereas copepods often rely on
microzooplankton as food, except during peak diatom production. The ability of
microzooplankton to feed on large diatoms and grow as fast as their algal prey
leads to the question of what allows diatoms to escape microzooplankton grazing
control during the initial phases of their blooms and maintain the blooms until
nutrient resources are depleted? Allelopathy is wide spread among phytoplankton.
The cosmopolitan bloom-forming SM produces several aldehydes and has become a
model organism in plankton allelopathy studies. Most studies on diatom
cytotoxicity have been dedicated to inhibitory effects on reproduction and
development of marine invertebrates, whereas surprisingly little information
exists on its impact on key diatom grazers, microzooplankton. Preliminary
results in the Chesapeake Bay show that aldehydes may induce cascading effects
within planktonic communities. The proposed study will: (1) Improve our
knowledge of the critical diatom-microzooplankton-copepod links in the coastal
ocean; (2) Generate novel data on the effects of allelopathy on marine food
webs; (3) Contribute to our understanding of broader patterns of marine
ecosystems by comparing plankton structure and dynamics in the temperate
Atlantic waters; (4) Advance biological oceanography through international
collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: One post-doctoral fellow,
two graduate students and several undergraduate students at the Universities of
Akron and Maryland will be trained as a result of this project. The project will
attract motivated minority students into the program. The research will be
extended to students in grades 7-12 and teachers via an interactive distance
learning series in collaboration with the WVIZ Ideastream network. The PIs will
continue an existing outreach partnership with the Great Lakes Science Center,
where a recent electronic presentation dedicated to Arctic change and NSF-
sponsored research was seen by ca. 45,000 visitors. The PIs will also work with
the Cleveland Museum of Natural History to develop public programs, and with the
National Inventors Hall of Fame STEM Middle School to develop a curriculum
focused on polar research. Curriculum modules will be available as free
downloads from a dedicated website. Broader Impacts, LLC, will evaluate these
education and outreach activities.