* 1357666
* Developing Dynamic Tools for Analyzing Irregularly Spaced Longitudinal Affect Data
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2018
* Hongtu Zhu, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 05/31/2018
* USD 350,001.00

The regulation of emotions is an integral part of everyday life. Despite the
widespread interest in emotions, very few statistical models exist for formally
evaluating the dynamics of emotion regulation. The collaborative work stemming
from this project will enhance theoretical and methodological developments in
the field of dynamic systems modeling by introducing novel methodologies suited
for testing existing theories of emotions. It also will create opportunities for
methodologists to refine existing techniques and develop new ones for studying
dynamic systems that will benefit other scientific disciplines. The tools
developed in this project can be used to examine irregularly spaced survey data
frequently observed in the studies of other dynamic processes, such as family
dynamics, social networks, and the propagation of diseases. Physicians and other
clinical practitioners may benefit from findings concerning how emotions vary
over time. To broaden the educational impact of this project, graduate students
will be involved in all phases of the project. Statistical tools developed in
this study also will be disseminated to a broader research audience through
online tutorial, forums, and conference
workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Empirical studies of human dynamic processes,
such as studies of circadian rhythms, emotions, propagation of diseases, and
dyadic and family-level interactions, frequently involve irregularly spaced
longitudinal survey data. In the study of human emotions, researchers often
adopt ecological momentary assessment (EMA) procedures to obtain responses at
random or event-contingent time intervals. Such designs facilitate the
collection of data that reflect an individual's ongoing emotional states "in the
moment." Common approaches based on ordinary and stochastic differential
equations can be used to accommodate the irregular time intervals observed in
such data, but they are not directly suited for handling the noisy, high-
dimensional nature and diverse time scales characterizing EMA data. The diverse
range of time intervals also leads to computational challenges in determining
the appropriate interpolation intervals in fitting differential equation models
to empirical data. The study will yield an integrated set of software tools for:
(1) fitting and evaluating continuous-time regime-switching models for
extracting key phases of emotion processes with homogeneous dynamical
structures; (2) conducting Bayesian local influence analysis to assess the
sensitivity of the proposed modeling extensions to perturbations to the
hypothesized prior, sampling distribution, and data; and (3) determining the
most robust interpolation intervals for fitting continuous-time models with
regime-switching features under conditions that mirror real-life EMA studies.
Simulation studies as well as two existing EMA data sets will be used to test
and validate the techniques developed in this study.