* 1357813
* EPRI: Collaborative Research: autoFlutter: Efficient, Waterless Power Plant Cooling
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2014,10/31/2018
* Ari Glezer, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Jose Lage
* 10/31/2018
* USD 398,602.00

1357813&lt;br/&gt;Glezer&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The rate of consumption and
withdrawal of water for use in power plant cooling systems has become untenable
in light of limited water supply and cost, as well as regulatory restrictions,
and environmental concerns. However, the effectiveness of dry air cooling of
current, conventional condenser systems has been hindered by the high thermal
resistance and poor air thermal capacity of the cooling air. It is clear that in
order to enable an appreciable decrease in water consumption for power
generation, the heat transfer between the condensing steam and the air-side
medium must be significantly enhanced. Earlier attempts to improve the air-side
heat transfer focused on the addition of surface features (dimples, etc.) on the
cooling fins with limited success and significant increase in fan power. The
proposed program overcomes the limits of air-side heat transport by exploiting
interactions between the cooling air flow and miniature, autonomously-fluttering
reeds (AFRs) to induce the formation and advection of small-scale vortical
motions near the condenser fin surfaces. A unique aspect of this approach is
that reed flutter is generated by harnessing mechanical energy from the
embedding cooling air flow at exceedingly low penalty in pressure losses. These
low-cost thin reeds can be tailored for different regions of the condenser and
fabricated either integral to the external condenser surfaces or as drop in
retrofit assemblies for existing condensers. The reed assemblies are easy to
install and maintain without plant level infrastructure modifications.
Preliminary heat transfer enhancement and pressure drop analyses coupled with
condenser designs and power plant simulations have shown that air-cooled
condensers using AFR technology can increase plant efficiency while
significantly reducing water consumption compared to wet cooling.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research program will focus on enabling advances in
thermoelectric power plant condenser technology to overcome current limits of
cooling by dry air and thereby significantly reduce water usage for evaporative
cooling. The present approach overcomes the limits of air-side heat transport by
exploiting interactions between the cooling air flow and miniature,
autonomously-fluttering reeds (AFRs) to induce the formation and advection of
small-scale vortical motions near the condenser fins. A unique aspect of this
approach is that reed flutter is generated by harnessing mechanical energy from
the embedding cooling air flow at exceedingly low penalty in pressure losses.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program encompasses integrated
experimental/modeling/numerical investigations that will focus on the
fundamental knowledge needed to implement, design, and optimize the use of the
AFRs, and demonstrate their efficacy in improving the heat transfer
characteristics of finned air-side passages of condensers in power plant
configurations and operating conditions. The research at Georgia Tech will focus
on experimental investigations of the heat transfer characteristics enhanced by
the AFRs along with the modeling, design, and testing of novel condenser
configurations enabled by the AFR technology. Johns Hopkins University will
focus on CFD investigations of small-scale heat transfer and performance
evaluation and optimization of AFR-enhanced condenser configurations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Small-scale heat transfer enhancement by AFRs was recently
demonstrated in air-cooled heated ducts at Georgia Tech with significant heat
transfer enhancement. These low-cost thin reeds can be tailored for different
regions of the condenser and fabricated either integral to the external
condenser surfaces or as drop in retrofit assemblies for existing condensers.
The reed assemblies are easy to install and maintain without plant level
infrastructure modifications.