* 1357665
* Investigation of the Effects of CACO3 Saturation State & Temperature on the Calcification Rate & Skeletal Properties of Benthic Marine Calcifiers
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2013,08/31/2015
* Justin Ries, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 08/31/2015
* USD 374,630.00

INTELLECTUAL MERIT: Anthropogenic elevation of atmospheric pCO2 is increasing
the acidity of the oceans, thereby reducing the saturation state of seawater
with respect to calcium carbonate (CaCO3). Of mounting concern is the potential
impact of these changes on the ability of calcifying organisms to form their
shells and skeletons. Recent studies, including pilot work conducted by PI Ries
and his colleagues on a suite of benthic marine calcifiers spanning broad
taxonomic, mineralogical, and ecological ranges, have revealed that marine
organisms exhibit a wide range of calcification responses to CO2-induced ocean
acidification, including positive, negative, parabolic, threshold, and neutral
responses. Marine calcifiers build their shells and skeletons from various forms
(polymorphs) of CaCO3, most commonly aragonite, high-Mg calcite, and low-Mg
calcite. These polymorphs differ greatly in their solubility in seawater and,
therefore, in their potential response to CO2-induced ocean acidification. X-ray
diffraction analysis of shells secreted by the organisms investigated in the
pilot study reveals that the proportion of calcite (the less soluble form of
CaCO3) to aragonite (the more soluble form) within their shells increases under
elevated pCO2, while the Mg:Ca ratio of their calcite declines. These
observations suggested that some marine calcifiers may partially adapt to a
declining CaCO3 saturation state by accreting a greater proportion of the less-
soluble form of CaCO3 (low-Mg calcite) at the expense of the more soluble forms
(aragonite, high-Mg calcite). However, it is likely that such mineralogical and
compositional changes in the shells and skeletons of marine organisms would
alter their structural and biomechanical properties. The project seeks to build
upon the results of the pilot study by rearing a suite of benthic marine
calcifiers under past (280 ppm), present (385 ppm), and predicted future (540,
840 ppm) pCO2 and under three distinct temperatures to investigate changes in:
(1) their rates of calcification and linear extension; (2) the relative
abundance and micron-scale distribution of the various CaCO3 polymorphs within
their shells/skeletons; (3) the ultrastructure and crystal morphology of their
shells/skeletons; and (4) their biomechanical properties. The research would
also build upon the pilot experiments by utilizing a more thoroughly replicated
study design, by more precisely constraining the chemical parameters of the
experimental seawater treatments, by investigating calcification responses under
3 different temperature regimes, and by employing a "pre-industrial" pCO2 level
(280 ppm). The results of the proposed research should advance our understanding
of how benthic marine calcifiers shall respond to future CO2-induced changes in
seawater temperature and CaCO3 saturation state. And by investigating the
response of organisms over the range of atmospheric pCO2 that has occurred since
late Paleozoic time, this research should inform our understanding of the
putative links atmospheric pCO2, mass extinction events, and secular variation
in the polymorph mineralogy of marine calcifiers throughout geologic time.
Finally, comparison of the observed biological responses to variable pCO2-T
scenarios with that already established for abiogenic carbonates will advance
our understanding of the very mechanisms by which marine calcifiers build their
shells and skeletons.

BROADER IMPACTS: The results of the proposed research will inform the decisions
of policy makers and legislators working to mitigate the impacts of CO2-induced
warming and ocean acidification by establishing pCO2-T tolerances for a range of
marine calcifiers. Results of the proposed research would be widely disseminated
through peer-reviewed publication, conference presentations, public outreach,
the PI's website, and mainstream media outlets. PI Ries is an early career
scientist whose developing research program would be materially enhanced by the
resources and activities afforded via the research. This research would also
promote the education, training, and professional development of graduate
students Ann Mooney (a native Pacific Islander) and Isaac Westfield, and
postdoctoral fellow Karl Castillo (a native Belizean of African descent), two of
whom belong to minority groups that are underrepresented in the marine sciences.
Finally, the proposed research would create valuable training and educational
experiences for several undergraduates conducting research under the PI.