* 1357036
* Collaborative Research: An Isotopic and Trace Element Study of Links Between Source Heterogeneity and Mantle Melting Beneath the Southeast Indian Ridge
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2018
* Barry Hanan, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Deborah K. Smith
* 04/30/2018
* USD 170,256.00

The Southeast Indian ridge is a mid-ocean spreading center that lies between
Australia and Antarctica. Due to its location, it is one of the least sampled
and studied parts of the ocean floor. It is also where French oceanographic
cruises have recently sampled a large number of closely-spaced mid-ocean ridge
spreading center lavas in an effort to examine geochemical heterogeneity of the
mantle on a fine scale. This research teams US scientists from San Diego State
University and Oregon State University with scientists from two major French
academic oceanographic institutions to carry out a comprehensive geochemical
study of these lavas to help understand the crust below the Indian Ocean and how
it is affected by the transfer of mantle material. Research goals are to examine
the validity of a risky, new hypothesis, based on statistical analysis and
theory, which proposes that mantle heterogeneity is bimodal in character and
represented by streak-like chemical differences that can help us understand
mantle convection and the chemical differentiation of the Earth. The US
component of the work involves the analysis of radiogenic isotopes (Pb, Nd, Sr,
and Hf) and trace element geochemical analyses of Southeast Indian Ridge basalt
glasses. These data will be used to determine whether the streak-like Pb and Hf
isotopes beneath the Southeast Indian Ridge propagate across the area, (2)
investigate whether mid-ocen ridge basalt lava isotopic heterogeneity is
different in the vicinity of active hotspot areas compared with those that are
far from hotspots, and (3) investigate how isotopic heterogeneity relates to
changes in mantle source lithology and partial melting conditions. Broader
impacts of the proposal are good and involve strong international collaboration
with scientists at two major French oceanographic academic institutions. The
project will also help support an NSF-funded, open, isotope facility at San
Diego State University and will develop, in conjunction with French colleagues,
improved volcanic glass dissolution procedures, thereby building infrastructure
for science. Additional impacts include undergraduate training and incorporation
of research results into college student coursework.