* 1357368
* 2014 Predator-prey Interactions "From Genes to Ecosystems to Human Mental Health" Gordon Research Conference; Ventura, CA - January 5-10, 2014
* BIO,DEB
* 12/01/2013,11/30/2014
* Evan Preisser, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 11/30/2014
* USD 10,000.00

This proposal provides funding to help graduate students and postdoctoral
researchers attend the inaugural meeting of the Gordon Research Conference on
Predator-Prey Interactions in January 2014. This conference, subtitled "From
genes to ecosystems to human mental health", brings together a wide array of
researchers from fields such as ecology, evolution, physiology, and psychiatry
to explore how predation risk (and, more broadly, the threat of bodily harm)
affects organisms, populations, communities, and ecosystems. While many
researchers have examined these questions within a given system or species,
there has been no opportunity for them to compare their findings and identify
fruitful avenues for cross-disciplinary work. This conference aims to provide
that opportunity, identifying areas of research synergy and spurring the
interdisciplinary collaborations necessary to address
them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal targets students and postdoctoral
researchers, with priority given to those individuals who are also members of
under-represented groups. Partial funding will be provided to enable them to
attend the conference. Giving them the opportunity to meet with leading
researchers and present their own work will broaden their career opportunities.
To share results of the conference with the widest possible audience, we will
publish a mini-review of the research discussed in Open Ecology Journal, an
open-access online journal indexed in Google Scholar.