* 1357423
* Collaborative Proposal:  Vibrio as a model microbe for opportunistic heterotrophic response to Saharan dust deposition events in marine waters
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2019
* Erin Lipp, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 03/31/2019
* USD 527,598.00

Overview: Dust and mineral aerosols are a significant source of micro and
macronutrients to oligotrophic ocean surface waters. Evidence is growing that
heterotrophic microbes may play key roles in processing deposited minerals and
nutrients. Yet it is not known which components of dust stimulate the
heterotrophic bacteria, which cellular mechanisms are responsible for the
utilization of those components and how the activity of these bacteria affect
the availability and utilization of dust-derived minerals and nutrients by
marine autotrophs. Knowledge of these factors is key to understanding how dust
deposition impacts carbon cycles and for predicting the response of tropical
oceans to future changes in the frequency and intensity of dust deposition
events. The objective of this project is to examine the specific effects of
aeolian dust on heterotrophic microbes in a tropical marine system under
controlled conditions. The central hypothesis is that in oligotrophic tropical
systems numerically minor opportunistic bacteria are the first responders to
influx of dust constituents and respond primarily by rapidly accessing soluble
trace metals and limiting nutrients that are deposited with Saharan dust. The
project will focus on two specific aims: 1) Quantify changes in community
structure, composition and transcriptional activity among marine microbial
populations upon exposure to dust, and 2) Identify key components in Saharan
dust aerosols that stimulate or repress growth and/or activity in Vibrio, a
model opportunistic marine heterotrophic group. The study will use a series of
controlled experiments designed to identify and quantify heterotrophic microbial
response to dust deposition events using both natural communities and model
bacteria (Vibrio) through metagenomics, transcriptomics and atmospheric and
marine biogeochemical techniques. This innovative approach will identify the
most critical (reactive) components leached from dust aerosols on the microbial
community as well as elucidate potential mechanisms of response.

Intellectual Merit: There is great interest in the biological response to dust
aerosols given its potentially large influence on biogeochemical cycling, but
there has been relatively little work that has addressed the mechanisms of
response (especially among the heterotrophic microbial fraction) or identified
the relative importance of specific constituents of dust aerosols. A detailed
framework for microbial response (focusing on opportunistic heterotrophs) will
facilitate efforts to link autotrophic and heterotrophic processing. This
contribution is significant because it will provide one of the first end-to-end
(chemistry to physiology to ecology) mechanistic pathways for marine biological
response to desert dust aerosols.

Broader Impacts: The outcomes of this research will provide information on an
often overlooked component of climate change, the long range effects of
desertification, which could impact biogeochemical cycling throughout the
oceans. Furthermore, working with Vibrio as a model will have the co-benefit of
addressing the possible role of dust deposition on the global rise of a marine
infectious agent. Additionally, this project will provide graduate,
undergraduate and high school students with both training and active
participation in research. All students will have opportunities to present their
work at local and regional meetings as well as national (international)
conferences. Through on-going programs at each institution, students from STEM
under-represented groups will be recruited for research opportunities (and for
entry into graduate programs). Additionally, through participation in the
Georgia Coastal Research Council results of this work, and related issues in
marine science and climate change, will be broadly disseminated to policy-makers
and local (coastal) stakeholders through meetings, links to the GRGC website and
listserv and targeted publications.