* 1357109
* I-Corps:  Biomimetic Degradable Load Bearing Osteoconductive Bone Graft
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2013,03/31/2014
* Esmaiel Jabbari, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 03/31/2014
* USD 50,000.00

The technology developed through this project generates a bone implant that
maintains its shape and provides mechanical stability to allow bone to form
around the implant. Afterward, the implant degrades with time to provide volume
for new bone formation. This combines the microstructure of cortical bone with
degradability of polyester nanofibers to address the issues of scaffold
resorption, strength and uniform nutrient supply. To address the issues of
compressive strength and resorption, the team will engineer calcium phosphate
(CaP) deposited polyester nanofiber sheets with high CaP content. To address the
issue of uniform nutrient supply, the team will engineer a bonded set of
macroporous laminated microtubes with interconnected canals. Upon seeding the
scaffold with progenitor cells, a pre-vascularized resorbable and stiff graft is
formed for implantation in a bone defect.

Unlike metallic implants that are non-resorbable and shield stress or ceramic
and plastic implants that are brittle and deformable, the product of this
invention mimics the structure of natural cortical bone for mechanical
stability, degradation, and uniform nutrient supply. Competitive advantages
include tunable resorption, load bearing with tunable mechanical strength,
osteoconductive to support new bone formation, interconnected microtubular
structure for uniform nutrient transport, and compatible with growth factors and
stem cells. Application o fthis technology can migrate to areas other than
orthopedics, like in pharmaceutics for drug delivery and targeting, in
bioprinting for generation of complex structures and 3D models of human tissues,
and engineering multifunctional biosensors.