* 1357600
* Biomechanics of Amyloid Oligomer-Induced Stress on Cardiomyocytes
* ENG,CBET
* 06/30/2013,05/31/2016
* Florin Despa, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 05/31/2016
* USD 151,079.00

1133339 Despa

The amyloid oligomers are sticky molecules that attach to cellular membranes and
change their mechanical and electrical properties, thus generating molecular
forces that can alter cellular signal transduction, function and viability.
Despite sustained research efforts, the biomechanics of amyloid oligomer-cell
interaction remains elusive. The major goal of this project is to assess the
biomechanics of the interaction of islet amyloid polypeptide (IAPP) oligomers
with cardiac myocytes, the beating heart cells. IAPP oligomers form within
pancreatic â-cells in patients with obesity and type-2 diabetes and are then
released in the blood along with insulin. They can deposit locally in pancreatic
islets and also in peripheral organs, including the heart. Cardiac accumulation
of IAPP amyloids contributes to the development of heart dysfunction, the number
one killer in obesity and diabetes. Due to the complex nature of the molecular
forces acting at the IAPP oligomer-cardiac myocyte interface, various
interaction modes and cellular responses can be expected. Major questions to be
addressed in the proposed research are as follows: (1) do IAPP oligomers a)
attach to and grow into fibrils at the sarcolemma, b) create pores or c) enter
cardiac myocytes?; (2) what are the effects on the sarcolemmal processes?, (3)
how they affect contractility and viability of the cardiac myocyte? These
questions will be addressed in a multidisciplinary research project that
combines biomechanical principles and methods with modern cell physiology
experiments, innovative transgenic animal models and mathematical modeling.
Deciphering the molecular and cellular signature of IAPP amyloid oligomers in
the heart can have a long-term impact in the diagnosis and treatment of diabetic
heart dysfunction, a large and growing epidemic with enormous health care costs
and social consequences. The expected results may also represent a significant
advancement in studying other generic amyloid oligomer-cell interactions, i.e.
Aâ oligomers and polyglutamine oligomers interacting with neurons and
astrocytes.