* 1357725
* Debt, Default and Business Cycles with Heterogeneous Firms
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Aubhik Khan, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2017
* USD 430,750.00

This award funds research on the effects of financial shocks on macroeconomic
activity. In the 2007 recession, financial shocks to the credit market were
followed by a sharp decline in aggregate investment and employment. However, the
credit shocks did not affect all firms in the same way. For example, we know
that job loss was disproportionately concentrated among small firms compared to
past recessions, and firms with lower cash holdings experienced far larger
declines in investment spending. The PIs will develop new quantitative models of
how financial shocks affect the economy through effects on different kinds of
individual firms. Existing models largely rely on an assumption that all firms
in a sector are very similar. The new model is more difficult to analyze, but
also more realistic. The model and methods developed in this project may improve
our ability to determine whether or not a given financial shock will result in
recession.

The PIs will develop and solve two quantitative DSGE models wherein shocks to
financial markets affect borrowers' default risk and thus credit conditions
facing nonfinancial firms. The models include a distribution of firms over
capital, debt and firm specific productivity, endogenous firm entry and exit,
financial shocks affecting equilibrium loan rate schedules offered to borrowers,
and real shocks affecting aggregate productivity. The first model explores one-
period debt; the second generalizes the first to accommodate firms with
differing debt maturities. Firms accumulate capital and may borrow or save; for
consistency with firm-level financial data, the model allows for retained
earnings. The PIs target the observed relation between size and leverage and the
volatility of cash ratios among U.S. nonfinancial firms in the model
calibration.