* 1357340
* Co-development of Economic, Civic, and Kinship Networks
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* John Padgett, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 07/31/2017
* USD 250,000.00

This project examines the emergence of novel organizational forms by studying
changes in and re-combinations of social networks that are based on kinship,
economic, and civic linkages. The research focuses on social networks as
foundations for other institutions and collects unusually detailed data on a
specific historical case that produced organizational novelty and inventions so
prolifically that it influenced the development of western civilization. This
study continues a trajectory of research by the investigator in which previous
findings from research on Florence Italy have been generalized and applied to
analyses diverse cases. Specifically, this past research has been used in
generating better understandings of the rise of capitalism in Europe, the
transformation of Communism in the twentieth century, and the biotechnology
industry in Silicon Valley. A central outcome of this project will be the
completion and public release of a relational data base on changing economic,
civic, and kinship networks among about 70,000 citizens. This will be further
generalizable to modern and diverse cases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The "emergence
of organization novelty," the subject of this research, has broad relevance. The
Florentine economy has been exceptionally resilient in the face of shocks, wars,
plagues, and social revolts. Florentine industry shifted from wool-
manufacturing, to international banking (the economic foundation of their
extraordinary wealth and cultural patronage), to silk production during this
time frame. Similarly, Florentine governmental and civic institutions were
remarkably inventive and flexible. Many constitutional systems of representation
have been experimented with, ranging from democratic to oligarchical to
centralized in effect. By studying these specific cases, this research will
contribute to answering the broad general question of what makes macroeconomic,
civic and governmental flexibility and resilience. The findings from this
research enable theoretical development that can be applied to similar modern
conditions. Increasing and improving general knowledge about causal
interrelationships between (easily visible) institutional order and (hard to
see) social-network foundations has potential for wide application beyond this
particular case study.