* 1357955
* Collaborative Research: Foundations for Comparative Naivete and Sophistication
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2017
* David Ahn, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Hyun Hong
* 04/30/2017
* USD 183,732.00

Consumers frequently make decisions that are inconsistent across time. For
instance, they may be tempted to consume more at a given date than they had
previously budgeted, leaving less for future consumption. Awareness of time-
inconsistency problems allows consumers to take advantage of commitment devices
to constrain their future decisions: A consumer who anticipates being tempted to
under-save may channel some assets into illiquid savings instruments such as
tax-sheltered retirement accounts to commit to saving that money until a later
date. However, a growing body of evidence suggests that many people hold
inaccurate beliefs about their future self-control and naively anticipate making
more virtuous choices. Naivete about time-inconsistency may undermine the
effectiveness of certain policy instruments like retirement accounts, since
naive consumers will underutilize these commitment devices. The goal of this
research project is to study when consumers make choices that are inconsistent
across time and the degree to which they are able to predict their future
deviations from current plans

This project will develop a new measure of the level of naivete or
sophistication consumers have about their own future choices and will provide
new behavioral definitions to test this. The project will also develop a
recursive and fully dynamic model that allows for using dynamic programming
techniques bringing naivete to closer contact with workhorse models in finance
and macroeconomics. The importance of this foundational theory is to understand
naivete in a language broad enough to develop and understand the implications of
interventions in cases where citizens have heterogeneous degrees of naivete and
are best approximated by a variety of different formal models. This project has
broader impact for a wide variety of public policy decisions ranging from health
management to retirement savings.