* 1357102
* Collaborative Research:   Continuation and Enhancement of MPOWIR
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2019
* Susan Lozier, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 03/31/2019
* USD 97,881.00

Overview: MPOWIR (Mentoring Physical Oceanography Women to Increase Retention)
is a community-led program aimed at providing mentoring to junior women in
physical oceanography in order to improve their retention in the field.
Initiated in 2004, MPOWIR activities started in earnest in 2007. The objectives
of the program, as determined by the community in the 2005 planning workshop
are: (1) to provide continuity of mentoring from a young woman's graduate
career, through her postdoctoral years to the first years of her permanent job,
(2) to establish a collective responsibility within the physical oceanography
community for the mentoring of junior women in the field, (3) to provide a
variety of mentoring resources and mentors on a variety of issues, (4) to cast a
wide net to avoid exclusiveness and (5) to open this mentoring program to all
those who self-identify as a physical oceanographer.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The MPOWIR program, through its focus
on the retention of women in the field of physical oceanography, will allow
further capitalization on the investment the funding agencies and universities
have made on the education of women students. Essentially, this project seeks to
stem the loss of intellectual capital for the physical oceanographic field, as
well as other geoscience disciplines through the following
activities:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1.Pattullo conference: This biannual conference
brings together about 25 junior women physical oceanographers, together with 12
senior physical oceanographers, both male and female, for a 2.5 day meeting
focused on discipline-based mentoring.&lt;br/&gt;2.Mentoring groups: Groups of
about 6 junior women and 2 senior women physical oceanographers meet for a
monthly teleconference, for the purpose of confidential, personalized
mentoring.&lt;br/&gt;3.MPOWIR website: The website serves as a repository of
resources for mentoring and physical oceanography careers.&lt;br/&gt;4.Databases
and surveys: Regular surveys are conducted to assess the effectiveness of MPOWIR
activities, determine community mentoring needs, and evaluate progress in
retention.&lt;br/&gt;5.Town Hall meetings and socials: Events at the Ocean
Sciences meeting facilitate networking between physical oceanographers and
provide career development information to junior scientists.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The website and town hall meetings are open to all, and
greater emphasis will be placed on making material available via the website, to
ensure a gender-neutral benefit. Efforts to export the MPOWIR model to other
disciplines and institutions will be undertaken via links with the Earth Science
Women's Network, and through a new quarterly newsletter. Social media will be
used to publicize MPOWIR activities, announcement and
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This proposed work aids efforts to
create a scientific workforce whose diversity more closely matches that of the
student population and that of the U.S. population as a whole, by aiding the
retention of women in the field of physical oceanography and other geoscience
disciplines.