* 1357483
* Collaborative Research: The Effects of Organizational, World-System, and World Society Factors on Power Plants' Emissions
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2016
* Don Grant II, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 07/31/2016
* USD 133,400.00

This project examines the effects of different international relationships on
electric power plant CO2 emission rates and levels, by assessing how global and
national social factors combine with the organizational characteristics of
individual power plants to shape emission outcomes, and investigates how the
conjoint effects of organizational and global factors on plants' carbon
emissions may vary by the national regulatory systems that mediate them. This
project addresses three research questions: Which sets of organizational, world-
system, and world society structures determine fossil fuel power plants' CO2
emission rates? Which sets of these structures cause plants' emission rates to
improve over time but their emission levels to worsen? And to what extent can
the effects of organizational and global factors on plants' emission outcomes be
explained by the regulatory systems of plants' host nations?

To answer these questions, this project will use newly released data compiled by
the Center for Global Development on the carbon emissions and structural
characteristics of over 20,000 power plants throughout the world. It will employ
multi-level regression techniques in conjunction with novel fuzzy set analytic
(fsQCA) methods that can identify which combinations of factors are associated
with an outcome. Consistent with the literature on structural configurations, we
hypothesize that plants with high CO2 emission rates and levels share certain
combinations of organizational, world-system, and world society structures and
the effectiveness of national environmental policies will depend on plants'
structural profiles. This project seeks to provide new information on the
structural sources of CO2 emissions, and it will advance world-systems, world
society, and organizational research on the environment that to date have been
typically treated as competing rather than complementary perspectives.

This project's findings will help to develop a sector-based strategy to
mitigating CO2 emissions, and findings should help determine the standards met
by power plants around the world. Findings may also be of interest to the
electricity industry, as it may become possible to target future regulatory
initiatives at specific subsets of power plants. Finally, project results could
support industry initiatives to optimize self-regulation and environmental
performance of member facilities. The project also includes training for a
graduate student research assistant.