* 1357920
* EPRI: On-demand Sweating-Boosted Air Cooled Heat-Pipe Condensers for Green Power Plants
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2018
* Chen Li, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Jose Lage
* 04/30/2018
* USD 675,004.00

1357920&lt;br/&gt;Li&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hybrid cooling, as proposed here, will
have direct impact on power plants, particularly in increasing the power
generation efficiency, reducing approximately 70% water usage (compared to
cooling towers) and by alleviating the dependence of air cooling performance on
the ambient conditions (i.e. weather conditions; ambient air temperature and
moisture, cross winds etc.). The foundational knowledge gained from this project
will stimulate the transition from current cooling equipment of power plants to
this unique and novel technology. The substantial water saving will help relieve
the water crisis facing US and the world. By active dissemination of the
fundamental findings, it will offer the scientific community a unique
understanding of effectively cooling large scale power plant units in an
efficient environment-friendly, and sustainable way. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
this research, novel heat-pipe condensers cooled by on-demand sweat-boosted air
cooling will be developed to achieve unprecedented cooling capability and
substantially reduce the size and footprint of air-cooled condensers (ACC), with
a minimal penalty in power production. This can be achieved by innovatively
engineering phase change heat transfer to drastically enhance three major heat
transfer processes in ACC. Specifically, heat acquisition will be enhanced by
dropwise condensation on robust Nickel alloy coatings created by atmospheric
plasma spray (APS); temperature difference can be significantly reduced by
highly conductive heat pipes (as the condenser core) enabled by novel hybrid
microscale wick structures; and the heat rejection process will be dramatically
enhanced by devising sweat-evaporation that mimics the primary mechanism of
mammals to effectively dissipate heat during physical exercise. Novel nanowicks
will be developed from functionalized carbon nanotubes (CNTs) to realize
evaporation and create durable self-cleaning coatings. The heat and mass
transfer on micro/nano-engineered surfaces will be experimentally and
numerically studied. Component level models will be integrated in a Virtual Test
Bed (VTB) to achieve high fidelity modeling of ACCs and power plants. Compared
with conventional ACCs, the capital cost can be potentially reduced by 67% as
estimated in our preliminary model. To achieve the objectives of this three-year
project, five major research tasks will be carried out: 1) designing and
evaluating condensers in a VTB; 2) devising sweat-boosted air cooling; 3)
developing high performance heat pipes as the core of the condenser; 4) enabling
dropwise condensation for heat acquisition; and 5) benchmarking modeling in a
lab scale condenser.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Underrepresented student support is
emphasized in this project. Outreach activities geared towards high school
students, teachers, and general public will be carried out.