* 1357522
* Dependence of Antarctic sea-ice extent on mesoscale ocean variability in the Southern Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2019
* Laurence Padman, Earth and Space Research
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 03/31/2019
* USD 464,384.00

Overview: Sea ice extent around Antarctica has slowly increased over the
satellite era (1979-present), against the general decline of other global
cryosphere components and contrary to modern negative sea ice extent trends in
global coupled climate models (CCMs). Previous hypotheses have focused on large-
scale mechanisms that impact the sea ice mass balance: changes in wind stress
fields due to stratospheric ozone depletion; a more energetic Southern Ocean
hydrologic cycle; increased downwelling long wave radiation; and enhanced
freshwater production under ice shelves. An additional hypothesis will be
tested: Mesoscale ocean processes that are not resolved in CCMs play a
significant role in controlling ice edge position and sea-ice characteristics in
the marginal ice zone and that inter-annual variability and trends in ocean
mesoscale activity can drive changes in sea ice extent that are not closely
correlated with the annual-averaged Southern Ocean state such as position of
Antarctic Circumpolar Current fronts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
Daily satellite-derived sea-ice concentration fields will be analyzed to
determine the effect of ocean mesoscale variability on sea-ice edge
characteristics that influence true and satellite-measured sea-ice extent.
Statistics will include the increase in ice-edge length due to mesoscale
processes as a measure of increased exposure of the Marginal Ice Zone to "open-
ocean" processes. Sea ice extent derived from different gridded datasets of sea-
ice concentration will be compared to determine whether inter-annual variability
and trends in sea ice extent are sensitive to measurement methodology and
spatial resolution. If justified by prior work, near-contemporaneous Envisat
ASAR high-resolution radar images will then be compared with sea-ice
concentration fields from AMSR-E. A database of tracked eddies will also be
analyzed to determine whether eddies generated by Antarctic Circumpolar Current
frontal instabilities and interactions with topography contribute to ice-edge
variability. These analyses will be performed on circum-Antarctic and regional
scales, at annual resolution to resolve inter-annual variability and
trends.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The output from an eddy-permitting three-
dimensional regional ocean model with coupled sea ice or a data-constrained
ocean state model (Southern Ocean State Estimate) will be analyzed to
investigate how well these models represent the ocean mesoscale contribution to
ice-edge perturbations. The investigators will also develop their own idealized
models of ocean/ice/atmosphere interactions at the ice edge to investigate
mechanisms for generation of ice-edge fronts whose instabilities may be
significant contributors to the ice-edge mesoscale
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This study will elucidate the
mechanisms coupling the highly energetic Southern Ocean mesoscale field with sea
ice. Antarctic sea ice has a profound effect on albedo, ocean/atmosphere heat
and moisture fluxes and gas exchange, and so is an important component of the
global coupled climate system. The concurrent analyses of existing data and
eddy-permitting ocean/sea-ice models will inform interpretation of sea-ice
variability in modern CCMs, and so identify critical developments needed to
improve their representation of sea ice. Careful examination of the marginal ice
zone will help inform the interpretation of satellite retrievals of ice-edge
position. The investigators will continue their participation in local outreach
activities including presentations at Pacific Science Center (Seattle) and the
Robinson Center for Young Scholars at the University of Washington, public talks
in Oregon and frequent contributions on Climate Science to the Corvallis
newspaper Opinion Page, development of a project web page targeted at a general
audience, and updating their outreach web site including polar photo server.