* 1358923
* REU Site: Development of Safe Nanomaterials for Biological Applications
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Shree Singh, Alabama State University
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 08/31/2017
* USD 336,634.00

This REU Site award to Alabama State University, located in Montgomery, AL, will
support the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during the summers of 2014 -
2016. The focus of this program is to provide research experiences in the
multidisciplinary fields of nanotechnology and biotechnology. Faculty from
biological sciences, chemistry, physical sciences and other related disciplines
will be serving as mentors for the program. All research projects will be based
on novel concepts of design and development of new nanomaterials for biological
applications. Students will participate in a full-time closely mentored lab
research project along with seminars and various professional development
workshops, such as the responsible conduct of research, professional
communication skills, career opportunities in academia and industry, and the
graduate school application process. Students will present their findings at
both a poster session and research symposium during the final weeks of the
program. Students will also take field trips to encourage interactions with the
faculty and students at Alabama State University. Housing, a stipend, and meal
and travel allowances will be provided. Students will be selected based on their
interest in research, academic record, and phone interviews with potential
faculty mentors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The REU program is intended to encourage
students to pursue a career in STEM fields. Students will learn how research is
conducted and many will present the results of their work at scientific
conferences. Members of underrepresented minority groups and from colleges with
limited research opportunities are especially encouraged to
apply.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Program evaluation will use both internal
evaluations and the BIO REU common assessment tool. Students are required to be
tracked after the program and must respond to an automatic email sent via the
NSF reporting system. More information is available by visiting
http://www.alasu.edu/REU , or by contacting the PI (Dr. Komal Vig at
komalvig@alasu.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. Shree R. Singh at ssingh@alasu.edu).