* 1358673
* Flexible Core/Shell Nanocable - Carbon Microfiber Hybrid Composite Electrodes for High-Performance Supercapacitors
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/31/2013,08/31/2016
* Xiaodong Li, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 08/31/2016
* USD 233,438.00

This award provides funding for synthesizing large quantities of conductive-
core/transition-metal-oxide-shell nanocables on a highly flexible and strong
carbon microfiber substrate. The primary goal of this work is to solve the three
most critical limitations in supercapacitors for portable electronic devices and
wearable electronics, i.e., inflexibility, low specific capacitance, and
electrode failure resulting from ion insertion/extraction during
charge/discharge cycling. The electrical conductive-cores will be used to
support redox active transition-metal-oxide-shells with highly electrolytic
accessible surface area and also to provide reliable electrical connections to
the shells, enabling full utilization of transitional-metal-oxide and fast
electronic and ionic conduction through the electrode. The carbon microfibers
will offer not only flexibility and mechanical strength to the electrode but
also more surface area than a flat conductive substrate for growing more
nanocables, which further improves the specific capacitance and energy density.
This research program will study the formation mechanisms of the core/shell
nanocables grown on flexible carbon microfibers and the electrochemical energy
storage mechanisms of the core/shell ? carbon microfiber hybrid composite
electrodes. High throughput manufacturing of such composite electrodes with high
flexibility, high specific capacitance, high energy density, high power density,
fast charging/discharging rate, and long cycle life will be explored through the
novel hierarchical nano/micro architecture design.

If successful, the results of this research will contribute to a better
understanding of the manufacturing-structure-property-function of the core/shell
? carbon microfiber hybrid composites and their electrodes. This research has
the potential to change the conventional concepts for flexible electrode design
and to significantly impact existing electrode manufacturing technologies. The
research advances made through this project will generate new knowledge that
will be introduced to undergraduate and graduate students through existing
courses and the research activities will be used as an educational platform for
students at all levels to learn about nanomanufacturing and nanotechnology-
enabled energy storage systems.