* 1358955
* Neural Mechanisms for Perceptual Decision Making in Humans
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2014,12/31/2018
* Simon Kelly, CUNY City College
* Continuing Grant
* Kurt Thoroughman
* 12/31/2018
* USD 530,898.00

In daily life, humans are constantly faced with decisions about what they see,
hear or feel - decisions that, though simple, are critical to acting in
accordance with their goals. For example, when driving, how close one's car is
to the car in front must be continuously monitored so that the appropriate
action - stepping on the break - can be performed in a timely manner. Despite
the simplicity of such decisions, our actions are highly variable because many
factors influence the decision process in the brain, for example, (1) how much
we know in terms of when to expect a relevant event, (2) whether it is more
important to act rapidly or to take longer in order to be more accurate, (3) in
what location we expect a relevant sensory event to occur, and (4) how much
practice we have had in making a given type of decision. There is currently very
little empirical knowledge on these factors because the decision process itself
is very difficult to measure noninvasively in humans. With support from the
National Science Foundation, Dr. Simon Kelly of the City College of New York
(CCNY), along with collaborator Dr Redmond O'Connell of Trinity College Dublin,
will measure electrical activity from specific regions of the human brain using
electroencephalography (EEG) and mathematical algorithms for source separation
while participants perform decision making tasks that rely on each of the four
aforementioned factors. Crucially, a new paradigm design and signal analysis
framework and algorithms will be used which provides the unprecedented ability
to measure distinct neural elements of the decision process, namely, 1) the
representation of the sensory information itself, 2) the accumulation of that
information over time, and 3) the planning of action in accordance with the
emerging decision. The findings, taken together, will shed light on some of the
most enigmatic aspects of how humans perceive and behave in their sensory
environments.

A vast array of neurological and psychiatric disorders are associated with
deficits in speed and/or accuracy on laboratory tasks in which they make
responses to sensations according to task instructions. The advances made in the
current project will open the unprecedented possibility to parse such deficits
on the neural systems level, and establish the specific stage of processing and
nature of computations that are impaired. This has great potential impact on
diagnosis and treatment in mental health. All data and code from this project
will be made available online for anyone aspiring to gain further insights from
the data, or generate new data using these paradigms. The project entails close
collaboration between biomedical engineers and psychologists, and stands to
promote such interdisciplinary synergy more generally in the neuroscience
community. All experiments lend themselves to student participation and highly
valuable learning experiences, which will be strongly encouraged. Early-stage
researchers at the postdoctoral, doctoral and undergraduate level will be
trained as a part of this project. The demographic make-up of the research team
at CCNY strongly counters the prevailing representation in science and
engineering, with 8 of the total 11 lab members belonging to under-represented
groups in STEM disciplines. All members will gain research training and
experience, as well as cross-cultural exposure through the international
collaboration with Trinity College.