* 1358991
* REU Site: Fluid Mechanics with Analysis using Computations and Experiments  (FM-ACE)
* ENG,EEC
* 03/01/2014,02/28/2018
* Amy Lang, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 02/28/2018
* USD 375,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed activity will carefully
engage and mentor at least 26 students over three summers from 2014-2016 in
exciting and emerging areas related to fluid mechanics with an end goal of
presenting their research at a national conference. This component of the
program acts as an important follow-through mechanism to further encourage REU
participants to pursue graduate studies and contributes to the success of the
site by motivating both the student and mentors to obtain quality research
results. Other important objectives include providing a structure wherein
research and technical communication skills are cultivated. The intellectual
merit of the program resides in the current need for basic and applied research
in fluid mechanics across a range of engineering disciplines as well as the
training of undergraduate students in state-of-the-art laboratory environments.
At least eight faculty will act as research mentors and students will contribute
to projects that include, as a sampling, particle image velocimetry (PIV)
investigations of bio-inspired boundary layer control mechanisms, combustion
studies using a color schlieren system, and the examination of magnetic fluids
for cancer treatment. This program provides a structured plan for each student
to present their work at the American Physical Society Division of Fluid
Dynamics (APS DFD) Meeting held each fall. Over the past six summers during the
previous site, 98% of participants presented an abstract at APS DFD. Assessment
of the program has resulted in continuous improvement to the site and,
especially, to the seminars and communication skills workshops -- the latest
involves having the students compile a three-minute video about their research
project for web posting. The broader impacts of the program include enhancing
and diversifying the pool of students considering a research career in
engineering/sciences. The program incorporates an aggressive recruitment plan
for attracting talented female and other underrepresented groups. Past efforts
resulted in demographics that included 22 women, 4 Hispanics and 2 African
Americans out of 51 students (43% women, and 28/51 or 55% from underrepresented
groups). In addition, one Army veteran also participated in 2013. The original
target, which was surpassed in the previous sites, was and still is to have at
least half of the students participating each year to be from underrepresented
groups. To-date, over 50% of past participants have entered graduate school. The
proposed REU program will not only advance knowledge in new research areas
within fluid mechanics, but will also train a group of diverse and highly-
educated engineering researchers into the US workforce. A new goal of the
renewal site is to recruit at least half from colleges where research in STEM
areas is limited.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award funds a Research Experience for
Undergraduates site that will run for 10 weeks each summer from 2014-2016. The
program is under the direction of Dr. Amy Lang at the University of Alabama and
will engage approximately nine students each summer in research related to
engineering fluid mechanics. Students will be mentored by one of eight faculty
from Aerospace, Mechanical and Chemical &amp; Biological Engineering departments
within the College of Engineering. These projects range from the study of how
butterfly scales improve flight efficiency for potential bio-inspired designs to
combustion studies for overall improvement in fuel efficiency for gas turbine
engines and automobiles. The site also cultivates the oral and written
communication skills of the students through a series of weekly workshops.
Communication of research results is a key skill for a high quality researcher
in engineering. Also, this site is unique in that it culminates in each student
submitting an abstract and presenting at the American Physical Society Division
of Fluid Dynamics meeting held each November. This is an international
conference of over 2000 professionals and students presenting their work in the
field of fluid dynamics. As a group the students attend the conference in
November after their summer experience with Dr. Amy Lang and accompanying
graduate students. Overall, this experience provides an opportunity for
promising undergraduates to perform research as they would experience in
graduate school, and, thus, motivates students to pursue advanced degrees in
engineering. Over 50% of past participants have enrolled in graduate school
(such as MIT, Georgia Tech and Stanford). Recruitment of students from
underrepresented groups is also a goal, with the primary focus being that of
women in engineering (over 40% were women in past sites, about 55% were from
underrepresented groups when including Hispanics and African Americans). This
new site also has the goal of recruiting from colleges where research
opportunities are limited, such as Smith College in Massachusetts.