* 1358839
* Neurophysiological circuits underlying episodic memory formation in the human brain
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2018
* Gabriel Kreiman, Children's Hospital Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Uri Hasson
* 05/31/2018
* USD 695,939.00

Learning and memory formation play a central role in our everyday lives. The
critical nature of our ability to acquire new information and to remember
previous events is manifested in a variety of conditions that affect memory
ranging from learning deficits in children all the way to Alzheimer's disease
and related conditions in the elderly. Previous studies have shown that the
hippocampus and related structures in the medial temporal lobe (MTL) play a
critical role in memory formation for places, images or words. Less is known
about how spatiotemporal sequences and events are encoded and recalled. By using
movies as a proxy to real-life memory formation for episodic events. Dr. Gabriel
Kreiman at the Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, will investigate how
neuronal activity in the human MTL support the formation of episodic memories
during movie events and how the hippocampus interacts with neocortical areas and
the amygdala during learning. Computer vision and machine learning techniques
will be used to develop detailed annotations of movie events to characterize
each sequence of frames in terms of its low-level properties, high-level content
and emotional aspects and to predict memory formation for episodic events from
audiovisual and emotional content. Furthermore, the researchers will combine
this machine learning approach with neurophysiological recordings in the MTL of
patients with epilepsy to understand how episodic memories for short movie
events are encoded and recalled.

Advancing our understanding of the neural circuits and interactions that
orchestrate memory formation will pave the way towards developing innovative
technologies to directly interact with the human MTL to enhance learning of
everyday episodic information. The machine learning approach used here to
characterize recall of complex audio-visual events will provide systematic
metrics to make predictions about memory formation, therefore holding the
promise of predicting recall in educational settings. Studying how hippocampal
neurons participate in the encoding and recall of episodic events is likely to
have major clinical implications for understanding and developing interventions
for neurological conditions including age-related dementias and learning
disabilities in children. This project will also offer valuable training
opportunities for undergraduate students, graduate students and postdoctoral
fellows to gain first hand experience in a cutting edge interdisciplinary study
involving computer science, cognitive science, neurophysiology and neurology.