* 1358646
* Formulating and Testing 4-D Dynamic Models for the North American Continent and Mantle
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Michael Gurnis, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Margaret Benoit
* 07/31/2017
* USD 344,387.00

In this project, a team of geophysicists at Caltech comprised of a two faculty
members, one in geodynamics and one in seismology, along with two PhD students
and a software engineer, are building 4-D models of North America that includes
the underlying mantle. The team members are refining the 4-D model and testing
the predicted seismic images with USArray seismic waveform data. The team is
building the models by merging together two core methods in geophysics -- plate
tectonic reconstructions and mantle convection -- and then using the models to
integrate seismic images (a primary outcome of the EarthScope project) and
surface evolution of the continent (topographic, structural, and magmatic
history). The models include recent developments (such as deforming plates in
plate reconstructions and greatly improved geodynamic modeling approaches) and
high-resolution tomographic images of the mantle beneath the U.S. The team is
explicitly testing the images emerging from the models through detailed
comparison of predicted seismic waveforms with USArray seismograms. By
capitalizing on the ability to constrain the sharpness of mantle structures with
seismic waveforms, they are hoping to better understand the large amplitude, but
spatially small-scale changes in the properties of mantle structures. The team
is addressing the following questions: (1) what is the geometry and sharpness of
velocity gradients from the transition zone to the lower mantle of the putative
slab below the eastern U.S.; (2) how has the geometry of the Farallon slab
changed as a function of time (geological age) and how has it descended into the
mantle; (3) how did the Laramide slab evolve out of the flat slab configuration;
(4) how is the topographic evolution of the entire continent from the Late
Cretaceous to the present related to the dynamic evolution of the mantle below
the North American continent; (5) how is the topographic evolution of the
eastern side of the continent related to the motion of North America over the
Mezcalera/Farallon slab? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project address one of the
most significant ambiguities associated with integrating the large variety of
data that scientists have made to better understand geological processes. In
this project, the team at Caltech is addressing the fact that the earth is a
multi-dimensional system that changes over time, but that different measurements
we make only constrain part of the overall system. This is important because it
relates to basic scientific questions associated with the origin of topography
and landforms on the one hand and applied questions associated with the
development and evolution of hydrocarbon bearing sedimentary basins that contain
most of the known non-renewable energy sources, on the other hand. The ambiguity
is that seismic methods give a very good "snap shot" on what the forces inside
earth look like, the so-called mantle convection. But those forces are always
changing, akin to the way weather patterns change on a daily basis. On the other
hand, the geological observations we use to sense the evolution of the earth's
surface (like the uplift and erosion of rocks) are very good in the time-domain,
over millions of years, but don't directly image how the forces and processes
change. The integration of the seismic images with the surface geology has been
a major goal of the EarthScope project, which has deployed a large network of
seismometers to map mantle convection below a continent. The Caltech project is
aimed at using state-of-the-art methods to bring all of the data and information
together with computational methods. In addition, the project aims at the
training of two Ph.D. students in these new methods that can be used widely in
the future. The students are gaining enormous experience with sophisticated
numerical methods, supercomputing technologies, and the linkage of data with
numerical models