* 1358861
* CNH-Ex:   Conflict and Fisheries in the Lake Victoria Basin
* BIO,DEB
* 06/26/2013,10/31/2015
* Sarah Glaser, University of Denver
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 10/31/2015
* USD 208,634.00

This project will investigate the links between fisheries, armed conflict, and
food security in the Lake Victoria Basin in eastern Africa. Lake Victoria, the
largest freshwater lake in Africa, is home to fisheries that contribute to the
food and livelihood security of over 40 million people. The introduction of two
species of fish, Nile perch and tilapia, has greatly changed the ecology of the
lake. While introduced fishes provide income for fishers, they have apparently
caused dramatic declines in the abundance of many native species in the lake.
One exception is the sardine-like mukene, which supports the largest fishery in
the lake and serves as a critical link between the ecology of the lake and the
human populations that depend on the lake for food and income. Food security is
inherently tied to civil unrest and eastern Africa has been one of the most war-
torn regions of the world since the mid-1990s. Martial conflict significantly
suppresses fish catch, which harms food security via decreased food availability
and loss of livelihood among fishers. Food insecurity can in turn accelerate
political violence. This project will investigate how changes in the ecology of
Lake Victoria affect food security, and how conflict affects fishing in the
Lake. In collaboration with regional fisheries organizations in Kenya and
Uganda, the project aims to a) develop understanding of the relationships
between fish abundance, fishery catch and effort, conflict processes, and food
security; b) generate estimates of fish abundance using statistical analyses;
and c) identify the important links in the system through dynamic structural
equation modeling. Researchers will employ geographic information systems to
relate fish catch and effort to food commodity prices in regional markets, and
use existing data on the occurrence of conflict to relate prices, conflict, and
catch.

These efforts will contribute significantly to understanding the role of natural
resources in conflict and conflict effects on local food security. There is an
urgent need to improve understanding of the links between human and natural
systems in the Lake Victoria basin. The human population is growing rapidly on
the shore of the lake, accelerating impacts on ecosystem services such as water
for drinking and irrigation and fishes for food. This study will contribute to
understanding of natural resources and conflict, fisheries ecology, and dynamic
modeling of coupled natural and human systems. The project will develop
partnerships between U.S. and eastern African scientists and develop the
scientific skills of two undergraduate researchers. Moreover, the project will
inform sustainable resource management decisions and policies for fisheries that
provide food and livelihood security for millions.