* 1358971
* REU Site: Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Chemistry at The University of Alabama
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* John Vincent, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 06/30/2018
* USD 280,000.00

In this project funded by the Division of Chemistry (CHE) at the National
Science Foundation, the Department of Chemistry at The University of Alabama is
hosting 9 participants in a Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
program for the summers of 2014 to 2016. These young scientists need exposure to
modern research methods and tools as part of their training. This REU site aims
to provide cutting-edge research training in chemical problems of relevance to
the environment, materials, or biological chemistry. Students will be recruited
primarily from the southeastern United States, and the Site will emphasize
recruitment of students from underrepresented groups. The site will provide
research experiences for a diverse student cohort who might not otherwise have
access to research opportunities and help to prepare them for their future
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All participants will carry out projects under the
supervision of active research faculty with experience in directing
undergraduate students. Participants will choose research projects on a well-
defined interdisciplinary problem in environmental, materials, or biological
chemistry. Training gained during performance of these projects is enhanced by
Monday and Friday one-hour seminars that together foster independence, maturity,
and confidence and will develop researchers to think independently, search out
new avenues of investigation, and to speak confidently in public. The program is
enriched by a series of Wednesday seminars exploring ethical issues pertinent to
chemical researchers. Students are housed in furnished on-campus apartments to
promote social and intellectual interactions. Early in each summer's program,
participants attend a series of meetings and activities designed to introduce
the basics of scientific research while building camaraderie and a group
identity. The program will help to improve the quality of the domestic graduate
student pool.