* 1358750
* REU Site: Leveraging Computational Tools for Enhancing Engineering Innovation
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2017
* Christoffer Turner, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 04/30/2017
* USD 346,153.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;This award from the Division of Engineering
Education and Centers supports a Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU)
Site program at The University of Alabama. The program is intended to engage
nine undergraduate students per summer for ten weeks in engineering research
projects that have a strong computational thrust. Most of the research projects
also have an experimental component, either directly or through collaboration,
and by tightly coupling the computational research with the experiments, the
pace of engineering innovation can be enhanced. By introducing undergraduate
researchers to computational tools early in their research careers, they will
gain a broader knowledge of available research techniques, their problem solving
approaches will be expanded, and they will develop a deeper appreciation of the
length-scales and time-scales relevant to different natural phenomena. Faculty
mentors from three different academic departments will be participating in the
program, so students will learn about the techniques and approaches relevant to
a wide range of engineering challenges. Through weekly group meetings, invited
seminar speakers, and visits to local facilities, the students will begin to
understand the information-passing that can be made amongst different modeling
techniques, and they will become familiar with national high-performance
computing resources and rapid prototype techniques. Ultimately, this experience
will engage students in challenging and meaningful computations-based research
experiences, providing a rich pipeline of talented engineers that can contribute
to current and emerging engineering challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-
TECHNICAL SUMMARY: &lt;br/&gt;This award from the Division of Engineering
Education and Centers supports a Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU)
Site program at The University of Alabama. The program will engage nine
undergraduate students per summer for ten weeks in computational engineering
research projects. The program theme resonates with many of the national
thrusts, ranging from the Materials Genome Initiative to new frontiers in
neuroscience and computational ecology. Furthermore, these hands-on experiences
will allow the REU students to make more informed decisions about their
preferred balance of experiments/simulations in future graduate research
projects and careers. The summer program is designed to help the REU make real-
world impacts in science and engineering, by educating students about
technology-transfer issues, computer-based research applications in the private
sector, and the leadership skills needed for long-term success. To this end,
there will be regular interactions with the newly-created National Water Center
on The University of Alabama campus, Oak Ridge National Lab, and the students
will benefit from a one-on-one leadership coaching program. Post-program
sustainability will be enhanced with big-brother/big-sister pairing between REU
students and current graduate students, as well as return visits to campus for
completing manuscripts or for conducting critical experiments.