* 1358873
* REU SITE:  Undergraduate research experiences in coastal and nearshore marine systems of the northeastern Gulf of Mexico
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2014,12/31/2018
* William Patterson, Marine Environmental Sciences Consortium
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 12/31/2018
* USD 223,881.00

The Dauphin Island Sea Lab (DISL), located on the Gulf of Mexico in southern
Alabama, will offer 10-week summer research experiences to 8 undergraduate
students each summer for two years. Students will work with mentors who share
their research interests and carry out independent research while interacting
with graduate students, post-doctoral researchers and faculty in a setting with
ready access to the nearshore environment. REU students will participate in a
series of workshops designed to develop critical skills in experimental design,
scientific writing and presentations. The students, under the guidance of
faculty mentors, will then design, implement, analyze and report on independent
laboratory and field research projects. Projects will focus on coastal and
nearshore processes in the waters surrounding the research station. Research
questions may address aspects of ecology, fisheries biology, evolution,
ecosystem interactions, conservation, microbiology, biogeochemistry and physical
oceanography. The REU students will attend seminars by DISL and visiting
faculty, interact with resident graduate students and participate in individual
lab group meetings, providing opportunities to explore research topics outside
of their own projects. Students will also be encouraged to publish results of
their research and to attend scientific conferences to present their work.