* 1358879
* REU SITE: A Pilot Distributed REU Site Focused on Serving Physics and Astronomy Students from Comprehensive and Community Colleges
* MPS,PHY
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2016
* John Mateja, Central Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 03/31/2016
* USD 155,040.00

This pilot for a distributed Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site
at Central Washington University (CWU) provides opportunities to six
undergraduate students each summer for ten weeks of research on topics in
physics disciplines such as lasers, optics, spectroscopy, biophysics, surface
and materials science and in astronomy. The REU students will conduct the
research at Central Washington University, Wright State University, College of
Charleston, University of Wisconsin-La Crosse, Austin Peay State University,
Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University, or Weber State University. In addition to
participating in research with an experienced mentor, the students will engage
in weekly activities to ensure not only that their research stays on track but
that they have an engaging collegial and scholarly experience. These activities
will take place at CWU, as well as at the other research sites. By the end of
the program, every student will have written a research report and presented the
results of their work in a talk or a poster. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU site
will have a number of broader impacts with its focus on providing research
opportunities to undergraduates to help prepare them for future science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics careers. Additionally, the site focuses
on providing research opportunities to students from institutions with small or
no research programs in physics and from community colleges. The site has a
strong plan to recruit students from groups underrepresented in physics. The
project will be guided by an evaluation, led by a team of evaluators, who will
assess how well this distributed model works and subsequently disseminate the
findings.