* 1358886
* Degassing Dynamics that Lead to Repeated Lava Dome Growth and Collapse at Persistently Active Stratovolcanoes
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2013,12/31/2015
* Kimberly Genareau, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 12/31/2015
* USD 116,504.00

The October 2010 eruption of Mt. Merapi, one of Indonesia?s most active
volcanoes, demonstrates the devastation and sudden loss of human life that can
result from even moderate to small eruptions of active stratovolcanic systems
throughout the world. The ability to observe current activity on Merapi, and the
existence of preserved erupted sequences resulting from long-lived activity,
allow for a detailed examination of volatile degassing dynamics during lava dome
growth and major dome collapse events. It also provides an opportunity to
formulate a general model of how such systems evolve over time. Because lava
dome growth and collapse is a dominant mechanism for the production of dangerous
and unpredictable volcanic phenomena (e.g., pyroclastic density currents, ash
fall) that have devastating effects on both local and regional populations,
understanding the physical parameters that trigger dome collapse events and
influence the generation of pyroclastic hazards is paramount to improving the
hazard mitigation strategies at this persistently active stratovolcano.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In exploring the causes of major dome collapse events at
andesitic stratovolcanoes, this project seeks evidence for geochemical and
textural signals for these impending events in erupted products, with the
objective of determining how the dynamics of volatile degassing during lava
effusion contributes to particular characteristics of resulting pyroclastic
density currents and ash fall hazards. Existing samples collected from Merapi
will be targeted by a focused range of analyses in order to constrain
similarities or differences in particular characteristics between single
eruptive events and temporal variations over the long-term course of eruptive
activity, including: &lt;br/&gt;1. Grain size distributions of fall and flow
units and ash grain morphologies within the most efficiently fragmented portion
of the tephra.&lt;br/&gt;2. Microlite number density and microlite morphology
within lava samples, plagioclase phenocryst rim compositions, rim textures, and
amphibole reaction rim thicknesses. &lt;br/&gt;3) Lava vesicularity, vesicle
morphology, bubble size distributions, and development of permeable networks for
gas escape during dome growth. &lt;br/&gt;4) Behavior of volatile elements (H2O,
CO2, Li) in minerals and melts during magma ascent and dome effusion.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By comparing several dome-producing events over time
within a single stratovolcanic system, this study seeks to quantify the
rheological parameters leading up to major dome collapse events, attempting to
explain why these collapse events occur, why they occur on variable time scales,
and how the behavior of volatile elements and the degassing of these elements
will influence the resulting characteristics of pyroclastic hazards. Quantifying
the physical parameters within volcanic conduits and understanding how these
parameters vary over time to cause major dome collapse events will allow
researchers to more accurately model (and ultimately, forecast) volcanic
behavior. This will lead to improved hazard assessment strategies for not only
Merapi, which represents a significant volcanic hazard for the nation of
Indonesia, but for the other &gt;100 active stratovolcanic centers throughout
the world that display similar behavior.