* 1358182
* Workshop on Control, Computing, and Signal Processing Challenges in Future Power Systems.  To be Held in Arlington,VA in November, 2013
* ENG,ECCS
* 11/15/2013,10/31/2014
* Steven Low, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Zhi Tian
* 10/31/2014
* USD 50,000.00

Transformative research activities in the last decade focused on sustainable,
robust, and reliable power systems have presented several paradigms such as
smart grids, self-healing grids, and distributed generation. This workshop seeks
to address the Control, Computing, and Signal Processing Challenges in Future
Power Systems within the context of developing the tools for a system-level
understanding of the impact of these emerging paradigms. It will promote cross
fertilization of ideas with the aim of developing the underlying foundational
science to realize next-generation electric generation, transmission, and
distribution systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will bring together prominent
researchers in relevant disciplines to address key questions relevant to future
power systems, including: 1) What emerging control paradigms will improve
management of renewables and charging of electric vehicles, with build-in
resilience against failures and malicious attacks on critical infrastructure? 2)
What is the role of optimization, big data analytics, and grid informatics in
revitalizing power delivery subsystems and improving consumer satisfaction? 3)
How can advances in statistical signal processing and machine learning be
leveraged to improve situational awareness and system reliability? 4) How can we
educate next-generation engineers about system-level challenges in future power
systems?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
workshop will engage several engineering disciplines to map out the foundational
science for research in future power systems. The workshop will also emphasize
the related educational aspects, primarily by leveraging the long tradition of
excellence in power and energy systems education that the University of
Minnesota has established through the NSF-supported Consortium of Universities
for Sustainable Power.