* 1358134
* U.S.-Israel International Research Experience for Students in Coastal Zone Research
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Adina Paytan, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 07/31/2019
* USD 250,000.00

Dr. Adina Paytan of the University of California, Santa Cruz will lead a three-
year International Research Experiences for Students (IRES) project supporting
collaborative research projects by 18 U.S. graduate students with scientists
from the InterUniversity Institute (IUI) in Eilat, Israel. The project provides
international research opportunities related to coastal zone sustainability to
US graduate students in the geosciences. The project also trains these students
in the processes required to formulate, design and conduct original research
overseas, an essential skill for today?s scientists who must function
effectively on multi-national teams and work on projects that are globally
relevant. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on coastal zone research,
covering the complex ecosystems extending from fresh water systems to near-shore
ocean systems. These ecosystems face numerous challenges and offer significant
research opportunities of global importance. The students will work with well-
regarded Israeli researchers and will use the excellent facilities of the IUI
located on the Gulf of Aqaba. A total of six students per year over three years
(18 total students) will participate in this summer research program in
collaboration with scientists from IUI. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
somewhat unusual in that a clear research plan for the students is not defined
at the outset. However, this is also a crucial strength of the project, since
students will develop the skills needed to perform independent, globally
oriented research. Students will apply by preparing their own proposal for a
summer research project in Israel that complements their ongoing thesis work in
the US. Students who are accepted will then further develop the idea in
collaboration with the selected Israeli investigator over the course of a
quarter-long planning course. The U.S. students will get first-hand experience
in skills essential for their long term scientific success: constructing
scientific research questions that link local and international coastal zone
sustainability issues, initiating interactions with non-U.S. scientists,
collaboratively designing and executing a research plan, dealing with logistics
related to work overseas, communicating and disseminating results jointly with
their collaborator, and maintaining long term relations with their international
partners.