* 1358607
* Physics-Based Volcano Geodesy with Application to Effusive Eruptions at Mount St Helens
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2020
* Paul Segall, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Margaret Benoit
* 06/30/2020
* USD 394,181.00

Non-technical summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prior to volcanic eruptions magma
accumulates in shallow reservoirs in Earth?s crust. As a result, pressure
increases in these magma chambers, which deforms or ?inflates? the Earth?s
surface; in contrast, during eruptions, magma leaves these reservoirs,
decreasing pressure and causing the Earth?s surface to ?deflate?. Better
understanding of these signals could help improve societal responses to volcanic
eruptions, such as possible evacuations and changes to airline routes near
volcanoes like following the 2010 Icelandic eruption. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is developing new physics-based models of volcano deformation, which can
be coupled with deformation measurements from the EarthScope Plate Boundary to
improve forecasts of the duration of an eruption and the volume of material that
may be erupted. The project is investigating a data assimilation approach in
which available data are used to develop probabilistic estimates for parameters
that describe the state of the magmatic system. These are then used to
initialize an ensemble of forward models that predict future behavior, including
eruption duration and total erupted volume. Given improved forward models, this
approach has the advantage of being consistent with both available data and
realistic physics-based eruption models. Physics-based volcano eruption
forecasts are similar in concept to numerical weather forecasts that assimilate
satellite and other data into sophisticated weather models.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
employs Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) inversion of continuous GPS positions,
magma efflux, and other data using a physics-based forward model of an effusive
eruption. Including a physically consistent eruption model allows the estimation
procedure to constrain parameters of interest that are not resolved by
traditional approaches, including the volume of the crustal magma chamber and
the initial water content of the magma. These parameters influence the size and
potential explosive potential of eruptions. Ongoing work is increasing the
realism of the forward model by including: 1) equilibrium crystallization of the
magma as it ascends and pressure decreases; 2) explicit consideration of the
rheological transition from distributed viscous flow to solid plug flow with
slip on bounding faults, based on a Bingham fluid model and 3) explicit
consideration of gas loss (both H2O and CO2) through both lateral and vertical
diffusion. Other goals include better models of the eruption onset and
cessation. The method is being applied to the 2004-2008 dome forming eruption of
Mount St. Helens (MSH), including GPS data from the Plate Boundary Observatory
(PBO) and could be applied to other volcanoes, including Augustine in Alaska,
Unzen in Japan, and the Soufriere Hills on Montserrat.