* 1358268
* SHINE:  Reconstructing Interplanetary Coronal Mass Ejection Evolution Using In-Situ Filament Plasma
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Jason Gilbert, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Ilia Roussev
* 07/31/2018
* USD 343,400.00

The main goal of this 3-year SHINE project is to improve present understanding
of the heating and acceleration of Coronal Mass Ejections (CMEs) by examining
the physics of interplanetary CME (ICME) evolution, especially as it relates to
the filament material and its reflection of the energization of the ejecta. In-
situ data and new analysis techniques will both be employed to measure the low
charge states of heavy ions for the first time, revealing previously undetected
ICME core material. The science objectives aimed with this project are highly
relevant to topics that are central to the SHINE community. A fundamental part
of the research work integrates the expertise of young scientists at the
University of Michigan at Ann Arbor with the professional training of seasoned
researchers. In addition to providing the community with a comprehensive list of
in-situ observations of cold ICMEs, this work will also provide a thermal
history of the plasma involved. Future models by the community will be
constrained and improved by these plasma results. By including researchers at
the undergraduate level in several of the data analysis tasks, this work will
also act as a tool to educate and give experience to the rising generation. The
research and EPO agenda of this project supports the Strategic Goals of the AGS
Division in discovery, learning, diversity, and interdisciplinary
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The comprehensive survey to result
from this SHINE project will relate cold ICME material in the heliosphere to the
eruption process at the Sun through two main objectives: (i) determine the
prevalence of filament material within ICMEs; and, (ii) determine the physical
properties of the CME plasma during the eruption process that are responsible
for either preserving or obliterating filament material on its way from the
corona into the Heliosphere. The Michigan Ionization Code (MIC) will be used to
predict charge state evolution in the filament in order to: (i) investigate the
formation of higher charge states and the survival of low charge state ions
during the eruption process; and, (ii) reconstruct the energetics of erupting
filaments, including the temperature, density, and velocity evolution of the
plasma from launch to the freeze-in point. Thus, the outcome of this project is
expected to be of great value to the solar-heliospheric community, and SHINE in
particular.