* 1358862
* Graduate Opportunities at Fisk in Astronomy and Astrophysics Research (GO-FAAR)
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2020
* Michael Blanton, Fisk University
* Continuing Grant
* James Neff
* 07/31/2020
* USD 2,199,981.00

The underrepresentation of minorities in STEM fields is one of the major
challenges facing the United States workforce. Although underrepresented
minorities (URMs) make up approximately 30% of the U.S. population, this cohort
accounts for only 4 percent of astronomy Ph.D.s awarded in the U.S., as well as
just 3 percent of faculty members. Indeed, an average Ph.D. granting program in
astronomy will graduate fewer than 1 URM Ph.D. recipient per decade. Recognizing
this problem, the ?New Worlds, New Horizons in Astronomy and Astrophysics?
Decadal Survey, published by the National Academies, noted that a promising way
to address this problem is to encourage strategic partnerships between minority-
serving institutions and research universities, national centers, and national
laboratories. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will provide continued support of
the GO-FAAR partnership between Fisk University and Vanderbilt University, which
is a pathway to the Ph.D. that substantially broadens the participation of
underrepresented minorities in astronomy. The principal component of GO-FAAR is
the extraordinarily successful Fisk-Vanderbilt Masters-to-Ph.D. Bridge program.
Fisk students establish one-on-one relationships with faculty at Vanderbilt,
engage in substantial astronomy research projects, and many ultimately end up
pursuing Ph.D. programs at Vanderbilt. The program has been particularly
effective to date, becoming the top producer of URM Ph.D.s in astronomy and
astrophysics in the country.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This renewal award will
institutionalize the program at Fisk and Vanderbilt, and establish its methods
as a national model. NSF funding will support the following key
objectives:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(1) To fully institutionalize the relationship
between Fisk University, Vanderbilt University, and other research partners, and
to firmly embed Fisk as a major contributor to the astronomical research
community;&lt;br/&gt;(2) To increase by 75% the number of URMs earning astronomy
and astrophysics Ph.D.s in the US, to sustain this level, and to diversify the
U.S. astronomy and astrophysics workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(3) To offer the
Bridge methodology to Affiliate institutions (to be recruited nationally)
through a program components 'toolkit,' training workshops, and on-going
consultation and supervision. The effect of NSF funding is therefore
multiplicative, since it is expected that numerous other Bridge programs will
result;&lt;br/&gt;(4) To launch a nationally competitive postdoctoral fellowship
program at Fisk, which is designed to launch URMs into faculty
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Other research partners involved in GO-FAAR
include the Sloan Digital Sky Survey, NASA Goddard&amp;#8232;Space Flight
Center, National Solar Observatory, University of Chicago, Large Synoptic Survey
Telescope, Lowell Observatory/Tennessee State University, National Academy of
Sciences, American Physical Society, Association of Universities for Research in
Astronomy, Southeastern Universities Research Association, and South African
Astronomical Observatory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Support for this award is
provided by (1) the Division of Astronomical Sciences Partnerships in Astronomy
&amp; Astrophysics Research and Education (PAARE) program; (2) the Office of
Multidisciplinary Activities (OMA) in the Directorate for Mathematical and
Physical Sciences; (3) the Division of Physics Education and Interdisciplinary
Research (EIR) program; and (4) the Division of Human Resource Development
Historically Black Colleges and Universities - Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP).