* 1358622
* Collaborative Research: The Effects of Water and Lithology on the Strength of the North American Lithosphere
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2016
* Anthony Lowry, Utah State University
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory Anderson
* 06/30/2016
* USD 58,019.00

Nontechnical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A full understanding of mountain-
building and earthquake processes requires knowledge of three-dimensional
variations in flow strength of continents. Measurements of flow strength are
among the major goals of EarthScope, because they are key to understanding the
timing and spatial distribution of earthquakes and volcanism, as well as the
evolution of North America through time. Characterizing flow strength is
challenging, however, because strength is very sensitive to three independent
physical properties -- temperature, rock-type, and water content -- whose
effects are not easily distinguished using commonly-used geophysical imaging
techniques. This project identifies several diverse geophysical measurements
that can be combined to separate the effects of temperature, rock type and water
in the Earth's crust and upper mantle. In addition, this project is supporting
the education of three graduate students and the development of software tools
for use in graduate classrooms. Finally, this project is providing maps and
other data products that are widely useful to scientists working to understand
such diverse topics as likelihood of future earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, and
the potential for economic mineral deposits at
depth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description This project seeks to
determine the relative effects of temperature, water and lithology on strength
of the North American continental lithosphere. The investigators are estimating
temperature variations using uppermost mantle seismic velocities and surface
heat flow measurements; characterizing crustal lithology from a combination of
gravity and seismic receiver function data; and combining these with
measurements of lithospheric flexural rigidity (an integral measure of bending
strength) to assess the remainder effects of water on flow rheology. This novel
approach to characterizing physical property variations enables in situ
estimation of fully three-dimensional flow rheology of the lithosphere, and
lends new insight into the dynamical processes of heat and fluid flux that
determine mobility versus stability of continental lithosphere. When combined
with new constraints on lithospheric mass density variations, these properties
promise to revolutionize the Earth Science community's understanding of
lithospheric evolution, deformation and dynamical processes. The grant supports
research efforts by three graduate students. The Colorado State University PI
and two M.S. students are estimating geothermal variations and associated
uncertainties, and also developing a series of teaching tools to demonstrate
concepts of lithospheric flexure and rheology to undergraduate Earth science
students. The Utah State University PI and student are estimating anisotropic
flexural rigidity, crustal lithology and thickness, and using the combined
measurements to model the water content and rheology of the lithosphere.