* 1358179
* IRES: US-Swedish Student Research Experience in Colloidal Science and Interfacial Engineering at the Royal Institute of Technology (KTH), Stockholm
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2014,01/31/2019
* Ilona Kretzschmar, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Mangala Sharma
* 01/31/2019
* USD 250,000.00

The experience U.S. student participants obtain in the U.S.-Swedish summer
research program at the Royal Institute of Technology (KTH), in Stockholm,
focuses on colloidal science and interfacial engineering. Led by the prinicpal
investigator, Ilona Kretzschmar of CUNY City College (CUNYCC), with Swedish
counterparts,this interdisciplinary program encompasses research from
traditional science and engineering disciplines and brings together qualified
students from diverse backgrounds for a ten week program for early career
research experience. Projects will range from biological colloids to new
materials for energy storage and conversion, as well as fundamental science
projects that address the assembly and interactions in the colloidal domain.
Overall, the IRES program at KTH intentionally relies on an interdisciplinary
team approach to train both graduate and undergraduate participants to be able
to adapt to new disciplines, learn from each other, and to gain more global
perspective and access to cutting edge colloidal science and interfacial
engineering.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The U.S.-Swedish research experiences for
participants run for an annual ten week period and entail mentoring by the PI
and counterparts centered in three major divisions of KTH, in Surface Science
and Corrosion, Biotechnology, and Chemical Technology. To examine colloidal
science in the broadest sense, planned activities range from work on compression
of molecular and colloidal layers at interfaces and the measurement of colloidal
interaction via the synthesis of biomolecules and sequencing of genes, to the
fabrication of colloidal batteries and fuel cells. Prior to the actual research
experience, IRES scholars receive research training at CUNYCC laboratories, meet
with previous scholars, and network with Swedish exchange students in residence
at CUNYCC. During the initial research experience abroad, students remain in
touch with the PI via a combination of weekly and monthly reporting and video
conferencing. The PI spends the final weeks of the program at KTH with the IRES
participants to interact with mentors, ensure individual progress, and prepare
for a cumulating conference in collaboration with the NYC-Louis Stokes for
Minority Participation (NYC-LSAMP) Program through which many IRES students are
recruited. KTH is ideally suited for a diverse IRES program as it educates a
significant share of Sweden's engineering students and is a well-known Swedish
public institution with an outstanding research portfolio and a student body
similar to that of CUNYCC. The overall success of this cooperative and diverse
IRES program is built on technically strong intellectual partnering and a
mutually benefical working program structure that has proven successful in
promoting synergy among lead researchers and excellent early-career team
experiences for U.S. and Swedish student participants.