* 1358944
* University of Michigan - CERN Research Experience for Undergraduate and High School Teacher Programs
* MPS,PHY
* 02/15/2014,01/31/2018
* Emanuel Gull, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 01/31/2018
* USD 788,546.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site at the University of
Michigan Ann Arbor provides fifteen undergraduate students each summer the
opportunity to participate in research on topics in high energy physics at the
European Organization for Nuclear Research (CERN) in Geneva, Switzerland. In
addition to participating in research with an experienced mentor, the REU
students will engage in activities such as seminars and lectures to learn to
understand the nature of international scientific collaborations and the
questions and methods of modern physics research. By the end of the program,
every student will have given a formal presentation, which will be recorded on
video and posted on the CERN website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project includes
a Research Experiences for Teachers (RET) site, where each summer five high
school teachers from across the U.S. are exposed to the world of research at
CERN. The teachers will use their experience to motivate their students to
better understand the physical world and prepare them to become the future
generation of scientists. Teachers also share teaching methods with teachers
from other countries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU and RET site will have a
number of broader impacts. The U.S. has a significant stake and financial
investment in the CERN research program. Therefore, it is very appropriate that
U.S. undergraduate students and high school teachers are involved in research
and learning opportunities at CERN. The site has a strong plan to recruit
undergraduate students and teachers from groups underrepresented in physics to
ensure that this valuable international research experience is accessible to a
diverse group of future physicists and high school teachers who train future
physicists.