* 1358908
* REU Site:   Evaluating the Effectiveness of Stream Restoration Projects Based on Natural Channel Design Concepts Using Process-Based Investigations
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Shannon Brewer, Oklahoma State University
* Continuing Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 08/31/2018
* USD 270,342.00

This Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Site will provide seven
undergraduate students a research experience over a ten week period during the
summers of 2015-2017. This REU site will generate important scientific
discoveries in the rapidly expanding field of stream restoration, which has
environmental and societal benefits of improving water quality, minimizing
downstream flooding, and providing riparian and aquatic habitat. Participants
will benefit from multi-disciplinary collaboration and experienced mentoring.
Students will receive professional development training on ethics, responsible
conduct of research, research writing, state-of-the-art equipment used in
various disciplines, and career and graduate school opportunities. Results will
be disseminated in publications/presentations at local, regional, and national
meetings, through on-line videos, and also through interaction with society and
community groups. Students for the program will be recruited from diverse
groups. Oklahoma is also unique in that it is highly rural with a large
percentage of Native Americans and first generation college students. The
proposed REU program will recruit from these populations in combination with
national recruitment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will include studies in
hydrology, geosciences, and biology at the Cow Creek Stream Rehabilitation Site
on the Oklahoma State University (OSU) campus. The opportunity to study streams
at a site on a University campus recently rehabilitated is unique. The central
theme of the program will be discussing ways to rehabilitate streams, and
specifically evaluating natural channel design approaches through process-based
investigations. Many current stream rehabilitation projects use natural channel
design concepts, which are often criticized. The alternative is a complex,
process-based analysis of the dynamic system and impact of stream modifications
on the hydraulics, sediment transport, and biological community. This project
hypothesizes that future restoration approaches will most likely resemble a
morphed combination of natural channel design and process-based techniques.
Students will participate in research projects quantifying the role of
vegetation on streambank erosion, documenting the influence of in-stream
structures on retention in the stream, evaluating the effect of sediment on
fish, using aquatic macroinvertebrates to assess streambank modifications,
evaluating plant diversity response, and studying vegetation impacts on stream
temperature.