* 1358959
* REU Site:  Exploring the Chemistry of Energy Applications, Living Systems, and Supramolecular Assemblies (ExCELS)
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2018
* Surita Bhatia, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 06/30/2018
* USD 270,000.00

This award from the Division of Chemistry (CHE) at the National Science
Foundation supports a Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Site led by
Professor Surita R. Bhatia at the State University of New York at Stony Brook
(SBU). This REU site will host an REU Summer Program entitled Exploring the
Chemistry of Energy Applications, Living Systems, and Supramolecular Assemblies
(ExCELS). The ExCELS program is centered on three technical areas of strength at
SBU; Energy, Living Systems, and Supramolecular Assemblies; while still being
broad enough to attract students with diverse interests. Students will be
trained in skills relevant to their research projects which may include organic
synthesis, polymer synthesis, solid state synthesis, cell culture and sterile
techniques, high resolution NMR, mass spectrometry, fluorescence microscopy, CD,
and Raman spectroscopy. The program targets participation of female, minority,
and deaf and hard-of-hearing students, including students from community
colleges and non-PhD granting institutions where research opportunities are
limited. Thus, it will broaden the diversity of the workforce in chemistry.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The REU is based on the three research strengths at SBU so
that students are exposed to a coherent intellectual theme within a cluster.
Specific objectives of the ExCELS REU are to: (1) Encourage and motivate
students to pursue graduate studies in chemistry, with a focus on recruitment of
underrepresented populations, including deaf and hard-of-hearing students; (2)
Train students to transition from dependent to independent researchers through a
focus on mentoring and research seminars by faculty and graduate students; (3)
Enable students to communicate science effectively through active participation
in "cluster" meetings involving students and faculty from multiple research
groups; and (4) Provide students with strategies for professional success
through a Professional Development Seminar.