* 1358896
* REU Site: Mechanisms of Evolution
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2018
* Eduardo Robleto, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 04/30/2018
* USD 324,968.00

This REU Site award to the University of Nevada Las Vegas, located in Las Vegas,
NV, will support the training of eight undergraduates for 10 weeks during the
summers of 2014-2016. The goal of the program is to provide students with
research opportunities that investigate mechanisms of evolution and reinforce
the connection with genetics. Student participants will conduct research in
topics that include genetic diversity of hot springs, conservation of genes
affecting eye function, genetic effects on metabolism in flies, DNA repair and
mutagenesis in stressed cells, genetic interactions that affect fly wing
morphology, gene regulation of morphogenesis, host-microbe interactions, and
biogeography of desert mammals. In addition, student participants will receive
training in the responsible conduct of research, laboratory safety, applying to
graduate school, and communicating results to scientists and the public. The
program culminates in a poster session that provides students with an
opportunity to present their results to a diverse audience of faculty, students,
university administrators and the general public. This program aims to increase
student diversity in the sciences. Students from underrepresented groups, first
generation to attend college, and those from colleges with limited research
opportunities are encouraged to apply. The program will be evaluated using the
REU common assessment tool.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students will enhance their
skills in the lab and learn how science is done. It is expected that many will
present the results of their research in regional and national conferences. Some
will be able to publish their work in peer-reviewed
literature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students are required to be tracked after the
program and must respond to an automatic email sent via the NSF reporting
system. More information is available by visiting
(http://faculty.unlv.edu/MoE/), or by contacting the PI (Dr. Kurt Regner at
kurt.regner@unlv.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. Eduardo Robleto at
eduardo.robleto@unlv.edu).