* 1358514
* Collaborative Research: EarthScope Geochronology Graduate Student Training Program
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* James Metcalf, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Dennis Geist
* 07/31/2018
* USD 68,579.00

Non-technical Summary

Geochronology uses multiple chemical, physical, and analytical approaches to
estimate the ages of rocks, minerals, and organic materials over a wide range of
geologic time. Geologists, archeologists, and other scientists use geochronology
to study topics as diverse as the ages of the oldest rocks on earth (using
radioactive decay of naturally occurring uranium into lead), the development of
life on this planet, and our ancestors' mastery of fire and agriculture (using
perhaps the most well-known method, Carbon 14 dating).

The EarthScope Geochronology Graduate Student Training Program is a new
initiative designed to promote interdisciplinary and innovative science by
fostering new relationships between graduate students, scientists, and labs at
different institutions, while simultaneously equipping the next generation of
Earth scientists with an understanding of state-of-the-art geochronology tools
that are profoundly important for conducting modern geoscience research. The
program provides support to generate key, high-quality datasets for publications
of mutual benefit to students, advisors, and labs; to found future research
collaborations; and enable multidisciplinary science. The program is being
launched by an EarthScope short course bringing together experts in the
geochronology community for a series of lectures and discussions covering the
fundamentals behind both the theory and practical uses of different
geochronologic tools. At the end of the program, an EarthScope session convened
at a national meeting and focused on North American continent evolution will
synthesize the program?s results and allow evaluation of its overall success.

Technical Description

The basic structure of the program enables graduate students to apply for up to
$10,000 to fund analytical costs, sample preparation, travel to the host lab,
lodging, and other expenses for a project that advances some aspects of
EarthScope science goals. These funds allow the students to visit the lab for a
week or more, participate in the analysis and sample preparation, and learn
fundamental aspects of the methods, techniques, and theory used in modern
analytical facilities. Students can apply for funds to use whichever method is
most appropriate for their proposed research project, including, but not limited
to, U-Pb, Argon-40/Argon-39, Lu-Hf, Sm-Nd, Rb-Sr, U-series, fission-track,
(U-Th)/He, Carbon-14, cosmogenic exposure, and luminescence dating. Any lab in
the United States or its territories can participate. Laboratories wishing to
participate in the program must simply provide a brief (1-2 page) written
summary that describes the research and learning experiences a student should
expect when visiting the lab. Students who are writing proposals are responsible
for initiating contact with geochronology lab staff to discuss their project,
timelines, and why this particular technique will help address the fundamental
questions in their research proposal. If the lab director feels that this is a
mutually beneficial opportunity, they provide a support letter and help the
student refine and clarify their proposed research.

This project is providing a number of potentially transformative outcomes,
including the 1) fostering of new relationships and interdisciplinary,
innovative science between researchers and labs at different institutions, 2)
generation of new opportunities for students to gain hands-on experience with
geochronology data acquisition and interpretation while being mentored by
geochronology experts, 3) implementation of a low-cost mechanism for generation
of key data for projects and publications of mutual benefit to students,
advisors and labs, while laying the foundation for future proposals and
collaborations, and 4) promotion of science that provides an important
contribution to EarthScope's core science goal to investigate the geologic
history of the North American continent.