* 1358399
* SHINE:   A Time-Dependent Solar Wind 3D-MHD Model Interface Using Interplanetary Scintillation (IPS) Observations
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2017
* Bernard Jackson, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Ilia Roussev
* 06/30/2017
* USD 343,400.00

The main goal of this 3-year SHINE project is to apply the tomographic analysis
to heliospheric data from available remote-sensing observations of
interplanetary scintillation (IPS), archival white-light observations from SMEI
(Solar Mass Ejection Imager), and extend this technique to the HI-2
(Heliospheric Imager-2) instruments onboard the STEREO spacecraft. This research
effort will allow the project team to discover the differences between their own
robust measurements of the kinematic propagation of these parameters near the
Earth and the physical processes governing the propagation of features from near
the solar surface using three-dimensional (3D) magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) models.
The project contributes to broader societal activities, such as advancing the
participation of women in science and improving the scientific literacy of the
general public. The project team will present the results of this research
project at national scientific meetings and will publish them in peer-reviewed
scientific journals. The research and EPO agenda of this SHINE project supports
the Strategic Goals of the AGS Division in discovery, learning, diversity, and
interdisciplinary research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research agenda
of this SHINE project consists of four main tasks, namely: (i) compare the
University of California in San Diego (UCSD) tomographic modeling with MHD
modeling to learn the physical differences between these two very different
types of remote sensing analyses; (ii) pursue inter-comparison of 3D MHD
modeling techniques that all use the same boundary conditions in order to learn
the best physical parameters needed to propagate time-dependent structures;
(iii) perform analysis of these interplanetary structures in order to determine
and provide the lacking magnetic field inputs required for the tomographic
kinematic model propagation; and, (iv) perform new analyses using iterative 3D
MHD codes that refine remote sensing observations from solar heliospheric
observations and IPS measurements. The outcome of this research project is
expected to yield new improved boundary inputs, based on multiple data sets
(that incorporate both remote-sensing observations and in-situ measurements),
for various 3D MHD models, and especially for Space Weather models, and an
analysis that displays the global properties of heliospheric structures. The
project would provide new physical insight on "the solar cycle dependence of
CMEs, including their propagation through and their interaction with the
background solar wind, including the linking of interplanetary and near-Sun
phenomena," as stated in the goals of the NSF's SHINE program.