* 1358110
* NSF IRES: Engineering Sustainable Biological Solutions for Clean Energy and Water in Costa Rica
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Wei Liao, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Dudka
* 08/31/2018
* USD 249,938.00

This program will train U.S. undergraduate students in engineering research
through a 2-week study abroad course, a semester of mentoring in experimental
design, and a 10-week research immersion at the University of Costa Rica.
Protection of water quality is essential in countries like Costa Rica that rely
on ecological resources for ecotourism and agricultural production. Many wastes,
such as food and animal wastes, in Costa Rica can be converted into energy
through anaerobic digestion; however, current practices yield wastewater that
adversely affects the environment and potentially contaminates food crops. Using
a novel system that includes a solar-assisted anaerobic digester and constructed
treatment wetlands, students will research and develop integrated, ecologically-
conscious systems for sustainable energy generation and water reclamation in
Costa Rica. Ultimately, the goal of the project is to train 12 students in
research, development, and design while increasing the workforce of globally-
trained engineers in sustainable biological systems to produce clean energy and
water.

Student research will optimize and develop integrated biodigester and wetland
treatment systems for sustainable energy generation and water reclamation. The
proposed project will advance knowledge of fundamental processes underlying
anaerobic digestion and wetland treatment processes, crucially benefiting the
future development of engineered biological systems. Research activities will
focus on a novel system that has the potential to transform engineering
approaches to decentralized wastewater treatment and energy generation. This
system integrates solar heating, thermophilic digestion, and four types of
constructed wetlands for treatment of combined food and manure wastes. Students
will work with faculty with a variety of expertise, including agricultural
engineering, biological engineering, microbiology, and chemistry. The proposed
program will advance discovery while promoting training and learning for the 12
participants as well as the U.S. and Costa Rican students participating in the
associated study abroad course, approximately 15 students per year.