* 1358842
* REU Site: Cross-Disciplinary Training in Sustainable Chemistry and Chemical Processes
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2014,09/30/2018
* Greg Swain, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 09/30/2018
* USD 287,420.00

This National Science Foundation award from the Division of Chemistry (CHE)
supports a Research Experience for Undergraduate (REU) site led by Professors
Greg M. Swain and Robert L. LaDuca both at Michigan State University. In this
project, students are learning how sustainable practices impact all fields of
chemistry and how these practices cut across different disciplines of science
and engineering. The research experience will provide them with the skills
needed to carry out chemical research or chemical processes in an
environmentally-conscientious manner. The overall objectives of the project are
therefore, (i) to involve undergraduate students in graduate-level research in
sustainable chemistry, (ii) to provide a positive mentoring experience for
undergraduates, (iii) to better prepare undergraduate students for graduate
school, (iv) to motivate undergraduate students to consider pursuing an academic
career, and (v) to recruit undergraduate students for graduate school at MSU.
Student interns will also participate in outreach activities that will provide
high school and middle school students with educational benefits and the interns
with valuable experience in communicating scientific information and mentoring.
The impact will be even broader when interns communicate their positive
experience with others at their own institutions. The activities will teach the
student interns, who will be part of the next generation workforce, how chemical
research is conducted in a sustainable and responsible manner.

Participating student interns will receive 10 weeks of hands-on,
interdisciplinary research experience in sustainable chemistry and chemical
processes. Student interns will be engaged in research involving green
synthesis, water purification and quality monitoring, renewable energy-related
materials, and advanced imaging and spectroscopy. Students will also benefit
from weekly journal clubs, mentoring faculty research presentations and
networking dinners, and from participation in teaching modules on research
ethics, statistics, laboratory and chemical safety, strategies for applying to
graduate school, and professional development. All of the program activities are
designed to sharpen the student?s critical and scientific thinking skills,
provide them with experience in all aspects of research from experimental design
through performance and analysis, and help to make them knowledgeable about
sustainable chemistry and chemical processes.