* 1358041
* The Microobial Nitrogen Pump: Coupling 14C and Compound-specific Amino Acids to Understand the Role of Microbial Transformations in the Refractory Ocean DON Pool
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2018
* Matthew McCarthy, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 03/31/2018
* USD 600,000.00

Dissolved organic nitrogen is one of the most important - but perhaps least
understood - components of the modern ocean nitrogen cycle. While dissolved
organic nitrogen represents a main active reservoir of fixed and seemingly
biologically-available nitrogen, at the same time most of ocean's dissolved
organic nitrogen pool is also apparently unavailable for use by organisms.
Recently, the idea of the "Microbial Carbon Pump" has emerged, providing a
renewed focus on microbes as primary agents for the formation of biologically-
available dissolved material. However, the role that microbes play in
transformation of biologically-available dissolved organic nitrogen is still
lacking. In order to fill gaps in this knowledge, researchers from the
University of California Santa Cruz will apply a series of new analytical
approaches to test the role of microbial source and transformation in formation
of the ocean's biologically-available dissolved organic nitrogen pool. Results
from this study will address one of the major unknowns of both chemical
oceanography and the ocean nitrogen cycle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;This proposal will provide oceanographers new tools to test
ideas of microbial organic matter sequestration in a world where the oceans are
rapidly changing. High school, undergraduate, graduate and post-doctoral
education will be furthered through active participation in lab, field, and data
synthesis activities.