* 1358512
* Comprehensive Analyses of Cascadia Tremor and Slow Slip
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2020
* John Vidale, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Margaret Benoit
* 08/31/2020
* USD 509,144.00

Slow slip and tremor are key processes in tectonic plate motion in subduction
zones, one of which is positioned along the Pacific Northwest coast from Cape
Mendocino up to Vancouver Island in Canada. For the basic mechanics of
subduction zones to be understood, slow slip must be made to yield its secrets.
Progress in this puzzle in the past decade has been and will continue in the
future to be transformative. To understand these processes, this project is
analyzing the copious seismic and geodetic data that has been gathered over the
past decade. Different data types and analysis approaches are being integrated
to determine more precisely where and when strain is accumulating and the role
of slow slip in loading and releasing plate-interface stress.&lt;br/&gt;The
potential interaction of slow slip with the hazardous locked portions of
subduction zones mandates better understanding of slow slip phenomena. For
example, the next generation of Pacific Northwest seismic hazard maps will use
our estimates of the updip limit of tremor as one way to estimate the downdip
limit of megathrust rupture, refining estimates of the shaking across the west
coast in the next great American earthquake. In addition, it is possible that
the slow slip being observed and interpret may reveal changes in the seismic
hazard over time as motion changes pattern, accelerates and
decelerates.&lt;br/&gt;The investigators are involved in the operation of the
regional seismic network and are active in various forms of outreach to educate
the public about seismic hazard. Episodic tremor and slip events is providing a
golden opportunity to advance public awareness of the regional geological
environment and seismic hazard through blogs, TV and newspaper interviews and
NOVA documentaries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of
Washington has captured seven episodes of slow slip under northern Washington
since 2004 with seismic arrays two with the EarthScope Array of (eight) Arrays,
accumulating a rich dataset.&lt;br/&gt;Several approaches are being integrated
to sift through the mountain of continuous recordings and our growing catalogs
in search of key relationships. The foci in this work is (1) delineation of the
space-time progression of tremor by both beam backprojection and envelope
correlation methods, (2) precise tracking of slow slip with LFE locations and
recurrence, (3) systematic determination of tremor amplitude and its relation to
tidal stressing and amount of slip, (4) integration of GPS and strainmeter
timeseries with spatio-temporal constraints from tremor, and (5) comparison of
emerging ivory-tower slow-slip models with observation. These approaches allow
refinement of the relation of tremor propagation patterns such as rapid tremor
reversals and streaks to slip front propagation and low frequency earthquake
generation, and thus yield constraints on the slip velocities, propagation
velocities, and rise times of slow slip pulses. As well, this study is teasing
out how much slow slip extends updip from tremor, with implications for seismic
hazard, and to assess the importance of tremor amplitude in scaling tremor
duration to slow slip moment release.&lt;br/&gt;Currently in hand are growing
caches of several types of geophysical data: multiple catalogs of tremor ranging
from Cascadia-wide with 210,000 tremor locations to high-resolution locations
collected by the Array of Arrays, as well as a burgeoning catalog of low-
frequency earthquakes. These provide views from the 1000 km to 100 m scales. In
addition, GPS, strain, and tilt-meter time series record deformation more
directly. Linking the above datasets is leading to characterization of the
inferred propagation of slow slip fronts over a range of spatial and temporal
scales.