* 1358129
* University of Texas at Arlington - Spain Collaborative Research on Hazard Mitigation of Civil Infrastructure
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2018
* Nur Yazdani, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 05/31/2018
* USD 249,915.00

Technical Description &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of the three-year
IRES project are to: (1) expose IRES students to international high quality
focused research experience on hazard mitigation of civil infrastructure with
foreign expert mentorship; (2) increase the awareness of the students on the
importance of global professional engagement, global engineering networking and
the world wide criticality of the research topic; and (3) recruit and train
students in the program, especially from under-represented groups, attract and
retain them in engineering programs, and motivate them for graduate studies. The
research projects will be held at AIDICO, Technological Institute of
Construction, Valencia, Spain. AIDICO provides R&amp;D services to improve
building materials/systems, energy efficiency, safety and disaster resistance.
AIDICO has an ongoing collaboration with UT Arlington covering research,
student/staff exchange and educational activities. Six civil engineering or
civil engineering bound undergraduates per year will be recruited from two
universities and several community colleges for the 6-week summer program (18
total). The common theme of the IRES site is Hazard Mitigation of Civil
Infrastructure. Six novel IRES research projects (one for each student) that
stem from ongoing AIDICO projects have been designed. The AIDICO projects have
excellent correlation with the Disaster Mitigation Group at UTA, a multi-
disciplinary effort of faculty members and public/private sectors. Significant
collaboration among students, graduate students, faculty and mentors during and
post summer, plus extensive dissemination activities are included. The proposed
IRES project includes an effective assessment component that will gauge the
impact of the project on the IRES students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical
Description&lt;br/&gt;The program will train students to solve hazard mitigation
issues for civil infrastructure involving natural, man-made and accidental
events. This is especially important with the increased worldwide occurrences of
natural, man-made and accidental disasters in recent years, the deteriorating
infrastructure with widespread failure and extensive human, economic and social
effects. The project provides an excellent opportunity to integrate research and
education. Students will be involved in hands on cutting-edge research under
expert mentoring, field trips, presentations, workshops, intellectual and
continuous collaboration, all well-designed to broaden the student's educational
experience. The early academic research exposure is expected to eventually
produce global scientists and engineers. The program is designed to inform
students of and motivate them for engineering degrees and graduate education.
The faculty members and foreign mentors have extensive expertise in the research
topic. Excellent resources from various sources will be leveraged. The project
will produce improved knowledge in critical hazard mitigation issues on the
building construction area. A majority of the recruited students will be from
under-represented groups from the partner universities and colleges. IRES/non-
IRES faculty members from these groups will be role models and mentors on
research and career choices. The project will nurture long-term partnerships
with the students, faculty members and AIDICO collaborators through continuous
academic year focus group meetings, faculty mentoring and virtual/social media
contacts. Results will be disseminated broadly through journal publications,
conference presentations, student workshop and chapter presentations, dedicated
website/blog, and social media. The societal benefits are: the student's
increased awareness of and ability to devise hazard mitigation efforts,
increased interest in engineering education/careers, capacity to develop foreign
collaborations, and finding original/imaginative and critically needed solutions
for a global societal challenge.&lt;br/&gt;