* 1358852
* REU Site:  Spatial Intelligence and Learning Center REU Program
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Jennifer Cromley, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 08/31/2016
* USD 96,000.00

This is a pilot REU Site associated with an NSF-funded Science of Learning
Center (SLC) at Temple University: the Spatial Intelligence and Learning Center
(SILC). Four faculty members from the developmental, cognitive and learning
sciences run this program to mentor a diverse group of undergraduate summer
interns. The students participate and get experience in an interdisciplinary
team science approach to the science of learning. The PI-team aims to provide
students with a research experience that informs them regarding a wide variety
of synergistic activities using different methodologies and populations, all
coordinated on achieving the overall goals of the SLC: improving spatial
learning and, ultimately, STEM learning. This team approach goes beyond the
boundaries of Temple, as SILC involves much cross-institutional collaboration.
Thus, the REU participants reduce their "degrees of separation" for networking
to pursue their own professional goals. Regular activities include lab meetings,
social events, mentoring sessions, and ethics modules that are designed to draw
the students from various labs together at least once a week. These cohort-
building events bring together students from all the labs within the SILC, and
involve a mix of social interaction, professional development, and research-
oriented events. Because of the wealth of opportunities to connect with other
undergraduates, graduate students, and faculty members from a variety of labs,
the REU experience will be rewarding, both in terms of development of the
interns' research knowledge and skills, and in discussing and sharing ideas,
solving problems collaboratively, and getting a sense of what it is like to be a
part of an academic community. In addition, all REU students will be invited
together to the SILC Annual Retreat in October 2015 to present posters based on
their summer work. This retreat includes SILC researchers from Northwestern
University, University of Chicago and seven other institutions as well as
Temple. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific merit of the project lies in the
advancement of a new science of learning, focusing on spatial learning and
cognition. Spatial cognition is a diverse field with many exciting theoretical
and translational research directions ripe to be drawn together synergistically.
Spatial cognition is central to many vital human activities, including
navigation and wayfinding, tool use and design, and scientific and mathematical
thinking. Research on spatial cognition draws on many disciplines, including
cognitive science, computer science, geography, geographic information science,
neuroscience, linguistics, psychometrics, and robotics. Its findings and
insights have relevance for education in science, technology, engineering and
mathematics, as well as in a wide range of professional fields, including
medicine and dentistry, urban planning and traffic modeling, and architecture
and design. Thus, the REU students are exposed to a very rich research
experience and mentored by faculty members and graduate students in these
fields. Some of the REU students come from the undergraduate population at
Temple University, one of the most diverse American research universities. At
least half of the participants come from institutions with limited research
opportunities. Given the complexity and size of the SILC enterprise, this pilot
REU Site serves as a testing ground for a larger, full-fledged REU Site in the
future.