* 1358501
* Workshop: Broadening Participation in the Biodiversisty Sciences: Three Workshops for Undergraduate and Graduate Students
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2016
* Gregory Riccardi, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* James Deshler
* 09/30/2016
* USD 48,000.00

This action funds three regional workshops for undergraduate and graduate
students with the ultimate goal of developing a diversified workforce in fields
of biology severely devoid of participants and leaders from under-represented
groups. These fields include paleobiology and organismal, evolutionary and
environmental biology. These fields taken together can be viewed as the
biodiversity research community who are expected to be served by the NSF-funded
National Resource for Advancing Digitization of Biodiversity Collections (ADBC).
Through ADBC, data and images for millions of biological specimens are being
made available in electronic format for the research community, government
agencies, students, educators, and the general public. Lack of participation by
scientists from under-represented groups in this activity is the impetus for the
workshops to reach students as they make their career choices.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The vision for ADBC is a permanent database of digitized information
from all biological collections in the U.S. that will lead to new discoveries
through research and better understanding and appreciation of biodiversity
through improved education and outreach, which will result in improved
environmental and economic policies. These workshops promise to broaden
participation in this ongoing national research resource.