* 1358900
* Planning Workshop: Increasing Capacity for Data-intensive Research in Environmental Biology
* BIO,EF
* 09/01/2014,10/31/2018
* Frank Davis, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Steven Ellis
* 10/31/2018
* USD 49,990.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many important questions in environmental biology
research and education will be addressed by harnessing the wealth of data
generated through federally funded research. The rise of big data and rapid
development of data-intensive research tools together present unprecedented
potential for new discovery. Data-intensive approaches hold the potential to
revolutionize scientific process and discovery, offering the ability to work far
beyond scales previously imagined - leveraging data produced by sensors from
micro-environments to continental scales, and synthesizing across historical and
contemporary data that span a diversity from the social to the physical
sciences. Achieving this potential depends critically on broader access to and
adoption of data-intensive research approaches that remain relatively uncommon
in environmental biology education and research. The field of environmental
biology has been hampered by the skills and tools to access and use the big data
archives. Currently foundational skills in data management, programming, and
other computing fundamentals are not consistently taught in environmental
sciences curricula; such skills and knowledge are requisite for effectively
engaging in data-intensive research. This workshop is designed to explore a way
forward for the field of environmental biology to broadly improve skills
necessary for data-intensive science. A workshop report including a concrete set
of recommendations will be produced and it is anticipated that the workshop will
mobilize a network of like-minded advocates for data-intensive research training
to raise awareness, and collaboratively lead future activities that raise the
level of computing literacy in the environmental biology workforce. The proposed
workshop participants are trailblazers involved in these efforts, as well as
leaders in environmental biology research and education. The workshop will
facilitate collective action and coordinated future approaches that will help to
transform exposure to and employment of data-intensive research approaches in
environmental biology.