* 1358941
* REU Site: Summer Undergraduate Research Program in Biochemistry
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2020
* Gary Kunkel, Texas A&M AgriLife Research
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 03/31/2020
* USD 466,603.00

This REU Site award to Texas A&M AgriLife Research and the Department of
Biochemistry and Biophysics at Texas A&M University, located in College Station,
TX, will support the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during the summers of
2014-2018. This project is supported by both the Directorates for Biological
Sciences (Division of Biological Infrastructure) and Mathematical and Physical
Sciences (Division of Chemistry). The Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics
at Texas A&M offers an energetic atmosphere to perform research in diverse areas
of biochemistry, including, but not limited to, genomics, proteomics,
enzymology, structural biology, mechanisms of gene expression, membrane
structure and function, and developmental/cell biology. Recruiting efforts will
focus on students who have completed their junior or sophomore year and who
attend institutions that do not offer doctoral degrees. Although not limited to
this geographical area, special recruiting efforts will be made to attract
students from universities and colleges in Texas and surrounding states in the
mid-South region. Partner institutions that enroll substantial numbers of
students who are underrepresented in STEM fields will help recruit students to
this program. Participants will evaluate the program at the end of their summer
experience and in subsequent years, using the online BIO REU common assessment
tool and a program-specific questionnaire.

Significant broader impacts will result from the summer research program.
Participants will receive training from faculty advisors who direct nationally
funded research programs. Weekly meetings will provide training in responsible
conduct in research, critical analysis of research literature, development of
hypothesis-driven research and instruction in presentation skills. At the
conclusion of the program students will present their research accomplishments
in both written and oral reports. Participants will leave with an appreciation
of the effort and satisfaction involved in biochemical research, and prepared to
pursue graduate training and careers in this area. A majority of previous
participants have enrolled in graduate school or obtained research positions in
academia or industry.

Students are required to be tracked after participating in this program and must
respond to an automatic email sent by the NSF reporting system. More information
is available at http://biochemistry.tamu.edu/academics/reu/summer-undergraduate-
research-in-biochemistry/, or by contacting the PI (Dr. Gary R. Kunkel at
g-kunkel@tamu.edu) or co-PI (Dr. Mary Bryk at bryk@tamu.edu).