* 1358651
* EAGER: Neurobiological Basis of Decision Making in Online Environments
* CSE,CNS
* 07/16/2013,09/30/2017
* Fariborz Farahmand, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 09/30/2017
* USD 241,026.00

Considerable research in the field has been focused on developing new
technologies to enhance privacy; encryption of personal data is often presented
as a potential solution. Many of the technologies resulting from this research
are not being effectively utilized because of issues rooted in human judgment
under risk and uncertainty. The majority of existing models and products related
to human judgement are based on a limited number of documented incidents and on
questionable assumptions about user intent and behavior. To better develop and
apply privacy technologies requires better methods of understanding and
measuring human perceptions of privacy. In this project we are investigating the
underlying neurobiological manifestations of privacy, and seeing to understand
-- and measure -- variations of uncertainty in online privacy decisions. The
outcomes of this proposed project will contribute to answering fundamental
questions about human behavior in online environments?e.g., under what
circumstances do systems in the mind cooperate or compete in privacy decisions?
When there is competition, how and where is it adjudicated? Do higher-level
deliberative processes rely similarly on multiple mechanisms, or a single,
unitary set of mechanisms? We anticipate these results being used to further
refine and develop useful privacy policies and technologies.