* 1358178
* U.S.-Kenya IRES: Origins of Human Adaptability
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* David Braun, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 06/30/2018
* USD 228,511.00

Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;This U.S.-Kenya International Research
Experience for Students (IRES): Origins of Human Adaptability builds on the
success of the Koobi Fora Research and Training Program (KFRTP) and will develop
a new framework for integrated training and research in anthropology,
archaeology, geology, anatomy, and paleobiology. The evidence for our species'
recent evolutionary history is of unquestionable social and scientific
importance; however, despite a wealth of fossil, archeological, molecular, and
paleoecological data, issues as basic as the evolution of the key modern human
behaviors and the effects of environmental change on human evolution remain
poorly understood. This can be attributed to so few students being trained in
the range of analytical, experimental and conceptual skills now available for
testing evolutionary hypotheses in an atmosphere that emphasizes collaborative
research. This IRES project will offer US-students an opportunity to gain
research experience investigating the adaptations of hominin species that
existed in Koobi Fora between 2 and 1.4 million years ago, a time period of
major climatic changes that marked the most dramatic transitions in the anatomy,
biology, and behavior of our lineage. The ultimate goal of this research is to
generate fossil and archaeological data from Koobi Fora to evaluate the
hypothesis: Changes in the biology and behaviors of hominin populations during
the Early Pleistocene mark the evolution of distinctive characteristics that
separated our lineage from other hominins and provided the framework for the
origin of our species. Testing this hypothesis will form the basis of
interdisciplinary training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This IRES project will recruit
at least 21 US-undergraduate and graduate students nationwide- focusing on
students underrepresented in STEM fields- and will embed each student in teams
conducting cutting-edge research on the origins of human adaptability within the
context of major climate changes. Training activities will take place in stages
(Preparation, Fieldwork, and a Project Completion Workshop) that extend over
three semesters and will continue afterwards via presentations and publications.
Each student will: 1) generate new knowledge by designing and conducting an
original research project with leading international scholars in the
archaeological and paleontological deposits of the Koobi Fora Formation in
northern Kenya, 2) collect and analyze data using state-of-the-art methods, 3)
synthesize and present the findings at follow-up workshops and professional
development seminars in the U.S., and 4) engage in training on the public
understanding of science with the Smithsonian Institution's National Museum of
Natural History (Washington, DC) and the Mc Wane Science Center (Birmingham,
Alabama).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Description &lt;br/&gt;This project
offers a number of measurable impacts, including fostering interdisciplinary and
international collaboration, publicly disseminating the students' research
findings, and training and inspiring some of the best US-students to pursue
careers in science. Biological Anthropology and Archaeology are uniquely
situated as interdisciplinary 'gateway' fields, and this project intends to
recruit students who would otherwise have little exposure to STEM research and
collaborative, interdisciplinary projects with scholars in the traditional STEM
fields. Impacts of the project include: 1) training three cohorts of students
from diverse backgrounds in a manner that exposes them to interdisciplinary
collaboration on an international level; 2) expanding the collaborative networks
between scientists at several African (National Museums of Kenya, Witwatersrand
U), European (Oxford U; Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology), and
American institutions (George Washington U, U Alabama, Birmingham); 3)
strengthening connections between these US-institutions, Birmingham's Mc Wane
Science Center, and the Smithsonian museum; and 4) creating datasets, peer-
reviewed publications, and public presentations that will enhance student
training and promote public understanding of science.