* 1358680
* REU Site: Biodiversity Science in the Summer Systematics Institute at the California Academy of Sciences
* BIO,DBI
* 03/15/2014,02/29/2020
* Rich Mooi, California Academy of Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/29/2020
* USD 451,598.00

This REU Site award to the California Academy of Sciences (CAS), located in San
Francisco, CA, will support the training of 8 undergraduate students for 8 weeks
during the summers of 2014-2018. During the program, students will work with CAS
scientists on research projects on biodiversity. Given the abundant resources of
the museum, it can support research projects on the systematics, phylogenetics,
and biogeography of a diverse range of organisms including extinct human
ancestors, spiders, turtles, birds, fish, ants, marine invertebrates, and
plants. By conducting an independent research project, students will be trained
in a range of research techniques. Depending on the nature of the particular
project, students may gain experience with light and scanning electron
microscopy, molecular phylogenetics, and/or next-generation sequencing
technologies. In addition, students will receive lectures on systematic biology,
take educational tours of the facility, and participate in community-building
activities. Students will also learn about the ethics of collections-based
science, responsible conduct of research in a museum setting, appropriate data
collection and archiving, and informed attitudes towards preserving the world's
biodiversity. Furthermore, students will develop oral communication skills
through the process of preparing a presentation of their research findings,
which are highlighted in a symposium at the end of the program. In conjunction
with educators, CAS has developed program assessment tools that provide feedback
on every aspect of the program and will also employ the common assessment tool
for BIO REU Sites. Interested students are encouraged to contact prospective
mentors before applying since shared interests between the mentor and student
are a key component of the application process. Letters of recommendation, a
statement of interest, and academic performance are also used in the selection
process. The program places particular emphasis on attracting students from
groups that are under-represented in the sciences.

The CAS REU program hopes to foster in its participants a long-term interest in
science by promoting scientific engagement that extends beyond the program's
end. Specifically, student participants will be encouraged to present their
research at domestic and international scientific conferences.

Students are required to be tracked after the program and must respond to an
automatic email sent via the NSF reporting system. More information is available
by visiting http://research.calacademy.org/opportunities/ssi, or by contacting
the PI (Dr. Rich Mooi at ssi-bi@calacademy.org).