* 1358325
* Anisotropic Properties of the Mid-lithospheric Discontinuity Beneath Central and Eastern North America
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2016
* Maureen Long, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory Anderson
* 07/31/2016
* USD 161,237.00

Earth's continents exhibit striking properties, including relatively thick and
low-density crust and a strong, thick, long-lived mantle lithosphere. The
continents have played a crucial role in controlling the Earth?s tectonic style
and in the evolution of life, but we don't yet understand how continents form or
why continental lithosphere remains stable over billions of years. Our
understanding of the structure and dynamics of continents in general and the
North American continent in particular is improving, enabled in large part by
data from the EarthScope program. A major recent discovery is the presence of
the so-called mid-lithospheric discontinuity (MLD): a sharp drop in seismic
velocities at a depth of roughly 100 km, internal to the continental
lithosphere. This feature has been extensively documented beneath North America
and other continental interiors, but its origin remains unknown. The goal of
this project is to probe the characteristics of the MLD beneath the central and
eastern United States using EarthScope data and thus further our understanding
of how continents form and evolve through time. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An
intriguing hypothesis is that the MLD corresponds to a sharp contrast in seismic
anisotropy, perhaps associated with distinctive regimes of past deformation.
This project is testing this hypothesis by studying the anisotropic properties
of the MLD beneath eastern and central North America. In Phase I of the project,
we are using anisotropic P-to-S receiver function (RF) analysis at long-running
seismic stations, including stations of the USArray Reference Network.
Characterizing the exact geometry of anisotropy across the MLD will allow us to
determine if the MLD does in fact correspond to a change in the strength and/or
orientation of anisotropy. In Phase II of the project, we will identify specific
regions for a more in-depth analysis using Transportable Array and/or Flexible
Array stations, perhaps including the Mid-Continent Rift, the Appalachians, the
Interior Plains, and the New Madrid Seismic Zone, with the ultimate goal of
understanding whether and how the MLD varies among different tectonic settings.
We are addressing four specific science questions with this work: 1) Does the
MLD beneath North America correspond to a change in the strength and/or
orientation of seismic anisotropy? 2) Is the character of any change in
anisotropy across the MLD consistent with inferences on MLD characteristics from
previous work? 3) Do we see lateral variations in the anisotropic properties of
the MLD within central and eastern North America, and do any variations
correspond to geologic or tectonic provinces? 4) What physical mechanism(s) can
explain the anisotropic properties of the MLD as a potentially ubiquitous
feature throughout cratonic North America? The insights into MLD characteristics
gained from this project will have important implications for understanding the
structure and dynamics of continental lithosphere, the formation and
preservation of continents, and continental deformation.