* 1358296
* REU Site: Wellman-HST Summer Institute for Biomedical Optics
* ENG,EEC
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2017
* Seok (Andy) Yun, Massachusetts General Hospital
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 05/31/2017
* USD 330,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;The Wellman-HST Summer Institute for Biomedical
Optics, a new REU site supported by the NSF Division of Engineering Education
and Centers, will admit ten undergraduate students to work on cutting-edge
research on biomedical optics. Students will pursue full-time laboratory
research for nine weeks from June to August at the Wellman Center for
Photomedicine at Massachusetts General Hospital. It provides a highly
multidisciplinary environment at the interface of laboratory innovations and
real-world applications. The faculty with backgrounds in physics, chemistry, and
engineering will serve as mentors. A variety of research projects are offered in
diverse, yet cohesive, themes in the field of biomedical optics, with emphasis
on multidisciplinary approaches that integrate optical physics and engineering
with biological questions and medical problems. The research program will
enhance the ability of students to undertake interdisciplinary research on a
broad range of cutting-edge topics including optical coherence tomography, bio-
integrated photonic devices, cell lasers, biomechanics, and photodynamic
therapy. Students who produce significant results will be identified and
encouraged to submit abstracts to annual conferences with full travel supports.
In addition to research, students attend lectures, seminars, and professional
development workshops on presentation, ethics, and intellectual properties. All
student participants are accommodated in the dormitory at the MIT campus in
close proximity to the labs and lecture sites, and they participate in various
social activities. Stipends and travel supports will be provided. The vibrant
summer program will make their summer experience go way beyond what could be
provided by a typical research experience in a single lab.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;Biomedical
optics is a rapidly growing field, well poised to impact biological sciences and
human health. Students will witness how innovative research in the lab can help
solve real-world problems and thus provide tangible benefits to the society we
live in. This experience will help students gain a broader and deeper
perspective on research and possibly further motivate the students to pursue a
future in interdisciplinary science and engineering. Interactions with mentors
provide role models to the students while helping them evaluate their own future
career paths. The REU site will also have a positive impact on faculty mentors
by fostering active interactions and collaborations. Students will interact with
overseas summer students in other ongoing international programs, building
global networks. In turn, by providing positive experiences, this interaction
can increase the international recognition of science and engineering in the
U.S. by attracting talented undergraduates from overseas to the U.S. for higher
education. The REU site is well positioned to become a national and
international model for highly interdisciplinary and intense summer research
experiences for undergraduates.