* 1358204
* IRES: U.S.-Ghana Collaboration Providing Opportunities for Global Research Activities on Sustainable Water Purification (GRA-SWP)
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Patrick Mensah, Southern University
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 07/31/2018
* USD 249,692.00

Technical Description &lt;br/&gt;This U.S.-Ghana International Research
Experience for Students (IRES) award supports collaboration in water resources
science between Southern University, LA and the Kwame Nkrumah University of
Science and Technology, Kumasi (KNUST). This IRES project establishes a joint
effort between the STEM faculty at these institutions, who will undertake
effective, innovative, and transformative research that ensures the
sustainability of global water resources and large-scale water purification.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The US-investigative team consists of two faculty members
from the Dept. of Mechanical Engineering at Southern University and A&amp;M
College, the nation's largest Historically Black College and University; the
international participants are faculty members of the Department of Materials
Engineering at KUNST. KNUST is the host institution for this IRES project and
will facilitate arrangements to enable successful research, scholarly visits,
and access to the research laboratories for IRES students. Five faculty members
from Southern and Kwame Nkrumah will be directly involved in the research and
mentoring activities. Student participants from the U.S. include five
undergraduate and one graduate student for five weeks each year over three
years. This project will train the next generation of researchers and contribute
to developing a globally- engaged workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
seeks to develop a low cost but technologically efficient composite material for
sustainable water purification. It will examine the process of adsorption of the
fluoride and other microbial contaminants onto the composite material developed
for enhanced fluoride removal. Three separate research tracts that students can
choose are: 1) Characterization of fundamental micro-structural properties of
laterite, 2) Evaluation of a composite Laterite with alumina and magnesium oxide
nano-particles to enhance adsorption of fluoride, and 3) Evaluation of a
composite laterite with calcium oxide and silica nano-particles to enhance
adsorption of fluoride.&lt;br/&gt;Students will learn data acquisition
techniques and the ability to analyze and interpret scientific information.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Description &lt;br/&gt;Students majoring in STEM
fields will have the opportunity to engage in research in an international
environment where they will have to adapt to solving non-traditional problems.
&lt;br/&gt;Additionally, the IRES experience is expected to: 1) enhance US-
student global awareness and perspectives, 2) provide experiential learning
opportunities for students through multidisciplinary&lt;br/&gt;and multi-
institutional partnerships; 3) enhance the ability of water resources science
faculty to conduct collaborative research through international engagements. The
project will raise&lt;br/&gt;general awareness about related issues and the need
and advantages of studying the topics&lt;br/&gt;in multidisciplinary and
internationally collaborative environments. The research findings will be
disseminated through peer-reviewed publications and presentations at conferences
organized by the World Health Organization and the American Society of Civil
Engineering.