* 1358843
* REU Site: Plant Genome Research
* BIO,DBI
* 04/15/2014,03/31/2020
* Georg Jander, Boyce Thompson Institute Plant Research
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 03/31/2020
* USD 504,249.00

This REU Site award to Cornell University's Boyce Thompson Institute (BTI),
located in Ithaca, NY, will support the training of 8 students for 10 weeks
during the summers of 2014-2018. Undergraduates with an interest in hands-on,
plant-focused laboratory research are encouraged to apply to the program. REU
students come from throughout the United States, and join a large and active
plant research community on the Cornell University campus. The field of plant
biology is being revolutionized by rapid advances in DNA sequencing, genetic
mapping, gene expression profiling, site-directed mutagenesis, and other genome-
enabled research methods. Scientists at BTI and Cornell University are employing
these new technologies to conduct cutting-edge research in plant molecular
biology, genetics, biochemistry, cell biology, and bioinformatics. Typical
summer undergraduate research projects will involve gene cloning and
characterization, functional genomics, expression of exogenous genes in plants,
and analysis of plant metabolites. Plant species being studied by the
participating faculty members include maize, soybeans, rice, tomatoes, potatoes,
and Arabidopsis. The student research experience will be enriched by scientific
ethics training, weekly faculty research lectures, discussion of graduate school
and career options, and tours of BTI and Cornell research facilities. Students
will develop skills in scientific communication by writing and critiquing
research proposals at the beginning of the program, as well as by presenting
their results in the form of a seminar at the end of the program. Assessment of
the summer research experience will occur through on-site interviews and
completion of a web-based survey that is provided for biology REU
sites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By participating in the REU Site program,
undergraduate students will receive training in advanced plant biology research
methods. This experience will prepare them for graduate school in the plant
sciences and future research careers in academia, industry, or
government.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students are required to be tracked after the
program and must respond to an automatic email sent via the NSF reporting
system. More information is available by visiting
www.bti.cornell.edu/education/internships, or by contacting the program
coordinator (Tiffany Fleming, pgrp-ourtreach@cornell.edu, 607-254-6732), the PI
(Georg Jander, gj32@cornell.edu), or the Co-PI (Jian Hua, jh299@cornell.edu).