* 1358895
* I-Corps:  Production Scale-up of Electrospun Fiber Scaffolds as Research Tools
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2013,08/31/2015
* Ryan Gilbert, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 08/31/2015
* USD 50,000.00

The purpose of this proposal is to develop new electrospinning technologies and
methodologies to create cost efficient electrospinning materials as cell culture
platforms. Standard cell culture platforms are disposable, plastic dishes or
wellplates with tightly controlled properties to ensure reproducible cell
culture conditions. However, these platforms lack topographical, physical
structures that are present within the native tissue microenvironment, limiting
their relevance to clinical applications. The research team strives to attenuate
the disparity between cell culture platforms and biological tissues by use of
electrospun fiber scaffolds. These scaffolds are composed of polymeric fibers
only two microns or less in diameter. Cells from all tissues of the body readily
recognize the fibrous scaffold and utilize its structure for attachment,
migration, and directed elongation, which produces morphologies more similar to
those found in native tissues than standard culture platforms achieve.
Electrospun fibers are commonly fabricated for intra-laboratory use, but lack
the potential for widespread dissemination due to an inefficient fabrication
process. Production is labor intensive and requires a skilled technician for
fabrication and characterization. The goal for this proposal is to automate the
manufacturing process and scale up production while retaining tight control over
the fiber properties in order to commercialize electrospun fiber scaffolds as a
consumable research tool. Implementing computer-aided manufacturing systems will
provide the necessary precision and control for fabrication of these microscale-
featured scaffolds.

The current paradigm for development of pharmacological therapies to any
particular disease begins in the basic science laboratory where chemical
compounds are screened against cell cultures for a desired effect. This
screening process is a prelude to rodent studies that test safety and efficacy,
which gives way to more complex animal models before human clinical trials.
Unfortunately, the number of successful outcomes from this process is quite low,
it is costly, and there are countless incidences of unanticipated side effects
even after reaching the marketplace. The proposal described herein is set to
initiate transformation of this flawed system. Electrospun fiber culture
scaffolds emulate tissue architecture in vitro, providing more sophisticated
cell culture data to enhance the screening process in the earliest stages. The
role of the fibers is not limited to only a research tool, but they can also
serve as the therapy itself given their unique physical properties and
controlled compound delivery capabilities. Providing researchers with more
information earlier can also lead to a reduction in animal testing, which
reduces ethical concerns and minimizes product overhead.