* 1358495
* Laboratory and Surface-based Studies of Atmospherically-relevant Ice Nucleating Particle Sources, Concentrations and Compositions
* GEO,AGS
* 01/15/2014,12/31/2017
* Paul DeMott, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 12/31/2017
* USD 911,313.00

The formation of ice on atmospheric particles is a basic process that can impact
climate through both the hydrological cycle, via influencing the efficiency and
distribution of precipitation, and through impacts on the scattering of solar
and thermal radiation by ice-containing clouds. Incomplete understanding of the
role of changing natural and human-influenced particle emissions on ice
formation processes in clouds results in large uncertainties in efforts to
constrain the magnitude of current and projected climate impacts. This project
will define the emissions of ice nucleating particles from soil and plant
surfaces to the atmosphere, particularly to quantify the contributions and
nature of organic particles, and within this group, biological particles, in
comparison to known inorganic global ice nucleating particle sources, notably
desert mineral dust particles. Results will be applicable toward improved
quantification of ice nucleation processes in numerical modeling studies at
cloud, regional, weather forecast, and climate scales.

The project combines atmospheric and biological measurement tools toward
defining the surface emissions of specific ice nucleating particle types from
collected soil and plant samples, and toward recognition of their influence
during direct atmospheric sampling. Laboratory studies will be performed of ice
nucleation by collected soil particles and plant organisms subject to lofting by
winds from regionally important ecosystems. Studies will have specific focus on
soils, plants, and ecotypes of the intermountain West and Central U.S. Plains
regions where aerosol cloud interactions may impact both water resources and
severe storm characteristics, but methods and results will inform future land-
based and airborne studies in other regions. Multiple methods will be used to
measure the numbers of particles that freeze when they enter liquid drops at
different temperatures, as they do in natural clouds, and these results will be
related to total aerosol mass and surface area. Specialized tools will be
applied to characterize the compositions of particles freezing, including
electron microprobe analysis, single particle mass spectrometry, thermal and
chemical treatments for selective removal of biological and organic particles,
genetic amplification and sequencing of all biological particles, specific
quantification of genes of known bacterial and fungal ice nucleating particles,
and online measurements of fluorescent biological particles. These same tools
will be applied toward detecting the presence and abundance of different ice
nucleating particle types per volume of air in the atmosphere over plant and
soil surfaces in collection areas before, during and after perturbations by
wind, rain, and harvesting. Detailed and generalized descriptions of ice
nucleation will be developed from these results for application in atmospheric
models.

The broader impacts of this work involve promoting postdoctoral education and
training, development and testing of new instrumentation and methods,
application of results toward climate change issues through collaborative
numerical modeling studies, and fostering cross-disciplinary research between
the atmospheric and biological sciences. Results are of critical importance to
unresolved impact of aerosols on ice clouds and regional and global climate.
Dissemination of results will occur via a project web site, publications,
participation in conferences and scientific working groups and open
communication with science news agencies.