* 1358111
* IRES University of Texas IBM Zurich Collaboration:  Modeling and Integration of Non-Linear Optics with Si Using Epitaxial Oxides
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2014,05/31/2018
* Alexander Demkov, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Roxanne Nikolaus
* 05/31/2018
* USD 250,000.00

A Technical description&lt;br/&gt;The proposed collaboration proposes a joint
research study of the electro-optical properties of BaTiO3 (BTO) films grown on
Si by a group in University of Texas Austin and the group at IBM Zurich. The
proposed collaboration is focused on developing hybrid
ferroelectric/semiconductor materials for future information technology. The
multidisciplinary nature of ferroelectric/ semiconductor systems means it is
almost impossible to have all the necessary expertise in one institution, or
even in one country. &lt;br/&gt;Two broad scientific questions will be
addressed: how does strain affect the linear electro-optical (EO) effect (i.e.
Pockels effect), and how can the EO effect can be enhanced? The EO effect
describes the change of refractive index of a material in a static electric
field, and is exploited in many technological applications such as electro-
optical modulators and deflectors. Ferroelectric ABO3 compounds such as BTO
exhibit unusually large EO coefficients and are therefore materials of choice
for optical devices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A Non-technical
description&lt;br/&gt;The integration of electro-optically active BTO on silicon
can pave the way to the realization of a new variety of photonic devices with
industry-changing performance. The development of silicon photonics, a hybrid
technology combining semiconductor logic with fast broadband optical
communications, could greatly benefit from the linear electro-optical properties
of ferroelectric oxides, a property not present in bulk silicon, as a novel way
to seamlessly connect the electrical and optical domains. Currently, no more
than 5% of interconnects in a state of the art supercomputer, such as the IBM
Roadrunner, are optical. Improving optical interconnects is thus tremendously
promising for advancing information technology. With scientific research
becoming increasingly multinational, it is of paramount importance to prepare
our students to work in this highly collaborative international environment if
we want to ensure US competitiveness in the global marketplace of tomorrow. The
collective IRES experience will prepare our students for scientific careers in
an international market place in an increasingly competitive technological world
where scientists are expected to have a range of skills.&lt;br/&gt;The program
will involve three graduate students, one focusing on first principles theory
and two focusing on growth and electro-optical characterization. Every year,
each student will spend up to twenty four weeks at the IBM facility in Zurich.
Students will participate in the complete process flow, from materials growth to
device fabrication and characterization, and thus learn how to process the
materials and manufacture devices. It is expected that the theory students will
develop a strong interaction with IBM researchers performing simulation and
design of optical structures and devices.&lt;br/&gt;