* 1358143
* Anthropological Exploration of the Contention and Cooperation in International Rights Policies
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2014,01/31/2018
* Marc Edelman, CUNY Hunter College
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 01/31/2018
* USD 199,990.00

This study seeks to understand how international policy surrounding rights
evolves among world policymakers. As global communication brings previously
disconnected groups closer together, debates about rights are a focal point for
understanding the preconditions for stable political and economic relationships
between nations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses specifically on
peasants, a group which has historically made up a bulk of the literature in
cultural anthropology. The UN approved a landmark Declaration on Indigenous
Rights in 2007 and is now moving to strengthen human rights protections for the
one-third of the global population that consists of peasants, small farmers, and
landless laborers. With the creation in 2012 of a new UN Intergovernmental
Working Group on a Peasants' Rights Declaration, transnational agrarian
movements hope to follow the example of the indigenous movements.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project's questions include: (1) How does the
peasants' rights process reflect and/or contribute to norms evolution? (2) How
do peasant stakeholders and their allies make their voices heard in the
Intergovernmental Working Group and strategize to influence its activities? (3)
What institutional changes in the UN will emerge from the Working Group? And (4)
how have understandings of human rights changed since they initiated the
campaign for a new rights instrument? The project employs documentary research,
key informant interviews, and intensive participant observation in Geneva during
all key periods when the peasants' rights Declaration is under consideration.
The new Working Group provides an extraordinary opportunity to observe processes
that are central to human rights scholarship in and outside of anthropology. It
contributes to three bodies of scholarship: (1) contentious politics and
transnational social movements; (2) the anthropology of human rights; and (3)
the anthropology of the UN and research on how civil society influences global
governance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has broad societal impacts
through enhancing our understanding of the evolution of international
cooperation. The project also broadens participation of underrepresented groups
in a STEM discipline by involving undergraduate and graduate students from
underrepresented groups in the analysis of data.