* 1358176
* CAREER: Hybrid 3D Unstructured Workspace Modeling: A Critical Component in Developing an Automated Construction Site
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2013,06/30/2017
* Yong Cho, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Chen
* 06/30/2017
* USD 320,271.00

The objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) program award is
to create an innovative 3D workspace visualization method, which will enable
automated construction equipment to safely and efficiently handle construction
materials for robotic field erection and connection. Robotic construction
material handling requires both rapid visualization of the workspace and highly
accurate position data for safe and secure physical contact between a target
object and a robot. These are difficult to achieve with current sensor
technologies. To meet this challenge, a target-focused range data collection and
modeling method will be researched through a hybrid approach that integrates a
light-weight 3D laser scanner with secondary and tertiary sensory devices such
as a laser rangefinder and an infrared camera. A hybrid system mountable on a
robot or piece of equipment will significantly reduce data collection time while
enhancing data accuracy. Automatic target detection and model-based fitting and
matching algorithms will be developed for various shapes of construction
material components. The hybrid approach will be tested using real-world robotic
test beds, including a multi-joint arm robot at the University of Nebraska-
Lincoln and a bolting robot and a robot crane located within Korea University's
automated building construction system.

If successful, the results of this research will enhance the development of more
intelligent and automated construction job sites and manufacturing processes by
providing a fully sensed, monitored environment for materials, equipment, and
operators. This research will also positively impact the environment by reducing
the enormous amount of construction waste, which will greatly benefit the
construction industry and society in general. Finally, this project has strong
educational plans that will nurture tomorrow's leaders in engineering and
science, promote lifelong learning for industrial practitioners, and broaden
participation of underrepresented groups in research.