* 1358175
* IRES -Experimental Nuclear Physics at the Mainz Microtron
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2018
* Evangeline Downie, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 05/31/2018
* USD 247,938.00

Technical&lt;br/&gt;This project will take a group of six students each summer
(eighteen students in total) to perform research within the A2 collaboration at
the MAMI accelerator of the Johannes Gutenberg University in Mainz, Germany. The
A2 collaboration uses the continuous wave, up to 1.6 GeV MAMI electron beam, in
combination with the Glasgow Photon Tagging Spectrometer to produce a quasi-
monochromatic photon beam. The experiments performed with this photon beam in
the course of this project will investigate the nucleon resonance spectrum by
analyzing single and multiple meson photoproduction on the neutron and provide
exciting new information on the nucleon polarizabilities through analyses of
single and doubly polarized Compton Scattering measurements. &lt;br/&gt;The
students will be involved in the simulation of reaction channels, analysis
techniques and new detectors. Some will be involved in the development and tests
of the new Active Polarized Target, involving tests of material and read-out
techniques in a cryogenic atmosphere. Some will work on programming FPGA chips
for uses in an upgraded data acquisition system. All students will gain
experience taking data, monitoring data quality as it is collected and debugging
any problems which occur during running, thereby gaining experience in many of
the areas of modern nuclear physics.&lt;br/&gt;To ensure the quality of the
experience for the student cohort, to investigate how best to serve the
educational needs of students during international research experience and to
evaluate the benefits of the program, the program will be examined using best-
practice physics education research-based techniques. The students will receive
preparatory instruction and training before leaving for Germany and upon return
to the US, their projects will continue until they reach conclusion and final
reporting. The results of the nuclear physics and PER components of the program
will be published in the relevant journals, with the students receiving full
credit, where appropriate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical&lt;br/&gt;This
project is designed to take a group of six students (eighteen in total) to
Mainz, Germany to work on activities within the A2 collaboration at the MAMI
accelerator during the summer. The students will have the opportunity to become
involved in this collaboration of ca. 100 physicists, as part of the research
groups of Professors Downie &amp; Briscoe of the George Washington University
(GW). They will be involved in hardware and software development for the
investigation of the structure and dynamics of the nucleon (neutrons and
protons). Before the summer, the students will undergo a preparatory phase at
GW, where they will learn about the physics background of their planned project,
become familiar with the software suites they will use, and begin dialogue with
their foreign supervisor using web-conferencing tools. At the Institut fuer
Kernphysik, of the Johnannes Gutenberg university, Mainz, researchers will work
with the IRES students on a variety of projects from hardware development and
tests for the Active Polarized Target and new trigger detectors, to analysis of
experimental data to search for rare meson decays, and simulation studies to
plan for future experiments. The students will also have the chance to acquire
modern technological skills of wider application, such as FPGA
programming.&lt;br/&gt;Upon their return to the US, the IRES cohort will
continue their research projects, producing a final report and a presentation
which will take place at a special symposium to showcase the students? work. The
students will also be encouraged to apply for the CEU fellowships to present
their work in a wider circle. Throughout the course of the IRES program, the
educational benefit to and progress of each student will be monitored by Prof.
Teodorescu of GW, with entrance, mid-term, and exit interviews. Professors
Briscoe, Downie and Teodorescu will work together to formulate an educational
framework for mentoring students in international research through the study of
the ongoing IRES program, and the results of this effort will be published in
appropriate physics education research journals.