* 1358629
* REU Site:   The Space Physics Research Laboratory, University of Michigan
* GEO,AGS
* 04/15/2014,03/31/2015
* Michael Combi, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Edward L. Bensman
* 03/31/2015
* USD 152,366.00

Twelve undergraduate students are competitively selected to spend 3 summer
months at the Space Physics Research Laboratory in the Department of
Atmospheric, Oceanic and Space Sciences, University of Michigan, where each
works with one of the over 40 faculty members (of which up to 15-20 regularly
participate) doing research in Airglow and Atmospheric Science, Space Plasma
Physics, Earth and Planetary Ionospheres and Magnetospheres, Air Pollution
Transport, and Planetary Atmospheres. The students have opportunities to
interact with their mentors, other undergraduate students in the program,
graduate students at the university and other faculty members and research
staff. They are able to have hands on experience working with instrumentation,
which has flown or will fly in space, making in situ and remote sensing
measurements of the atmosphere, and fabricating and calibrating components of
these state-of-the-art systems. They are also able to choose to construct and
work with software packages, which solve analytical expressions, analyze space
flight data in image forms, and manipulate large databases. A portion of their
experience involves attending weekly seminars given by the faculty/staff,
writing up their work in a report for their mentor (which may be publishable),
and presenting their report orally to the students and
staff.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit
of this proposed program is contained in the actual accomplishment of research
work that is produced. Some of the projects have or will directly result in
journal publications or presentations at scientific
meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;Beyond this the
broader impact is inherent in the fundamental purpose of the REU program, which
is to engender interest and research experience in the atmospheric and space
sciences in students who might pursue these areas as a career. In this regard we
have made special efforts and have been reasonably successful in attracting both
women and underrepresented minorities to these fields of physical science.
Furthermore in recent years nearly one summer REU student per year has returned
a year or two later as an incoming graduate student in our own M.S., M.Eng., or
Ph.D. programs.