* 1358724
* Enhancing Data and Tools for Research and Education on African American English
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2014,02/28/2021
* Melissa Redford, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Tyler Kendall
* 02/28/2021
* USD 548,846.00

No variety of U.S. English has received more attention by researchers, the
media, or the public than that spoken by African Americans. The place of African
American English, and the language of African American children in the American
social landscape has often been the source of controversy, kindling far ranging
debates about such topics as equity in educational policies and practices and
linguistic profiling in housing discrimination. Researchers of American English
have also long debated the historical origins of African American English and
the ongoing relationship between language varieties spoken by African Americans
and those spoken by their European American neighbors. Studies have long
demonstrated the systematic and rule-governed nature of vernacular African
American English, and other non-standard language varieties more generally, yet
important questions remain about the origin of African American English
varieties, their current and future development, and their relationships to
regional European American and other socioethnic varieties. At the same time,
important social and educational applications of enhanced knowledge persist
about the nature of and socioeducational implications related to non-standard
varieties in general and African American English in
particular.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the major hurdles in developing better
knowledge about African American English is the lack of publicly available data
and detailed information about the variety. Very little research data are
available to scholars and educators beyond those data they collect privately for
their own purposes. This award supports the creation of the first public corpus
of African American English. Through the award, researchers are building a large
collection of linguistically annotated spoken language data along with publicly
oriented web-based resources. These resources will enable a wide-range of
researchers, as well as the public, to more robustly understand the variety.
Corpora such as these are also important for developing language technologies,
such as speech-to-text software, and lead to better human-computer interaction.