* 1358222
* IRES: Application of Biochemistry and Analytical Chemistry for Real-World Tasks in Ppublic Health and Biomedicine
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2014,11/30/2018
* Eric Conte, Western Kentucky University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Lyons
* 11/30/2018
* USD 249,978.00

This IRES award will provide research experiences to undergraduate students from
Western Kentucky University (WKU) in South Korea at Pusan National University
and Changwon National University. The WKU students will work on projects in
biochemistry and analytical chemistry with the PI or Co-PI and respective South
Korean collaborators. The PI, Professor Moon-Soo Kim from WKU, and Professor
Haesik Yang from Pusan National University will collaborate on the use of
sequence-specific Zinc Finger Proteins (ZFPs) and Transcriptional Activator-Like
Effectors (TALEs) for the detection of pathogens. They seek improvements in
detection sensitivity for this technique by using electrochemical detection with
redox cycling. The development of a point-of-care diagnostic for pathogen
detection is expected from this project. The Co-Pi, Professor Eric Conte from
WKU, and Professor Yong-Ill Lee from Changwon National University will
collaborate on the use of Magnetic Zirconia particles for the separation of
chiral racemic drug mixtures. The separation of chiral racemic mixtures is a
challenge in biomedicine where typically only one enantiomer will have
biological activity. Magnetic zirconia particles show promise for separating a
number of important racemic mixtures and subsequent isolation of the
biologically important chiral molecule. Separating and isolating the
pharmaceutically active chiral substance is important for studying a drug?s
metabolic route.

A strengthened joint collaboration, involving WKU undergraduate students, will
result between the WKU investigators from a predominately undergraduate
institution and Korean collaborators at two internationally recognized Ph.D.
granting institutions (Pusan and Changwon National Universities). In addition,
this experience is designed to expose students to education within a different
cultural milieu. They will gain an appreciation for higher education in a
country other than their own and gain research experience in an international
environment. Also, a greater cultural appreciation will result. WKU students
will work in the laboratory of the PI or Co-PI during the academic year and
visit their host Korean University during the summertime. Qualified
underrepresented students from WKU will be given priority for this overseas
visit, including students from nearby Appalachian counties. These students will
be least likely to have the means to visit a foreign land and in general lack
exposure to diverse cultures.