* 1358147
* IRES:U.S.-Sweden Research Experience in Efficient and Secure Mobile Systems for Students
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* An-I Wang, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Mangala Sharma
* 08/31/2018
* USD 250,000.00

Mobile computing increasingly pervades our lives in forms ranging from
smartphones, GPS navigators, and entertainment devices to the many subsystems
embedded in our automobiles, trains, and airplanes. The power and security
requirements for these platforms present unique challenges. This International
Research Experience for Students (IRES) project will enable the Principal
Investigator and Florida State University (FSU)students and faculty to visit
Chalmers University of Technology (CTH) to conduct computer research on
efficient and secure mobile systems. Over the three years of this project, 15
U.S. graduate students (in cohorts of five) will visit CTH, in Gothenburg,
Sweden, for a period of 10 weeks each summer. While in residence, the U.S.
students will work closely with CTH faculty and students on joint projects. The
combined expertise of the FSU and CTH researchers uniquely qualifies this team
to provide IRES student participants with a rewarding and productive research
experience, not only during their time abroad, but in the context of the
broader, ongoing international faculty collaborations to which their summer
projects contribute.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Energy and security have become key
design constraints for mobile computing devices, and the intellectual merit of
this IRES project lies in the cooperative efforts to develop novel approaches to
addressing these constraints. The US-Swedish IRES will do this in part through
projects that focus on the design and analysis of combined compiler,
architecture, and hardware techniques for making mobile computer processors more
energy efficient. Furthermore, the objectives include contributing to future
support of secure file deletion by developing new methods to track copies of
keys throughout a system. Both technical and societal broader impacts are
expected. If successful, results may lead to future technology that creates more
efficient and secure systems to support ubiquitous computing which continues to
pervade our daily lives. Not only will participating FSU students increase their
research knowledge; they also will become more globally engaged and better
prepared to work in a diverse and expanding international computer and
information science research environment. Reciprocally, the CTH partners intend
to send Swedish students to FSU for similar, well-planned cooperative research
visits. Overall, this balanced approach is expected to reinforce and extend the
early career international research experience for FSU students by providing a
valuable international cultural and research experience to U.S. students who do
not have the opportunity to visit Sweden as IRES participants.