* 1358130
* REU Site:  Collaborative Research:  Field-Based Research on the Gulf of California Rift Margin, Baja California Sur (Mexico)
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2014,09/30/2015
* Cathy Busby, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Lina Patino
* 09/30/2015
* USD 116,048.00

The goal of this Baja Basins Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU)
project is: (1) for student participants to develop skills in conducting and
communicating scientific research, (2) to employ an integrative field and lab
research approach, using digital technology and modern analytical lab equipment,
and (3) to learn international cooperation by collaborating side-by-side with
Mexican students, professors, and mining professionals to address research
questions on the tectonic evolution of the economically important Santa Rosalía
rift margin basin in Baja California Sur, México. Few places in the world expose
volcanic and marine sedimentary sequences and large uplifted Quaternary terraces
that can be used to understand the processes involved in the progressive stages
of continental breakup, including magmatic activity and economic mineralization.
The geologic youthfulness of the Santa Rosalía basin along this segment of the
Gulf of California, as well as excellent exposures make it ideal for resolving
the rates of development of structures and resulting depositional systems.
Participants will spend three weeks in México conducting field research during
the winter intersession to take advantage of cooler weather. This will allow
time for sample preparation to be done before the four-week summer laboratory
analysis session is conducted, on the campus of the University of
Missouri-­Kansas City. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This REU site will recruit junior
undergraduate geoscience majors with an emphasis on Hispanic, bilingual,
veteran, and women students. The collaboration with Mexican scientists, mining
professionals, and the international nature of the fieldwork will provide an
unparalleled avenue for cultural enrichment for the students as well as an
experience in global cooperation between academia and industry that will be
invaluable for a student's future success in an increasingly global workforce
and economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is being co-funded with the Office
International and Integrative Activities.