* 1358137
* IRES: U.S.-Greece Undergraduate Engineering Research on Sustainable Indoor Living Environments
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Dimitris Korakakis, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Roxanne Nikolaus
* 08/31/2018
* USD 249,896.00

This U.S.-Greece International Research Experience for Students (IRES) project
annually offers eight U.S. senior undergraduate engineering students advanced
training through cooperative research on sustainable indoor living environments
at the Greek Institute of Electronic Structure and Laser (IESL) and the
University of Crete (UoC). All activities are guided by the West Virginia
University principal investigator, Konstantinos Sierros, and his Greek
counterpart, George Kiriakidis who directs the Transparent Conducting Mterials
Lab at IESL. While abroad, student participants will gain exposure to research
trends and engineering challenges that concern functional materials, devices,
and smart systems for sustainable living technologies. Specifically, each
student cohort will work collaboratively in several distinct sustainability
areas at the interface of applied physics and engineering by conducting research
on: metal oxide-based indoor gas sensing devices; printable photocatalytic
materials for improving air quality; phase change materials and vacuum
insulation panels for thermal insulation; and life-cycle analysis of materials
and devices. Key to the overall research experience abroad is access to the
partner's unique European prototypal facility located at the combined premises
of IESL and the Science and Technology Park of Crete. This site will serve as a
test-bed and technology integration facility for the IRES activities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The early career training and international research
experience for undergraduate students on sustainable technologies can contribute
to future U.S. competitiveness by helping to develop the next generation of
experts on energy-efficient and sustainable living environments. Such globally
engaged students are expected to become the backbone of our future engineering,
energy and sustainability workforce. Their valuable training and cultural
engagement are ensured by providing participants with careful mentoring while at
IESL/UoC and by fostering effective collaboration with international
counterparts before, during, and upon completion of the IRES experience. For
broader impact, the results of this project also are expected to strengthen
future, long-term sustainability research collaboration between West Virginia
University and IESL/UoC.