* 1358342
* SHINE:  Theoretical Investigation of Small Scale Structure in Solar Flare Current Sheets
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* John Raymond, Smithsonian Institution Astrophysical Observatory
* Continuing Grant
* Carrie E. Black
* 06/30/2018
* USD 342,578.00

Magnetic reconnection is a fundamental physical space plasma process that is the
driver of solar eruptions. A detailed understanding of magnetic reconnection,
therefore, is an important component of understanding the physical processes
responsible for space weather at Earth. Magnetic reconnection governs the
dynamics and heating of other astrophysical plasmas as well. The process occurs
on length scales much shorter than can be observed remotely, but the released
energy and changes in magnetic structure have important global consequences. The
objective of this project is to perform numerical simulations of magnetic
reconnection in the solar atmosphere that result in predictions that are
suitable for comparison with solar observations. The results will provide new
understanding of the observational signatures of reconnection and new
understanding of the role of small-scale structures in rapid reconnection and
particle acceleration. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project includes significant
science education and public outreach components. Members of the proposal team
will mentor undergraduate summer interns. Funding is also included to coordinate
outreach efforts by solar physicists for a local science festival. Each year,
this festival brings in hundreds of members of the public of all ages, with
exhibits designed to be informative to everyone in
attendance&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project is aimed at characterizing
the small-scale structure in density, temperature, and energy within the
reconnection region, which is vital for the dynamics of reconnection and
particle acceleration. If strong variations in temperature or density exist,
then this will substantially impact the ionization evolution and consequently
the interpretation of observations. Both two-dimensional and three-dimensional
simulations will be performed, with a focus on investigating how the tearing and
plasmoid instabilities drive turbulence and enhance reconnection rates. The
statistical properties of the nonlinear dynamics resulting from these
instabilities will be investigated to provide insight into particle acceleration
and the dynamics of reconnection. While most observations of solar eruptions are
interpreted under the assumption that the plasma is in ionization equilibrium,
the time scales for ionization and recombination are often comparable to or
longer than the time scales of the eruption. The observational predictions will
therefore be made using time-dependent ionization modeling in the post
processing, including the effects of non-thermal particle distributions.