* 1358987
* The Keck Geology Consortium: Year-long Collaborative and Comprehensive Research Experiences for Undergraduates
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/2014,04/30/2017
* Robert Varga, Pomona College
* Continuing Grant
* Lina Patino
* 04/30/2017
* USD 550,000.00

The Keck Geology Consortium, comprising 18 primarily undergraduate institutions,
will offer summer research experiences for ~34 undergraduates each of three
years, building on 23 years of successful programming involving over 1400
students. Students will be recruited from the 18 schools and from non-Consortium
institutions. Summer research projects will be continued in the following
academic year as independent study projects. All participating students will
publish short contributions in the annual proceedings volume and will be
encouraged to present their work at regional and national disciplinary meetings.
The Consortium will run 5-6 projects per year for 28 undergraduate seniors and
one project for 6 sophomore students from underrepresented groups in the Earth
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed projects involve a mix of field and
laboratory research experiences that will make meaningful scientific
contributions in the areas of structural geology, paleontology and paleoecology,
and paleoclimatology as well as igneous and metamorphic petrology, sedimentology
and stratigraphy, volcanology, geomorphology and geoarchaeology. The yearlong
Keck Consortium program enhances students' scientific and geoscience research
skills and provides a robust scientific experience culminating in presentation
of results at the annual research symposium and publication in the proceedings
volume. The Consortium encourages full participation by women and minority
groups.