* 1358474
* REU SITE: Plant Genomics at Michigan State University
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Robert Last, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 08/31/2017
* USD 311,682.00

This REU Site award to Michigan State University (MSU), in East Lansing, MI,
will support the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during the summers of
2015-2017. REU interns will engage in faculty mentored research focused on
genomics of plants and photosynthetic microbes that will be suitable for
students interested in molecular genetics, biochemistry, chemistry and
computational biology. Participants will be selected from a pool of junior and
senior applicants with an emphasis on individuals from minority serving and
primarily undergraduate institutions. This REU provides interns with experiences
designed to help prepare them for graduate school. Interns will be immersed
within an active research group and will interact with faculty, postdoctoral
associates and graduate students to acquire research skills and an in depth
understanding of their project. The program will be augmented through weekly
presentations describing MSU research programs and faculty career paths,
together with seminars addressing scientific ethics, presentation skills, and
career and graduate school opportunities. These activities will be structured to
increase each intern's ability to think critically and conduct biological
research with the goal of maximizing their future impact on STEM disciplines.
Program assessment will be accomplished through a combination of custom surveys
and the REU common assessment tool.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This three year REU
will train 30 students in cutting edge research in plant genomics. The program
will seek to attract students from under-represented groups and smaller
institutions where research opportunities are often limited. Experiences will
focus on the formulation and testing of hypotheses and the scientific method
together with graduate school and career opportunities in the biological
sciences. Formal and social interactions with faculty members and their research
groups are an integral part of the program and collectively these experiences
are intended to provide interns with the experience and confidence to pursue
graduate school and scientific careers in the biological sciences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students are required to be tracked after the program and
must respond to an automatic email sent via the NSF reporting system. More
information is available at http://www.plantgenomics.msu.edu, or by contacting
the PI (Dr. Cornelius Barry at barrycs@msu.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. Robert Last at
lastr@msu.edu).