* 1358690
* SAVI Belmont Forum International Collaboration: Community-driven strategy to deliver e-Infrastructures and Data Management for global environmental challenges
* GEO,ICER
* 04/15/2014,09/30/2016
* Robert Gurney, Arizona Geological Survey
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Uhle
* 09/30/2016
* USD 652,648.00

This award is designated as a Science Across Virtual Institutes (SAVI) award and
is being co-funded by the NSF's Directorate for Geosciences, Directorate of
Computer Information Science and Engineering's Advanced Cyberinfrastructure
(ACI) Division and Office of International and Integrative Activities. The aim
of this award is to deliver an e-infrastructure and data management roadmap and
implementation plan for effective end-to-end (basic research to decision making)
global environmental change research by facilitating collaboration among
engineers, computer, natural, and social scientists from the United States and
many countries across the globe through a Knowledge Hub. The funds will be used
to support the collaboration between 14 US researchers and approximately 120
researchers from the 13 participating Belmont Forum countries and the
coordination of the Knowledge Hub activities through a secretariat. Knowledge
Hub activities such as virtual working groups and in-person workshops will focus
on two thematic areas: governance and interoperability in architectures.

The resulting e-Infrastructure and Data Management Strategy and Implementation
Plan will serve as a clear roadmap to address and prioritize interoperability
challenges across the globe and integrate national and international research
efforts to promote more holistic environmental decision support systems for
global environmental change research. A key outcome of these collaborative
efforts will be enhanced interoperability among global environmental data that
will help develop beneficial societal products.

The development of this e-infrastructure and data management Knowledge Hub
represents an extraordinary opportunity to bring together international leaders
in interoperability, standards development, and various aspects of governance to
seek a synoptic world vision. This virtual institute will create opportunities
for enhancing the career trajectories of a new generation of researchers in the
U.S. and across the globe. The Knowledge Hub will expose US early-career
scientists to interdisciplinary, multi-institutional activities focused on
environmental data and cyberinfrastructure where they can benefit not only from
the US participants but also their counterparts from 13 other countries.