* 1358998
* REU Site: Tuskegee University Research Experience for Undergraduates in Nano-Bio Materials Science and Engineering
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2014,02/28/2017
* Mahesh Hosur, Tuskegee University
* Continuing Grant
* jose caro
* 02/28/2017
* USD 330,000.00

ID: 1358998 PI: Zainuddin, Shaik ORG: Tuskegee
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: REU Site: Tuskegee University Research
Experience for Undergraduates in Nano-Bio Materials Science and
Engineering&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This REU site is
focused on training undergraduate minority students for a 10-week period each
summer in the fields of Nano-Bio Materials Science and Engineering under the
mentorship of interdisciplinary research faculty and their Ph.D. students.
Research activities will be focused on a wide range of important areas including
synthesis of nanoparticles for biomedical applications and antimicrobial
properties, nanosensors for detection of salmonella enterica, nanoscale drug
delivery system for treatment of solid tumors, and structure-property
relationships in nano-bio composites. Involvement of REU students in these
challenging and meaningful research areas with minority Ph.D. students as
mentors will have a significant impact on their decision to pursue graduate
studies and STEM based careers. REU students will also participate in several
unique activities including a two-credit hour Introduction to Research course
and training for the Graduate Record Examination. Students will learn critical
thinking, qualitative reasoning, mathematical, analytical, and research skills
through these activities that will be integral in their transition toward
graduate studies and STEM careers. Site activities will also support student
professional development including professional seminars by role models, field
trips to local industrial sites, summer presentations, and workshops. Finally, a
comprehensive assessment program will be implemented to evaluate the impact of
the program on students including interest in research, progress in education,
and long-term professional development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Tuskegee University (TU) has, over the years with support from
National Science Foundation (NSF) and other federal agencies, developed a
program of research and education in Materials Science and Engineering (MSE),
which is not only very comprehensive but also very effective in recruiting,
motivating, mentoring, and graduating students with advanced degrees in MSE. The
program has produced the largest number of minority PhDs in MSE of which over 50
percent are females. Through this REU Site, Tuskegee University will establish a
pipeline to expose undergraduates from four-year and community colleges in
Alabama to a research environment. The research projects chosen for students are
in Nano-Bio Materials Science and Engineering, an area of high national interest
that is vital for the technological developments in engineering, science, and
medicine. Involvement of REU students in these emerging research areas with
faculty from various disciplines and existing on-campus multidisciplinary
research and education centers will enable them to develop skills needed to
excel in academia and STEM careers. Minority Ph.D. students as mentors, deans of
various colleges at TU, and MSE minority Ph.D. alumni as seminar speakers will
not only serve as role models, but also build confidence and motivate these
students to pursue graduate studies in STEM areas. The planned workshops, summer
presentations, and field trips give students a broader appreciation and an
incentive for pursing graduate studies in STEM disciplines.