* 1358564
* EAGER: Microstructure of Er optical center in the large-bandgap semiconductor GaN
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2015
* Hans Robinson, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Mahmoud Fallahi
* 09/30/2015
* USD 61,985.00

Objective: This research project aims to achieve a greater understanding of
erbium optical centers in the wide bandgap semiconductor GaN. The approach
utilizes the magneto-optical techniques to study the microscopic structure of
these centers.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;The proposed work
involves theoretical and experimental investigations of the microscopic
structure of optically active Er centers in GaN will be investigated using
magneto-optical measurements. The study will focus on the Zeeman effect on
photoluminescence lines associated with erbium centers in GaN as a function of
magnetic field strength. Several approaches combining analytical and simulation
techniques for the magnetic field-induced splitting of the photoluminescence
lines will be utilized. The individual g-tensors of ground and excited states of
the erbium optical centers will be determined. The study will focus on the
temperature dependence of the intensity ratio of the high and the low energy
components at high magnetic fields. The information will provide a detailed
description of the microscopic structure of the optical
centers.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the research will
lead to a greater understanding of erbium optical centers in GaN semiconductor
films. This information is crucial for future photonic/optoelectronic
applications, including optical amplifiers, optical communication systems, solid
state lighting devices, and quantum information processing systems. The proposed
research also impacts training graduate and undergraduate students in
interdisciplinary areas of photonics, material science and
devices.&lt;br/&gt;The research results will be incorporated into courses
offered by the PIs in both Optics and Nanoscience programs.