* 1358465
* REU SITE: Systematics and Evolutionary Biology for the 21st Century
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2020
* Susan Perkins, American Museum Natural History
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 04/30/2020
* USD 698,579.00

This REU Site award to the American Museum of Natural History (AMNH), located in
New York, NY, will support the training of 8 undergraduate students for 10 weeks
during the summers of 2014-2018. The theme of the REU program is systematics and
evolutionary biology. Students will be mentored by the museum's scientists and
curators and will conduct research aimed at elucidating the evolutionary history
of groups of organisms. The vast resources available at AMNH make many
innovative research projects possible. For example, projects that explore the
evolution of jungle leeches, malarial parasites, extinct predators, and
hermaphroditic sea anemones will be offered. In the process of collecting and
analyzing data, students will be trained in a range of scientific methodologies,
including morphological scoring, DNA sequencing, computed tomography, massively
parallel next-generation genomics, and computational phylogenetics. In addition
to the research experience, students will attend weekly lectures, educational
tours of the museum collections and other relevant field trips, and learn the
importance of ethical and responsible scientific conduct. At the end of the
program, students will write a report and give a short presentation on their
research accomplishments. To assess program success, the BIO REU common
assessment tool will be used. The program intends to assemble a diverse cohort
of students by attracting participants from across the country, as well as
locally. Selection of applicants is based primarily on the applicant's
potential, rather than academic scores, and the program places particular
emphasis on recruiting students from minority groups that are currently under-
represented in scientific fields. Students may apply online through
www.amnh.org/REU/. Since matching applicants to appropriate mentors is
essential, communication with prospective project mentors in advance is
encouraged.

During the program, students will complete a "broader impacts" project in which
they communicate scientific ideas and the importance of basic scientific
research to a lay audience. This experience will teach students the importance
of outreach to educate the public.

Participants are required to be tracked after the program and must respond to an
automatic email sent via the NSF reporting system. More information about the
program can be found by visiting www.amnh.org/REU/, or by contacting the PI (Dr.
Mark Siddall at siddall@amnh.org) or the co-PI (Dr. Susan Perkins at
perkins@amnh.org).