* 1358978
* REU Site: Georgetown University REU for Materials Physics
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2018
* Amy Liu, Georgetown University
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 04/30/2018
* USD 330,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Each year, nine undergraduates from diverse
backgrounds and a broad spectrum of institutions will be recruited for a 10-week
summer research experience in materials physics at Georgetown University.
Students will engage in experimental, computational, and theoretical research
projects in nanoscale physics, soft matter, device physics, active matter,
biophysics, and cold-atom systems. Taking advantage of Georgetown's location in
the nation's capital, students will also be exposed to the role of science,
particularly materials research, in public policy. These activities build on
Georgetown's existing programs designed to engage undergraduate science majors
directly with the government on issues of national importance, and will help
build an understanding of the connection between scientific research and the
world outside of the laboratory. Students will also participate in a variety of
professional development activities, many of which will be held jointly with the
REU program in the Georgetown Chemistry Department.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-
TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;The National Science Foundation supported Research
Experiences for Undergraduates program in Materials Physics at Georgetown
University will provide undergraduates from diverse backgrounds and a broad
spectrum of institutions an opportunity to engage in important and challenging
research in the fundamental science of materials, while developing technical and
professional skills necessary for a successful career in science. In addition,
students will be exposed to the role of science, particularly materials
research, in public policy, and will meet with science policy practitioners in
the Nation's Capital. Recruitment efforts will focus on students from schools
with limited research programs, as well as members of underrepresented groups.
It is anticipated that engagement in focused research projects, exploration of
the broader role of science and scientists in society, and development of
lasting relationships with faculty mentors will positively influence student
perceptions of careers in science and help increase the pool of future materials
researchers. In addition, students who complete this program will be uniquely
qualified to understand and communicate the importance of materials science in
technological progress and in addressing societal challenges.