* 1358063
* Matacanela Archaeological Project
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2014,01/31/2016
* Marcie Venter, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/2016
* USD 159,971.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Marcie Venter and an international
team of colleagues will conduct two seasons of archaeological research on the
southern Gulf Coast of Veracruz, Mexico. The fundamental significance of this
research rests on the fact that it will permit scientists to gain insight into
the long term relationship between climate change and societal response at a
traditional level of social organization. This same process is occurring in many
parts of the world today among groups of similar social complexity. The
effectiveness with which such adaptations take place have worldwide
implications.

The research team consists of scholars from several US-based universities, and
Mexican researchers and institutions. The research will explore the ways that
societies have responded to climate change and environmental degradation in the
past by examining the Classic and Postclassic center Matacanela, located in the
Tuxtla Mountains. The end of the Classic period (ca. AD 800) was characterized
by dramatic climate shifts, the cessation of maize agriculture, political
decentralization, economic reorganization, demographic decline and migration.
Although most other centers in the region were abandoned, architectural and
sculptural evidence strongly suggests that Matacanela was not and that it
persisted despite regional collapse. This study will evaluate the reasons for
and strategies involved in settlement persistence. The research questions
require data from site contexts associated with political authority (civic-
ceremonial architecture, plazas), community and household ritual, household
organization and food production/processing areas. These data will be amassed
through the topographic mapping of the site; controlled, systematic surface
collection of artifacts; geophysical survey; and stratigraphic excavations.
These data will also help refine the regional chronology, which is relatively
coarse-grained following AD 800. Concurrent with and following field work each
season, all collected artifacts will be analyzed. Samples will be exported to
the US for advanced analyses. The project participants will conduct additional
data analysis in the US. The PI will integrate the diverse datasets. The
intellectual merits of this project are two-fold. This research provides an
evaluation of resilience during the collapse of a lowland Mesoamerican society.
This research also compares Postclassic political reorganization with other Gulf
lowland settlements. Postclassic reorganization in the south-central Gulf
lowlands to the northwest was due in large part to Nahua immigration from the
central Mexican highlands. Although Nahua immigration has been documented
ethnolinguistically for the Tuxtlas, and some Aztec agents resided in the region
at the time of Spanish arrival, continuity with earlier artifact traditions
suggests that the foundation of Postclassic Tuxteco society was largely based on
a reorganized local population. Important components in this reorganization may
have included altered long distance networks, and means of acquiring authority.
This project at Matacanela will permit sites in the south-central and southern
Gulf lowlands to be situated within a broader comparative historical framework.
The broader impacts of this project include collaborative efforts and learning
opportunities for US and Mexican researchers and students in the form of field
and laboratory experiences, thesis and dissertation data, peer-reviewed journal
articles, and a project monograph. Moreover, the study region has experienced an
explosion in development of two kinds lately: tourism and commercial
infrastructure that seems to be setting the stage for natural gas extraction off
of the Catemaco municipal coast. This project will provide important site
registry data and management recommendations that natural and cultural
conservation agencies, local agricultural cooperatives, tourism entrepreneurs,
and officials can use to co-manage important and increasingly endangered
components of cultural patrimony.