* 1358498
* REU Site: An Energy Research REU focusing on Wyoming Community Colleges
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* Brian Leonard, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 07/31/2018
* USD 331,062.00

This award, supported by the Division of Chemistry (CHE) and the Experimental
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR) Program both at the National
Science Foundation support a Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Site
at the University of Wyoming (UW), led by Professors John O. Hoberg and Brian
Leonard. Wyoming's educational system is comprised of a single 4-year graduate-
level university along with seven community colleges (CC). Each of these CC's
supports a chemistry department along with a total of 22 faculty. Thus, this
proposal targets and will recruit students from these seven institutions and is
expected to produce a significant, scientific impact on the community colleges,
students in the state of Wyoming, and surrounding states. The site is designed
to train students in modern research by providing hands-on experience with
sophisticated instrumentation, and providing access to specialized research
methods not typically available in their community college education. Projects
are integrated with participation in seminars, an ethics course, and field trips
to a national lab and coal mine to educate students on the current scientific
issues related to both national and global energy demand and management. The
program also serves to prepare students for careers in the emerging high-tech
energy field, which will continue to grow. An impact of this program is to
attract students into science careers using current energy and climate problems
that will motivate and impassion students who desire to continue living in the
western United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the Department of
Chemistry at the University of Wyoming (UW) will bring seven teams of community
college professors and their undergraduate students from Wyoming community
colleges (CC) to UW each summer. These teams will work in chemistry research
groups on outstanding problems in energy science and energy resource management.
This 10-week summer research program involves hands-on research along with a
variety of activities to educate and train students in energy science. Each
student works closely with one of the 11 participating faculty mentors who have
been carefully selected for their research accomplishments and successful
experiences in working with undergraduate researchers.