* 1358520
* Study of the Spatial and Temporal Distribution of Atmospheric Gravity Waves Using Pressure Data From the Dense USArray Transportable Array
* GEO,EAR
* 12/15/2014,11/30/2017
* Michael Hedlin, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Margaret Benoit
* 11/30/2017
* USD 359,396.00

Non-technical statement

The National Science Foundation has provided funds for an unprecedented
observatory for study of the Earth's interior and the atmosphere. The USArray
Transportable Array is a 400-station observatory that places broadband seismic
and atmospheric pressure sensors on a Cartesian grid every 70 km across an area
that spans 2,000,000 square km. Seismic data from these stations have provided
high-resolution images of the Earth's interior beneath the continental United
States, whereas the atmospheric data at these stations provide measurements of
atmospheric phenomena. In a project recently funded by NSF, researchers at UCSD
developed a method to detect very long wavelength pressure disturbances, and
described how they traveled across the TA. Discussions with atmospheric
researchers confirmed that these pressure disturbances detected on the Earth's
surface coincided with gravity waves detected by satellite measurements, at
30-50 km altitude.

In this research, the researchers are making further direct comparisons of
satellite observations of gravity waves with pressure disturbances recorded at
ground level, with the goal of determining when and where these phenomena occur.
Since gravity waves play a large part in transferring energy from near the
Earth's surface to the upper atmosphere, this research is contributing to the
understanding of global atmospheric circulation.

Technical Abstract

The upgrade of NSF's EarthScope/USArray Transportable Array (TA) to include air
pressure sensors at each station has opened up new avenues for research into
atmospheric phenomena and the interaction of the atmosphere and solid Earth.
This network places high quality pressure sensors on a regular, dense Cartesian
grid across an area of about 2,000,000 square km, a configuration that allows
for quantitative analyses of a broad range of atmospheric wave phenomena. The
UCSD group is using the new pressure data to study atmospheric gravity waves at
the mid-latitudes spanned by the TA. The UCSD group has developed a technique to
detect gravity waves with wavelengths greater than 100 km and characterize their
propagation across the TA, yielding a quantitative measure of how their
characteristics (speed, direction, period, and amplitude) may change with
location across the full footprint of the TA. The method reduces the large
volume of data from the TA into a quantitative record that can be used for
further study.

The research includes a collaboration with Dr Lars Hoffmann (Juelich
Supercomputing Centre) to compare gravity waves detected using satellite
radiance data with those detected using UCSD's technique applied to TA pressure
data. Satellites and ground-based pressure sensors provide fundamentally
different platforms for studies of atmospheric gravity waves. Although these
datasets and the analytical methods applied to them are completely different, a
preliminary comparison of the results suggests agreement between the two.

There are two main objectives of this effort. First, TA recordings of large
convective events are being studied in detail and compared with satellite
recordings of the same events. The objective is to determine whether gravity
waves detected at ground-sited pressure sensors are coincident in time and
location with stratospheric gravity waves, and whether gravity waves detected
within the footprint of the TA are dominantly convective or orogenic in origin.
The UCSD group is studying and documenting other characteristics of the detected
gravity waves; specifically their speed, amplitude and direction. Second, a
statistical study of the occurrence of gravity waves is being conducted with the
objective of determining the diurnal, seasonal and regional trends in the
occurrence rates of gravity waves. A key deliverable of this effort is the
statistics of gravity waves during the 4-year study. The proposed research is
contributing both to atmospheric science and to improved understanding of the
effects of gravity waves on infrasound propagation.