* 1358931
* REU Site: Cradle to the Grave - CO2 Opportunities and Challenges
* ENG,EEC
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2018
* Jochen Lauterbach, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 03/31/2018
* USD 343,143.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: The topic of this REU site is "Cradle to the grave - CO2
opportunities and challenges". The scientific objective is to leverage the
expertise of an interdisciplinary team in nanoscience, materials science,
heterogeneous catalysis, spectroscopy, electrochemistry, mathematical modeling,
and geological CO2 storage to advance the understanding of the role that novel
materials and processes will play in reducing the environmental impact of CO2.
The REU students will participate in cutting-edge research, ranging from
advanced combustion technologies, CO2 separation and sequestration, and chemical
conversion of CO2 and biomass to hydrocarbon fuels. The combustion research will
focus on oxy-fuel combustion and integrated gasification combined cycle. Gas
phase chemistry of sulfur oxides and trace metals will be elucidated by
experiments and kinetic modeling. Increasing energy production efficiency by
raising the temperature of combustion environments will expose gas turbine
blades to highly aggressive environments. Modern blades consist of high strength
super-alloys blades, ceramic thermal barrier coatings and metallic/oxide bond
coats. REU students will participate in the experimental aspects of this project
including using state-of-the-art high-throughput deposition and characterization
techniques or in the modeling and data mining aspects of this work. Once CO2 has
been generated, it must be captured from the flue gas. Research here will
emphasize the generation of novel unit operations for the efficient removal of
CO2 and new high-capacity sorbent materials. Carbon forms the backbone for high
energy density fuels. C=O bonds in CO2 therefore need to be converted back to
high energy C-H and C-C bonds. Projects in this thrust range from the
fundamental study and improvement of proven technologies, such as
electrochemical reduction of CO2 to more ambitious projects, which rely on solar
energy to promote conversion. However, the sheer scale of CO2 production is such
that it is infeasible to completely convert the CO2 into chemicals or
hydrocarbon fuels. Therefore, storage of CO2 is required to reduce the
environmental impact of energy generation on a scale beyond anything that has
ever been attempted. Research here focuses on sequestration of CO2 and in
particular on the long-term stability of storage in geological formations in
South Carolina

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: Our nation's ability to meet our future energy needs in a
sustainable manner will be critical to our ability to continue to prosper.
Advancing the scientific knowledge and developing the intellectual workforce for
a variety of sustainable energy technologies will be at the center of this
endeavor. This REU site will train and expose our future scientific leaders to
cutting-edge research in sustainable energy in general, and in nanoscience,
catalysis and CO2 capture and storage in particular. Professional development
efforts will provide the students with the non-technical knowledge and
experience required to take discoveries out of the lab and place them into
society. Participants will include rising juniors and seniors majoring in
chemical engineering. Special emphasis will be placed on minorities as well as
students who would otherwise not have an opportunity to do cutting-edge
research.

We acknowledge the support from the Division of Engineering Education and
Centers.