* 1358903
* Quality of Life Technology Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU)
* ENG,EEC
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2018
* Reid Simmons, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 03/31/2018
* USD 365,739.00

Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students participating in the QoLT REU
program will have a concrete experience in lateral thinking, aligned design and
interdisciplinary problem-solving that will hone their ability to pursue
systmes-level solutions in a principled manner throughout their research career.
The students will be assigned a project based on ongoing and/ or pilot research
in the QoLT ERC. Unlike most current work in robotics, with its goal to replace
human labor, the central theme of QoLT research is to develop intelligent
systems that work with people and are safe, person-aware, and environment-aware.
All QoLT research projects have the benefit of systems-wide context, with
stakeholders representing multiple academic disciplines, organizations (e.g.,
caregiving groups), and end users. The REU projects will emphasize and teach
Participatory Action Design (PAD), a process of identifying, translating, and
integrating contextual constraints into the conception and development of QoLT
systems with the involvement of diverse stakeholders. The REU students will
learn PAD during project development, as they integrate their identities as
engineers into the context of the complete design and analysis cycle. QoLT REU
projects will include substantial research components and will likely lead to
new findings, which can be published in peer-reviewed proceedings and
journals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
vision of the QoLT ERC is to transform the lives of people with reduced
functional capabilities due to aging or disability through intelligent devices
and systems. The QoLT ERC is a unique partnership between CMU and Pitt,
integrating CMU's strength in the design, implementation, and technology
transfer of intelligent systems, and Pitt's strength in health sciences and
aging research. The primary objectives of the QoLT REU program are to transform
students from dependent to independent thinkers, give them a sense of
accomplishment and exposure to potential end-users, and provide experience on a
project that has a genuine fit to an ongoing ERC project. The program builds on
the successes of the previously funded QoLT REU Site in that it places an
emphasis on recruiting disadvantaged students in STEM (racial minorities,
students with disabilities, and students from schools with limited research
opportunities) and provide them with a comprehensive training experience.
Students are expected to leave the program with a sense of excitement about
technology and engineering, a critical mindset, and a deep understanding of the
process of conducting QoLT research. Students will be active participants and
innovators in projects designed to address real-world problems with systems-
level engineering efforts. The students will think laterally and design real
systems that make a difference in an intellectually and emotionally powerful
way, and this is the unique strength of the QoLT
context.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the QoLT REU Site are close
at hand because QoLT has a societal goal that is explicitly woven into the
concept of broad impact itself: how can technology be used to effect positive
social change in the lives of the elderly and in the lives of persons with
disabilities? QoLT REU students will conduct leading research that has direct
effects on peoples' lives. The value of the sense of worth that a young
engineer-to-be obtains from such an experience early in her training cannot be
overstated. Coming from diverse backgrounds, students will integrate their
research experiences with planned curriculum devoted to research, design, and
integration methodology.