* 1358579
* An Immersive Research Engineering Training Program for Undergraduates
* ENG,EEC
* 03/15/2014,02/28/2017
* Jay Alberts, Cleveland Clinic Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 02/28/2017
* USD 332,301.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;The NSF REU program (EEC-1358579; NSF Division of
Engineering Education and Centers) allows Cleveland Clinic's Department of
Biomedical Engineering (BME) to offer a "full-spectrum" approach to biomedical
engineering, familiarizing 10 REU students over 10 weeks with how to apply their
knowledge to real-world problems and to succeed as innovators in the future
workforce. Students learn to integrate basic science principles into research
projects requiring creative solutions for medical device development, cardiac
ultrasound engineering, biomaterials, drug delivery/nanomedicine, etc. With
their mentors, students develop problem-solving and critical thinking skills.
Students interact with diverse multinational groups of peers, graduate students,
postdoctoral fellows, research scientists, physicians/surgeons, and industrial
partners. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF REU scholars gain experience conducting
laboratory-based research to answer theoretical basic science questions,
translating study results, and identifying concepts that underlie methods or
devices for innovation/commercialization. Students also attend lectures on
scientific and commercialization topics, participate in social gatherings, and
present their final research summaries at the program's conclusion.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cleveland Clinic's Lerner Research Institute, comprising
&gt;200 PIs supported by ~2000 scientific and other personnel, is the source of
much fruitful collaboration. All REU mentors, internationally known in their
fields and patent holders themselves, are supported by peer-reviewed extramural
funding. In 2011-12, BME had &gt;$27M in federal or state grant funding. It also
leads in innovation: in 2013, 20/66 (30%) of Cleveland Clinic patents were
issued to BME personnel; 47/94 (50%) of new patent applications were initiated
in BME. Thus BME is uniquely positioned to expose REU students to the
discovery/modeling-testing/commercialization continuum as they perform state-of-
the-art research whose data and publications form the basis for further grant
proposals. Through close ties with Cleveland Clinic Innovations (the technology
transfer group), BME has translated many technologies into the clinical arena
and/or into spinoff companies. Innovation is a key element of all BME
activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Of broader impact is that NSF REU students
become part of this dynamic process. BME's active Minority Recruitment Plan,
designed to ensure adequate representation across minorities, provides many with
their first experience of scientific research, from coursework to practice.
Those continuing in science or engineering are ready for graduate school; those
in other paths learn critical thinking applicable to many fields. All NSF REU
students leave well equipped to contribute to U.S. science and
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;Cleveland Clinic's NSF REU program (EEC-1358579; NSF Division
of Engineering Education and Centers) provides vital support for an educational
pipeline to ensure a strong, smart workforce of scientists/engineers to benefit
society into the future. The Summer REU program of the Department of Biomedical
Engineering (BME) offers a select group of undergraduate students experience in
the day-to-day practice of basic research using biomedical engineering
principles. Over 10 weeks, mentors familiarize 10 highly motivated REU students
with how to apply engineering/scientific principles to real-world clinical
problems, ranging from designing implements used in heart disease patients, to
creating nanostructures to deliver anticancer drugs to tumors, to crafting
devices to answer surgical needs. REU students develop problem-solving and
technical skills by interacting with multinational groups of peers, graduate
students, postdoctoral fellows, research scientists, physicians/surgeons, and
industrial partners. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;NSF REU scholars gain hands-on
experience conducting laboratory-based research to answer questions arising from
basic science and from clinical conditions seen by Cleveland Clinic specialists.
The REU program also prepares students to understand the idea-to-prototype-to-
product process: how ideas get from the drawing board through many rounds of
changes to finally become new devices or improved methods that can be developed
by industry, then used by doctors to benefit patients worldwide. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;All mentors of REU students are experienced scientists, clinician-
scientists and/or engineers with peer-reviewed funding from the National
Institutes of Health, National Science Foundation, Department of Defense, and
other sources, many with patents for their innovations. BME is the largest
department in Cleveland Clinic's Lerner Research Institute, where some 200
investigators supported by 2000 research scientists and support personnel work
in 11 highly interactive departments. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Most important, NSF
REU students become an integral part of a team and a dynamic creative process.
BME's active Minority Recruitment Plan seeks to provide many minorities with
their first real experience in scientific research, from coursework to practice.
Students continuing in science/engineering are well prepared for graduate
school; those in other paths learn critical thinking applicable to many fields.
All NSF REU participants leave well equipped to contribute to U.S. science and
industry.