* 1358838
* REU Site:  Interdisciplinary Research on Human Impacts in the Lake Champlain Ecosystem
* BIO,DBI
* 04/15/2014,03/31/2018
* Jason Stockwell, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 03/31/2018
* USD 318,650.00

This REU Site award to the University of Vermont (UVM), located in Burlington,
VT, will support the training of 10 undergraduate students for 10 weeks during
the summers of 2014-2016. This REU program is supported by the Directorates for
Biological Sciences (BIO) and Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences (SBE).
The program is focused on the ecological and socioeconomic impacts of habitat
fragmentation, eutrophication, and invasive species on the Lake Champlain
ecosystem. While participating in the program, students will work with the UVM
and Saint Michael's College faculty on projects ranging from fish ecology to the
impact of harmful algal blooms on human health and property values. To promote
cross-disciplinary thinking, students will work in pairs, serving as assistants
to each other in their respective, but distinct, research projects. In addition
to research, students will attend workshops, seminars, and symposia on topics
such as experimental design, basic statistics, effective communication, the
ethical and responsible conduct of research, and careers in science. Students
will be mentored on how to present research at conferences and how to write
manuscripts for scientific journals. At the end of the summer, students will
present their research results at a poster session. In addition, students will
present a talk that ties their individual project into an over-arching view of
the interactions among human activities, societal structures, and the lake
ecosystem. The program will be evaluated using the REU common assessment tool.
Applicants will be selected based on academic record, two letters of reference,
and an essay that explains why the student is interested in the program and how
it will advance his/her career. Rising first and second year undergraduates,
members of under-represented groups, and students from institutions with limited
research opportunities are encouraged to apply. The program will provide
stipends, housing, and travel funds to and from the site.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The team-based approach of this REU will foster interdisciplinary
thinking and encourage collaborative problem solving in students at early stages
of their career. This will enhance their capacity for deeper and broader
critical thinking as they mature into independent investigators.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students are required to be tracked after the program and
must respond to an automatic email sent via the NSF reporting system. More
information is available by visiting http://www.uvm.edu/~ecolab/, or by
contacting the PI (Dr. Jason Stockwell at jason.stockwell@uvm.edu).