* 1358096
* IRES: US-German Research on Human-Computer Interaction in Ubiquitous Computing
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2018
* W. Thomas Miller, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Dudka
* 05/31/2018
* USD 249,994.00

Technical description.&lt;br/&gt; The UNH IRES program is a cooperative effort
between the University of New Hampshire and the University of Stuttgart in
Germany. The focus of the program is on ubiquitous computing, or ubicomp.
Ubicomp is a multidisciplinary field of study that explores networked computing
devices that are embedded in everyday objects. Each summer 3 undergraduate and 3
graduate students will conduct research for just over 8 weeks at the Human
Computer Interaction (HCI) Lab of Professor Albrecht Schmidt at the University
of Stuttgart. The HCI Lab is one of the leading ubicomp laboratories in the
world. &lt;br/&gt;Student research within the UNH Ubicomp IRES program will
focus on two areas: in-vehicle speech interaction and speech interaction with
public displays. Students will initially investigate in-vehicle speech
interactions to establish how different speech recognition error rates and
different response times affect the driver. Students will subsequently contrast
interacting with a computer to interacting with a passenger. Finally, students
will use the results of these experiments to propose new, safer approaches to
driver-computer spoken interactions. In the context of speech interactions with
public displays, students will explore the use of pupil diameter measurements
from video camera based eye trackers to estimate the cognitive load associated
with spoken interactions with electronic bulletin boards. Students will develop
techniques for separating pupil diameter changes that are due to cognitive load
from those that are due to visual target luminance on the display. Students will
subsequently use pupil diameter to evaluate the cognitive load associated with
different types of interactions with public displays, providing a baseline for
proposing novel interactions that mix spoken and manual interactions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical description.&lt;br/&gt;The UNH IRES program
is a cooperative effort between the University of New Hampshire and the
University of Stuttgart in Germany. The focus of the program is on ubiquitous
computing, or ubicomp. Ubicomp is a multidisciplinary field of study that
explores networked computing devices that are embedded in everyday objects. Each
summer 3 undergraduate and 3 graduate students will conduct research for just
over 8 weeks at the Human Computer Interaction (HCI) Lab of Professor Albrecht
Schmidt at the University of Stuttgart. The HCI Lab is one of the leading
ubicomp laboratories in the world. &lt;br/&gt;Student research within the UNH
IRES program will focus on two areas: in-vehicle speech interaction and speech
interaction with public displays. In the automotive domain, speech interaction
with in-vehicle devices is an important topic. In-vehicle devices, such as
built-in entertainment systems, and brought-in mobile phones, are proliferating,
and research has shown that it can be dangerous to interact with these devices
by touching and/or looking. Thus, much research has been done to explore speech
as an alternative way of interaction with in-vehicle devices. Students in the
UNH IRES program will relate the benefits and limitations of speech interaction
with in-vehicle devices with real-world parameters, such as how well speech
recognition works at any given moment. They will also work to identify why it is
that talking to a passenger appears to reduce the probability of a crash, and
how we might be able to use this new information to create safer in-vehicle
speech interactions.&lt;br/&gt;Speech interaction is also an exciting topic in
the budding exploration of electronic bulletin boards. Today, people use
bulletin boards to display and read printed (physical) notices. But tomorrow?s
electronic bulletin boards will act more like large, public webpages, edited by
users from their mobile phones. Students in the UNH IRES program will compare
speech interaction with other types of interactions with such electronic
bulletin boards (such as typing directly on the bulletin board, or typing on a
mobile phone). They will pay special attention to assessing the mental effort of
each type of interaction. Their long-term goal will be to assess if speech
interaction can reduce this mental effort.