* 1358613
* Structure of the North American Continent Using EarthScope USArray Data and Applied Wave Gradiometry Methods
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* William Holt, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Margaret Benoit
* 06/30/2018
* USD 135,522.00

Wave gradiometry is a new technique utilizing the shape of seismic wave fields
captured by EarthScope USArray transportable stations to determine fundamental
wave propagation characteristics. Most techniques in seismology apply averaging
methods, which smooth out wave field differences that may reflect real structure
or complexity. Wave gradiometry methods are designed to take advantage of these
wave field variations to resolve structure that cannot be derived strictly from
averaging methods. The amazing thing about gradiomery is that if the spatial
gradients of the wave field are known at a single seismic station, then the wave
slowness, wave azimuth, change in geometrical spreading and radiation can also
be determined at that point. The beauty of the EarthScope USArray, therefore, is
that it provides an opportunity to quantify the spatial gradients of wave fields
on a scale never before possible. This proposed work will involve further
development and use of the wave gradiometry method in discovery-based research
across the entire USArray, which will lead to new vital constraints for
resolving 3-D structure within the lithosphere and upper-most mantle
asthenosphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We now have an important opportunity to take
advantage of information within the wave fields, sampled by USArray, that have
not been exploited to date. This observational approach, involving
quantification of the displacement gradients within the wave fields, is the next
important step in seismology that, when combined with theory, has the potential
to lead to new important discoveries regarding 3-D structural complexity. We
present here new adaptations to gradiometry method, including treatment of
continuous displacement gradient fields within subarrays, and the use of
multiple time series of spatial gradients obtained for each seismic station
using reciprocity principle. Another important component of our research is the
work with synthetic data (1) for calibration and to 'ground truth' the method
and (2) for a better understanding of how wave field parameters estimates
(slowness, wave azimuth, changes in geometric spreading, and radiation pattern)
are linked with structural complexity, including the influence of lateral
variations in anisotropy. Phase velocity maps generated to date show interesting
jumps in velocity near some major terrane boundaries, indicating that some of
these features extend deep into the mantle lithosphere. Furthermore, results
from two events in Vanuatu show that changes in geometrical spreading and
radiation are consistent with focusing and defocusing of energy as it propagates
through low/high velocity zones. Use of such information from multiple different
events, and from multiple different back azimuths, has the potential to be
transformational in areas such as 3-D tomographic inversions. The Broader Impact
of this work will consist of the training of a Ph.D. student, Yuanyuan Liu, the
training of Undergraduate and High School students who will work in the lab
during the funding period, and the generation of educational products involving
wave field animations. The P.I. has a strong track record in working with both
undergraduates and High School students. This substantial effort in mentoring
will continue during the proposed period. During the funding period we will
produce, and make available, wave field animations (animations of strain) as an
educational product. These animations show the dilatations, shear, and rotations
(see snap shot in Figure 1) associated with the wave fields that cross USArray.
These will be useful for visualizing a component of the field that few
researchers or students are used to thinking about, thereby providing the
opportunity for unexpected insight and discovery. All codes will be shared, and
displacement gradient tensor fields determined from the USArray seismograms will
be archived using the NSF-supported Extreme Science and Engineering Discovery
Environment (XSEDE) facility. An integrated model website will be set up where
we will provide data sets that are used in the published models, published model
results, benchmarking exercises and files, codes and tutorials for all
gradiometry modeling, and wave field animations. Results are expected to be
published in a timely way and they plan to make all data sets and codes, along
with tutorials, available on the web site.