* 1358510
* Analysis of Seismic Data from the USArray Project to Determine Crust and Uppermost Mantle Structure Beneath the United States
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2016
* Peter Shearer, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Anderson
* 06/30/2016
* USD 179,944.00

During the last ten years, NSF's USArray Project has deployed thousands of
seismometers across the United States to record both local and distant
earthquakes. Analyses of these data have provided greatly improved images of the
structure of Earth's crust and mantle beneath the United States. This project
studies earthquakes and quarry blasts recorded by USArray at distances up to
1600 km away (1000 miles), which are particularly useful for probing crustal
thickness and the structure of the uppermost mantle, i.e., immediately below the
crust at depths of about 35 to 50 kilometers (about 20 to 30 miles). Maps
showing variations in the measured velocities of seismic waves in this region
provide clues regarding the history and evolution of mountains, faults, and
other geological features, including the Colorado Plateau and Yellowstone
volcanism. This project builds on previously NSF funded work in the western
United States to focus on more recent USArray data from the eastern United
States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In particular, the project uses regional seismic
phases such as Pn, Sn, Pg and Lg, to produce new maps of crustal thickness and
both isotropic and anisotropic variations in uppermost mantle P and S velocity
that can be related to many surface tectonic features. These results generally
agree with previous studies in their large-scale patterns but show more detail
in many regions. Owing to its relatively sparse station coverage and lack of
earthquakes, the eastern United States has been much less studied than the west,
so the most recent USArray station deployments provide a valuable opportunity to
probe its crust and uppermost mantle structure. This project will provide new
crustal thickness maps, estimates of crustal Vp/Vs ratios, maps of uppermost
mantle variations in seismic velocity and azimuthal anisotropy. In addition,
analyses of Sn propagation efficiency and Pg and Lg times and amplitudes are
planned to resolve lower crustal velocities and attenuation. These results will
complement shear-wave splitting and surface- and body-wave tomography studies by
providing superior resolution for structures at lower crustal and uppermost
mantle depths.