* 1358627
* REU Site: Summer program in the biochemical sciences
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2019
* Trevor Creamer, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 03/31/2019
* USD 340,730.00

This REU Site award to the University of Kentucky, located in Lexington, KY,
will support the training of eight students for ten weeks during the summers of
2014-2017. The goal of the site is to encourage participants recruited mainly
from Appalachia to pursue careers in the biochemical sciences. Eight students
will work with mentors from the Department of Molecular and Cellular
Biochemistry. The Department is well equipped and has the facilities to allow
student participants to carry out cutting edge research and students will each
have their own independent research project. They will be expected to
participate in formulation of hypotheses, design and execution of experiments,
and the analysis and presentation of the results. In addition, students will
receive training in several aspects of professional development including
laboratory safety, ethics, career opportunities in the biochemical sciences, and
scientific communication. The program will culminate with the students
presenting their data in short oral presentations. The students will interact
extensively with research personnel of all levels.

The Department has a long and successful track record of involving
undergraduates in research. Many of these students have continued on to careers
in science, as researchers and teachers. Participants will be selected by the PI
and Co-PI. Success of this program will be determined by using a common
assessment tool developed by the NSF BIO REU and by surveys developed by this
REU Site.

The goal of this REU Site is to encourage students from the impoverished
Appalachia region to pursue careers in the biochemical sciences. Emphasis will
be put on recruiting students from institutions with few research opportunities
and from underrepresented groups. REU participants will be tracked after the
program to determine their career path and each student must respond to an
automatic email sent via the NSF reporting system. More information including
the application materials can be found by visiting
https://biochemistry.med.uky.edu/nsf-reu-site-summer-program-biochemical-
sciences, or by contacting the PI (Dr. Trevor Creamer at Trevor.Creamer@uky.edu)
or the co-PI (Dr. Rebecca Dutch at rdutc2@uky.edu).