* 1358938
* REU Site:   Basic and Environmental Soil Science Training (BESST)
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2019
* Joshua Heitman, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Aisha Morris
* 04/30/2019
* USD 385,000.00

Soils play a fundamental role in myriad global processes. The need to understand
the flow of elements, energy, and water through soils is immense and widely
accepted across the geosciences community. Yet, the number of scientists trained
with specific soils expertise is rapidly declining. The BESST REU Site utilizes
a diverse, multi-disciplinary team of scientists to deliver individualized
student research experiences in state-of-the art soil science topics, synergized
through unifying themes and team training opportunities. Specific objectives are
to: i) recruit outstanding students without extensive previous experience in
soil science, with an emphasis on those from under-represented groups; ii) train
these students by providing a substantive research experience and exposure to
broad opportunities in basic and environmental soil science; and iii) develop a
pool of future professionals empowered to advance understanding of soils in the
geoscience community. Activities are supported by a university with well-
developed infrastructure for undergraduate student research, and hosted by a
department with a long-standing tradition of international excellence. Student
recruitment is pursued through departmental and university collaboration with
undergraduate-serving institutions, HBCUs, and national undergraduate research
organizations. The program is assessed by external experts to ensure that it is
rigorously evaluated and didactic impact maximized. The intellectual merit of
the REU Site lies in constructing a new and critically needed pipeline for the
next generation of geoscience researchers, equipped to address wide-ranging
basic and environmental research problems in soils. Broader impacts are derived
from training a diverse group of students to engage in addressing important
societal and ecological issues throughout their careers. The REU site seeks to
develop a new paradigm for soil science, extending student recruitment and
training beyond traditional foundations in agriculture, and transforming soil
science into an integral part of the geoscience research community. Student
research opportunities highlight relationships between human activities and
terrestrial environments, which are central topics in modern soil science that
are broadly applicable to many other sub-disciplines of the Earth and
environmental sciences.