* 1358805
* EAGER: Characterization and Modeling for Architectural Thermal Energy Harvesting
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2017
* Carole-Jean Wu, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 12/31/2017
* USD 200,000.00

To reduce the ever-increasing power dissipation caused by high temperature in
computing systems, current approaches seek to apply cooling mechanisms to remove
heat aggressively, as well as devising management techniques to avoid thermal
emergencies by slowing down heat generation. Complementary to existing
techniques, this proposal attempts to address the heat management problem using
a fundamentally different approach -- rather than removing the heat or slowing
down heat generation, we transform this heat into reusable energy by using
thermoelectric materials. A Thermal Energy Harvesting (TEHar) framework is
proposed here that will allow heat energy generated by computing devices to be
recovered, transformed, and harvested efficiently, to achieve better energy
efficiency. TEHar is based on the interesting implication of thermal energy
distribution of computing platforms: the temperature differences between the
hottest and the coldest components can be more than tens of degrees, creating a
steep spatial thermal gradient. We discover that, by leveraging the
thermoelectric effects at the architectural level, the varying spatial thermal
gradients created as a result of computations can be exploited to transform heat
into reusable energy. Therefore, the heat generated by the circuitry of the
computing devices is not wasted but is rather harvested for reuse. This research
explores possibilities in thermal energy harvesting techniques at the
architectural level. Overall, this proposal explores the potential for energy
harvestability, particularly in the steep thermal gradients commonly observed in
computing systems, while also investigating applications that can reuse this
recovered energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The TEHar solution proposed here is
anticipated to not only reduce cooling expenses and ambient temperatures, but
also increase energy utilization, device lifetime, and physical space
utilization. The TEHar technology developed here can be applied to a broad range
of computing devices, large or small. If the research is successful, it has the
potential of having a significant economic benefit as well as a significant,
positive impact on the environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Furthermore, this
energy harvesting research requires cross-disciplinary engagement in areas such
as material engineering, VLSI architecture, system architecture, and mechanical
engineering and will attract a diverse set of student researchers. Overall, the
engineering and scientific contributions will also have important societal
impacts, including the broadening of ASU's engineering curriculum, the
engagement of graduate as well as undergraduate research activities, the
potential of creating high-school or middle-school scientific projects, and the
increased representation of target underrepresented minorities in science and
engineering.