* 1358034
* EPRI: Direct Contact Heat Exchange and Absorption Refrigeration Based on Green Non-volatile Ionic Liquids for Enhanced Dry Cooling of Thermoelectric Power Plants
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2014,03/31/2019
* Vijay Dhir, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Jose Lage
* 03/31/2019
* USD 605,216.00

1358034&lt;br/&gt;Ju &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is an urgent need to minimize
or possibly eliminate industrial usage of freshwater. It has been estimated that
thermoelectric power production withdraws close to 40% of freshwater in the US.
Currently available dry cooling methods with zero water consumption have found
very limited usage (&lt; 2%) due to the high capital cost, large
footprints/weight, and low thermal efficiency. Therefore, research toward
developing innovative alternative dry cooling methods that are economical are
need to facilitate their broad adoption. This will eliminate the water
withdrawal for cooling in power generation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
at UCLA will develop a new class of technology called DIrect-contact Liquid-on-
String Heat Exchangers (DILSHE) for dry cooling of a steam power plant. A key
feature of the DILSHE is the use of inexpensive and light-weight materials,
making it highly economical and easily transportable. High heat transfer
effectiveness is achieved using thin films of non-volatile liquids flowing over
a dense array of parallel strings while reducing associated gas flow pressure
drop. Another feature of DILSHE is its modular design; this allows multiple
units to be stacked together to form large cooling units, with each module being
field readily serviceable and/or replaceable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
proposes to conduct systematic experimental and theoretical investigation to
establish scientific and engineering foundation for rigorous design and
optimization of the DILSHE. It will improve and apply advanced fluid mechanical
and thermal metrology tools and techniques for studying the instability of
gravity-driven thin liquid film flows and associated enhancement in mass,
momentum, and energy transport. Comprehensive survey and preliminary screening
of non-volatile heat transfer liquids will also be conducted to facilitate
exploration of their novel use not only in the proposed DILSHE but also other
heat transfer applications. The research will also build and test a lab scale
prototype (25 kW capacity) to validate the proposed design and to facilitate
further commercial development of the technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will also include dedicated efforts to involve undergraduate and
graduate students from under-represented groups. K-12 STEM education will be
promoted by developing innovative programs for high-school students based on a
cradle-to-career philosophy that leverages the research components of the
project in coordination with UCLA's outreach offices. The project will also
include efforts to promote engineering business opportunities, which, when
instilled early on, will help promote an entrepreneurial spirit that resonates
with the youth in the United States.