* 1358907
* Intracranial Electrophysiology and Electrical Stimulation of the Human Default Mode Network
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2018
* Josef Parvizi, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Uri Hasson
* 05/31/2018
* USD 573,783.00

Our brains are highly active when we are up and about doing things, such as,
cooking, eating, dancing, or when we are sitting quietly solving mathematical
equations, or thinking about our past memories and future dreams. Only recently,
scientists learned that a set of brain structures, known as the default mode
network (DMN), show reduced activity during the performance of many tasks but
increased activity when we are at rest or remembering what happened in the past.
This is the opposite of what scientists have seen in many other areas of the
brain. To date, almost the entire literature about the DMN function is based on
neuroimaging methods (e.g. fMRI) that follow the changes of blood flow in the
brain, and thus have limited temporal resolution. With support from the National
Science Foundation, Drs. Parvizi and Wagner of Stanford University will combine
functional imaging (fMRI), direct electrophysiological recordings from the
surface of the human cerebral cortex (ECoG), and electrical brain stimulation
(EBS) to measure the activity of DMN structures during rest, attention, and
recall conditions and determine their interactions with brain areas involved in
attention and memory functions. This study will provide unprecedented
information about the modes of our brain function when we switch from rest to
solving difficult tasks and vice versa. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Pathological
changes in the DMN are known to hallmark the onset of disorders such as
Alzheimer's disease and attention-deficit disorder and autism all of which
represent a pervasive public health issue. This project will lead to knowledge
about the working of DMN and may one day contribute to development of
intervention and treatment methods. Findings from this research will have
significant societal impact. This collaborative research will also offer unique
training opportunities for students and fellows to learn the multimodal approach
with fMRI, ECoG, and EBS.