* 1358774
* New US-South Korean Collaboration: 2-D Ocean Temperature from Seismic Oceanography Data
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Tanya Blacic, Montclair State University
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 05/31/2015
* USD 31,435.00

Dr. Blacic proposes to initiate a new international collaboration with Dr.
Changsoo Shin at Seoul National University in South Korea to apply his method of
obtaining background sound speed models in the solid earth from marine seismic
data (Laplace domain inversion, LDI) to&lt;br/&gt;the ocean itself. Dr. Blacic
and a student from Montclair State University will visit Dr. Shin?s laboratory
at Seoul National University to work on the initial adaptation of the LDI method
and to participate in planning meetings with Dr. Shin and his students. Dr. Shin
will coordinate the necessary work on the LDI computer program, will provide
expertise on the LDI method, and will provide access to the computer program for
rapid code testing. Dr. Blacic will develop the synthetic seismic data sets for
code testing and provide expertise on issues related to adapting solid earth-
based seismic processing techniques to seismic oceanography data. Students at
both Seoul National University and Montclair State University will be involved
in the proof-of-concept work and project planning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr.
Blacic will be including material on seismic oceanography in the undergraduate
and graduate geophysics course she will be teaching at Montclair State
University beginning in Fall 2013. Results of this project will make up a part
of that material. A student at Montclair State University, whose student body is
&gt;60% female and &gt;30% minorities, will be involved in the project planning
and initial phases of the research. The student will participate in the visit to
Seoul National University and will thus have the opportunity to learn about
international project planning as well as computer modeling and coding
techniques. The student will also give a presentation at Seoul National
University on seismic oceanography. After returning to Montclair, the student
will prepare the results of the initial application of Laplace domain inversion
to synthetic seismic oceanography data sets for presentation at Montclair State
University's Student Research Symposium and/or a national scientific meeting.