* 1358975
* Crystal Growth of Intermetallics with Competing Magnetic Interactions
* MPS,DMR
* 08/16/2013,03/31/2016
* Julia Chan, University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 03/31/2016
* USD 247,866.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;The search for materials with desired properties
concomitantly relies on the discovery of new materials and the subsequent growth
of large single crystals. To unequivocally determine the material's innate
properties, large single crystals must be grown such that detailed studies can
be completed. The growth of high quality single crystalline materials allows the
determination of intrinsic properties and for fundamental correlation between
structures and unusual magnetic and electrical properties. This research,
supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program is focused on
synthesizing materials of the ternary intermetallics Ln:M:X (Ln = lanthanide, M
= transition metal, X = Al, In) to correlate crystal chemistry and physical
properties. The effort is focused on growing high quality single crystals of
four families of intermetallics to study the competition of magnetic
fluctuations and unusual magnetism, targeting the CeCr2Al20, Ho6Mo4Al43, ThMn12,
and YbFe2Al10 structure types. These structures consist of high coordination
polyhedra and serve as models for investigating the role of two sublattices and
packing on magnetism. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;The
search for materials with desired properties concomitantly relies on the
discovery of new materials and systems. The proposed work, supported by the
Solid State and Materials Chemistry program involves the synthesis and
characterization of novel materials containing rare earth transition metals to
understand new physical phenomena. The group's effort is aimed at growing large
single crystals to perform measurements and determine intrinsic behavior of new
compounds with potential energy applications. The PI's group will continue
collaborations with scientists in Japan as there is a natural and mutually
beneficial synergy of synthesis and characterization that exists between
research groups, as well as a common mentoring of graduate and undergraduate
students between the research groups. Research and teaching are integrated by
incorporating crystallography and materials science throughout two courses
(General Chemistry and Advanced Inorganic Chemistry). The partnership with a
local elementary school will lead to continued enhancement in curriculum
development. The Chan group will continue to develop hands-on materials-related
demonstrations for incorporation into LSU Chem Demo program. An additional aim
of this proposal is to involve high school chemistry and physics teachers for a
summer research experience in the laboratory. This will offer an invaluable tool
to boost teachers' involvement in the sciences and their understanding of how
their discipline relates to the children in the classroom.