* 1358675
* EAGER: Elevated Carbon Dioxide, Nitrogen Metabolism, and Photorespiration
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2014,05/31/2018
* Arnold Bloom, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 05/31/2018
* USD 218,899.00

Nitrogen is the mineral element that plants require in greatest amounts. A major
source of nitrogen for plants is the nitrate that they absorb from soils.
Research in the Bloom laboratory has established that rising CO2 (carbon
dioxide) concentration in Earth's atmosphere inhibits the conversion of nitrate
into proteins in the shoots of most plant species. One physiological mechanism
responsible for this phenomenon involves photorespiration, a process through
which sugars in a plant react with oxygen instead of CO2. Photorespiration has
been erroneously portrayed as a wasteful process, but in fact, photorespiration
generates energy necessary for converting nitrate into protein. Elevated CO2
decreases photorespiration, which leads to declines in plant protein
concentrations, slower plant growth, and lower food value. The proposed research
will examine how photorespiration transfers energy to convert nitrate into
protein. It will examine the chemical structure of the enzymes that facilitate
these reactions and to trace the flows of energy from one reaction to another.
This information will provide a new perspective on the efficiency of
photosynthesis and greater insight on the influence that rising CO2 will have on
the distribution of plant species.

Rising CO2 concentration in the atmosphere inhibits NO3 assimilation into
proteins in the shoots of C3 plants and impedes their growth when NO3 is the
predominant N source. One process that links CO2 concentration to shoot NO3
assimilation is photorespiration. Photorespiration stimulates the export of
malic acid from chloroplasts and increases the availability of NADH in the
cytoplasm that empowers the reduction of NO3 to NO2, the first step of NO3
assimilation. CO2 enrichment decreases photorespiration, decreasing the amount
of NADH available for NO3 reduction. The proposed research will examine this
mechanism in greater detail. Nearly all studies of Rubisco are conducted in the
presence of magnesium, which favors carboxylation, rather than in the presence
of manganese, which favors oxygenation and electron transfers that might
stimulate NADP+ reduction. The objectives of this research are: 1) use X-ray
crystallography to confirm the locations of manganese and NADP+ within tobacco
Rubisco, 2) identify via electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) the structural
changes of transient enzyme-substrate complexes and catalytic reaction
intermediates during photorespiration, and 3) conduct site-directed mutagenesis
of residues in the catalytic large subunit of Rubisco that are involved with
photorespiratory electron transfer to provide powerful structural probes. Energy
transfers between photorespiration and nitrate assimilation should explain why
over 95% of higher plant species still rely solely on C3 fixation even after
more than 20 million years of relatively low atmospheric CO2 concentrations and
multiple introductions of the C4 pathway: C3 fixation is more efficient than
previously thought because photorespiration supports nitrate assimilation.
Moreover, these mechanisms should explain why plant responses to elevated CO2
are highly variable: in C3 plants that are dependent on nitrate, CO2 inhibition
of shoot nitrate assimilation causes organic N deficiencies and slows growth,
whereas in C3 plants dependent on ammonium, elevated CO2 promotes growth.