* 1358883
* REU Site:  Sensorimotor Neural Engineering
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2014,12/31/2017
* Thomas Daniel, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 12/31/2017
* USD 284,580.00

This REU Site award to the University of Washington, located in Seattle, WA,
will support the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during the summers of
2015-2017. The REU program is open to all undergraduate students who are
citizens, nationals or permanent residents of the United States. Students who
participate in the program gain skills in lab research, develop their critical
thinking and problem-solving skills, understand the process of science, and
communicate their research results to their peers and the general public.
Students will have an opportunity to present their results in a national
conference. The REU program provides students an experience that is typically
not available to them in their academic curriculum. Students from schools with
limited opportunities for research and from underrepresented groups are
encouraged to apply.

The goal of this REU Site is to provide a carefully mentored research experience
for talented undergraduate students at the Center for Sensorimotor Neural
Engineering (CSNE). Each undergraduate student will enter a collaborative team
with a graduate student or postdoctoral fellow mentor and a faculty member as
they undertake a research project. The team will focus on a CSNE project that
has been carefully selected as a good example of interdisciplinary biosciences
and engineering research and one that has ties to industry interests. The
students will also participate in a weekly communications course and journal
club that deals with both oral presentation and writing skills. Each student
will be required to write a journal style report of their research for
publication and deliver an oral and poster presentation of their summer research
in a mini-symposium session. Emphasis will be placed on recruiting students from
under-represented groups. The common assessment tool provided by the NSF BIO
program will be used to assess the REU program.

Students are required to be tracked after the program and must respond to an
automatic email sent via the NSF reporting system. More information is available
by visiting http://www.csne-erc.org , or by contacting the PI (Dr. Eric H.
Chudler at chudler@u.washington.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. Thomas Daniel at
danielt@uw.edu).