* 1358386
* SHINE:   Solar Wind with a Time-dependent, MHD, Interplanetary Scintillation Tomography
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Sergey Borovikov, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Continuing Grant
* Ilia Roussev
* 06/30/2018
* USD 343,400.00

The main goal of this 3-year SHINE project is to locate heliospheric structures
globally around the Sun, determine their relationship to the heliospheric
velocity and density, and trace them back toward the Sun in a physically
consistent way. This research project is directly related to one of the National
Space Weather goals, namely "to determine the connections between eruptive
events and the Sun, and to enhance both the understanding and predictions of
solar wind geo-effective events." This project would yield a major step forward
in the simulation of complex, turbulent gas systems (both charged and neutral)
in the inner Solar System and elsewhere. The development of physical models that
embrace "coupling complexity" via the self-consistent incorporation of multiple
physical processes is viewed as a pivotal development in the different plasma
physics areas for the current decade. The research effort will also provide
leadership in promoting plasma physics and computational science within the
University of Alabama in Huntsville and the University of California in San
Diego campuses. Furthermore, through the training of a broad spectrum of
students, scientists and engineers, the project will foster Space Physics
research within the State of Alabama. The research and EPO agenda of this SHINE
project supports the Strategic Goals of the AGS Division in discovery, learning,
diversity, and interdisciplinary research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
main objective of this SHINE project is to develop and utilize a new MHD
(magnetohydrodynamic) - IPS (interplanetary scintillations) tomography tool of
the solar wind (SW) in order to investigate the evolution of the SW plasma and
magnetic field, as well as turbulent fluctuations, from distances beyond the
critical point outwards to heliocentric distances of 1-5 AU. The team will study
the propagation of Coronal Mass Ejections (CMEs) into the distant SW, paying
particular attention to the magnetic field structure inside CMEs, which is of
particular importance for geo-effective events. Moreover, by way of performing
the numerical simulations, the CMEs will be propagating through a realistic SW
background to the points where the distributions will be compared with the
spacecraft data. This will allow the researchers to investigate the effect of
CMEs and other transient events on the Earth and interplanetary environment, and
help formulate the safety requirements for future interplanetary missions. This
makes it a valuable asset for their investigation of "the solar cycle dependence
of CMEs, including their propagation through and their interaction with the
background SW, including the linking of interplanetary and near-Sun phenomena,"
as stated in the goals of the NSF's SHINE program.