* 1358932
* RUI: Mathematical modeling of chromosome organization and segregation in bacteria
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Blerta Shtylla, Pomona College
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2017
* USD 129,605.00

This research project focuses on developing and analyzing novel mathematical
models of chromosome arrangement and segregation in bacterial cells, using data
from Caulobacter crescentus bacterium. A diverse set of biological problems will
be explored, including chromosome movement mediated by dynamic polymer
interactions, chromosome architecture and packaging strategies inside the three
dimensional space of the cell, self-organization patterns of bacterial
cytoskeleton filaments, and filamentous structure dynamics and reshaping of the
DNA. We will use mathematical models to develop novel descriptions of these
biological processes. A variety of mathematical modeling approaches will be
used, including stochastic ordinary differential equations, partial differential
equations, dynamical system analysis and geometrical variational principles.
Model simulation and analysis will be used to advance our understanding of these
processes.

Bacteria dominate the earth's biomass, so the study of bacterial cell biology
reaches every aspect of life, including the medical, agricultural and ecological
realms. The life cycle of bacteria is crucially dependent on the proper
progression of cell division, however, because these processes occur at the
nano-scale level, the current understanding of how forces and biochemical
reactions are coupled to control division is limited. The approach taken here,
using modern applied mathematical tools to examine bacterial cell division
dynamics, will result in an improved understanding of how bacterial cells
precisely and robustly organize and segregate their chromosome copies during
division, while pushing forward the use of mathematics to study biological
problems more generally. This quantitative approach will improve our
understanding of essential cell processes and also aid in the discovery of novel
applications of bacterial processes that can help sustain and improve our
quality of life.