* 1358847
* REU Site: Biological Basis of Human and Animal Behavior
* SBE,SMA
* 04/15/2014,03/31/2018
* Shelia Kennison, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 03/31/2018
* USD 286,296.00

The goal of this REU Site program is to provide undergraduate students with an
in-depth, hands-on research experience focused on the biological basis of
behavior. Students are trained students in the application of the scientific
method to develop hypotheses, design and conduct research studies involving
either animal or human subjects. Students are also trained in the responsible
conduct of research. Students are mentored by full-time, Ph.D.-level faculty
members who are tenured/tenure-track faculty with strong programs of
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research conducted by students with their mentors advance understanding of the
biological basis of behavior in animals and humans. With regular and frequent
contact with mentors, student learn all aspects of the research process,
including hypothesis formulation, integration and analysis of scientific
literature, research design, data collection, data analysis, and the
presentation of research findings. Students also attend seminars focused on
statistics, research methods, and preparing for the graduate school application
process. To maximize exposure to multiple areas of research, they attend
seminars in which faculty mentors present data from recent research. Students
also attend a weekly seminar in the responsible conduct of research in which
they learn about the history of research ethics, contemporary ethical
regulations, as well as data management and authorship practices. Students also
discuss case scenarios in which ethical dilemmas are presented. During the 8
weeks, students are housed together in a University dormitory and complete a
team-building activity at the start of the program. The REU experience
culminates with a one-day public symposium in which students present their work
in a poster and in a brief oral presentation. Students and mentors present
research results at regional and/or national conferences and submit research
reports for publication in peer-reviewed academic
journals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By
increasing students' understanding of the biological basis of behavior, the PI-
team anticipates stimulating interest in careers in science and behavioral
research. A large percentage of the former REU students from this REU Site have
gone on to pursue graduate degrees. Because the REU participants include a high
percentage of students from underrepresented groups, the PIs hope that this
program is serving to increase the diversity among individuals working in
science-related careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBE REU Site is co-funded by
the Biological Sciences Directorate.