* 1358573
* 3D Deformation Fields Over Southern California From InSAR and GPS
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2017
* Rowena Lohman, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Margaret Benoit
* 06/30/2017
* USD 150,737.00

Non-technical summary

Geodesy -- the study of the shape of the Earth and its changes over time --
helps researchers gain insight into how the Earth's surface deforms in response
to faulting, volcanism, hydrologic cycles, landslides, and human activity.
Observations of deformation can inform assessments of the hazard associated with
individual faults or volcanoes, models of the forces driving plate tectonics, as
well as identification of new modes of deformation such as the slow slip events
now observed at subduction zones and strike-slip faults worldwide. However, the
available data are rarely optimal for the studies that rely on them -- campaign
and continuous GPS observations are at isolated points that are usually
separated by 10s of km or more, and place less of a constraint on deformation in
the vertical direction than in horizontal ones. Space-based geodetic imaging
such as Interferometric Synthetic Aperture Radar (InSAR) provides observations
over large areas (100s of km) at high spatial resolution (few 10s of meters),
but only constrains a near-vertical component of deformation and lacks the
temporal resolution of continuous GPS. Tradeoffs between potential models of
behavior can usually be greatly reduced when observations of more than one
component of the 3D deformation field are available. This project is providing
key information about how best to combine these diverse data.

Southern California, with its high population density and complex, evolving
network of faults, is a region where spatially dense 3-dimensional observations
of ground displacements are particularly important. In many cases, the long-term
rate and even the fault plane geometry of structures that make up the San
Andreas system are poorly understood, as is the manner in which parallel faults
accommodate the plate motion over time. The characteristics of the seismic cycle
along these faults -- how regular they are, whether earthquakes occur in
clusters along one fault followed by hiatuses during which activity shifts to a
different structure, etc. -- are necessary inputs into attempts to assess
seismic hazard in the region.

Technical Description This project involves assimilation of available GPS and
InSAR data into a combined, 3-dimensional map of ground deformation over a study
region within Southern California, taking full advantage of the complementary
strengths of the two data types. The proposed work includes close examination of
the characteristics of seasonal signals, data quality and anthropogenic sources
of ground deformation that may contaminate the tectonic signal as well as being
of interest in their own right. This project focuses on the transition from the
Los Angeles basin through Banning Pass down through the Salton Trough -- an area
of interest both because it covers the southern San Andreas fault, but also
because it is expected to experience vertical deformation due to both the
convergence across many faults in the region and anthropogenic withdrawal of
subsurface fluids. The project is developing combined models, and making
available to the wider community the underlying data, the models, and the
software used to generate those models those models. The project is also
supporting the training of a graduate student and formal outreach to female high
school students at the CURIE program for STEM development.