* 1358835
* REU Site:  Marine Research in Puget Sound for Community College STEM Students
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2014,12/31/2018
* Ann Murkowski, Seattle Community College District Office
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 12/31/2018
* USD 288,717.00

The Seattle Community College District VI in partnership with the Ocean Inquiry
Project will host an REU Site for Marine Science Research in Puget Sound for
Community College STEM Students. This three-year project will support eight
community college STEM majors annually from a variety of disciplines. Students
will be selected from 16 community colleges in the Puget Sound region and will
participate over the course of a year. This regional and year-long approach was
designed to provide research opportunities to students who have few other
opportunities to participate in research. Participants will engage in
university-level in-situ marine science research contributing to the
understanding and preservation of Puget Sound.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI's,
Ann Murkowski (faculty at North Seattle Community College) and Co-PI Marina
Halverson (faculty at Seattle Central Community College) are partners on this
project and together will provide the intellectual, administrative and mentoring
leadership for the project. The eight students will be working in pairs, with
two pairs assigned to each PI. The Seattle Community College District will serve
as the fiscal lead. Central and North will provide lab space and computer
support for lab processing and analysis. The Seattle Maritime Academy (SMA) (a
division of Central) will provide the ship(s) and crew for cruises. Senior
Personnel, Fritz Stahr and the Ocean Inquiry Project (OIP), will organize the
cruises, provide instructors for the cruises, and provide any needed equipment
and technical assistance for data collection. Faculty from the University of
Washington's, School of Oceanography and scientists from King County Metro's
Environmental Lab will be research mentors to the students.