* 1358888
* REU Site:   Research Internships in Ocean Sciences (RIOS)
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Gary Taghon, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 08/31/2017
* USD 270,256.00

This award renews funding for a Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU)
program at Rutgers University. Advances in remote sensing, ocean observatories,
autonomous vehicles, numerical modeling, and molecular biology are changing
oceanography. The faculty and research facilities at Rutgers allow
undergraduates to explore how to use these, and other, technologies to
understand marine ecosystems. The program brings ten students to Rutgers each
summer for ten weeks. Some students will be housed at the main campus in New
Brunswick, NJ and some will be housed at Rutgers University Marine Field Station
in Tuckerton, NJ. Through independent projects and team research experiences,
students focus on process-oriented concepts and techniques applicable in any
marine ecosystem. Students are recruited through national and regional
advertising. An initial four-day orientation introduces students to ongoing
research, focusing on the Raritan River-Raritan Bay and the Mullica River-Great
Bay systems. The two estuaries provide a sharp contrast in their human impacts
on coastal ecosystems. The orientation includes two days at the Rutgers
University Marine Field Station in Tuckerton, with hands-on experience in the
coastal LEO-15 research area, and on the Mullica River. During the first week
students also consult with mentors and attend workshops on how to formulate a
research question and write a proposal. Other orientation activities include
workshops on effective teamwork and an online course on responsible conduct of
research. Ethics training will be supplemented by group discussions of case
studies. Students make oral progress reports of their research in a mid-program
workshop. Discussions of careers in ocean science and when and how to apply to
graduate school take place towards the end of the program. All participants
receive instruction on how to write up and analyze their data and how to prepare
a poster for the final poster session. A total of thirty students will recieve
an excellent summer research internship experience and career training via this
award.