* 1358585
* Do Creeping Faults Ever Host Large Earthquakes?:    An Investigation of Thermal Alteration in the SAFOD Drillcore
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2019
* Pratigya Polissar, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Margaret Benoit
* 05/31/2019
* USD 341,804.00

Broader Significance &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will address one of the
major questions of fault mechanics and seismic hazard: can significant
earthquakes happen on faults that are slowly creeping? This question has
garnered more attention after the 2011 Tohoku-oki earthquake in Japan ruptured
through a shallow section of the fault that was assumed to only slide stably
(rather than as part of an earthquake). The same may be true of the creeping
section of the San Andreas Fault, and this project is evaluating the earthquake
potential on that section of the fault.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Due to friction,
when a large earthquake ruptures a fault, the fault surfaces heat up. This
project is using the breakdown of organic molecules found in physical rock
samples from the San Andreas Fault Observatory at Depth to search for such
heating along the San Andreas Fault in an area of slow steady slip. If the
results indicate significant pulses of heating, this may indicate significant
earthquakes can rupture this region, despite the slow creep, which would mean
the seismic hazard is larger than currently thought. This novel approach to
detecting heating in faults has potential application to many other questions in
rock mechanics and earthquake physics as well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is determining the maximum
temperature rise, and therefore aspects of earthquake history, along the
creeping section of the San Andreas Fault within the SAFOD drillcore. Although
the fault is currently creeping near tectonic plate rates, it is possible that
this section of the fault hosted earthquakes in the past. Evidence of previous
earthquakes will aid in understanding the seismic potential of this area of the
San Andreas fault and more generally whether creeping faults can host large
earthquakes. Past earthquakes are identified by measuring the thermal maturity
of organic molecules (biomarkers) within both the active creeping sections as
well as areas of relict fault gouges and cataclasites compared to the less
deformed protoliths of the fault-zone rocks. Biomarkers are sensitive to
temperature rise such as achieved during earthquakes, and because they are not
susceptible to retrograde reactions, they preserve the earthquake temperature
rise. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to the thermal maturity of the fault
zone, the chemical kinetics for reactions of biomarkers within the core are
determined from laboratory heating and shearing experiments. Well-established
kinetics allows for quantitative constraints on temperature history. Because
temperature rise during earthquakes is dependent on fault shear strength, slip,
and thickness, determining the reaction kinetics is important for understanding
earthquake mechanics. Thermal diffusion models coupled to biomarker reaction
kinetics will constrain the mechanics for the creeping section of the San
Andreas fault.