* 1358737
* REU Site: Molecular Biophysics
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2014,12/31/2018
* Istvan Pelczer, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 12/31/2018
* USD 599,309.00

This REU Site award to Princeton University will support the training of 10
students for 9 weeks during the summers of 2014-2016 at the Princeton, NJ,
campus and 10 students for 10 weeks during the summers of 2015-2017 at the Czech
Academy of Sciences in Nov√© Hrady, South Bohemia, CZ. This project is supported
by the Office of International and Integrative Affairs (International Science
and Engineering section) as well as the Directorates for Biological Sciences
(Division of Biological Infrastructure) and Mathematical and Physical Sciences
(Division of Chemistry). Successful completion of the domestic program qualifies
participants for a second summer at the Czech Republic. The scientific focus of
this program is molecular biophysics, an interdisciplinary field that applies
conceptual, experimental, and analytical approaches from the physical and
mathematical sciences and engineering to contemporary problems in biology at the
molecular level. At each site, student interests are matched with those of
experienced, dedicated faculty mentors. Participants are also assigned day-to-
day and 'near-peer' mentors. Numerous meetings, seminars, and workshops are
planned to discuss program expectations, ethics and the responsible conduct of
research, and topics in biophysics. Participants develop their oral and written
communications skills through required presentations and a written report. At
the international site, a novel research concept is applied that combines
experimental and computational approaches iteratively. Participants can pursue
the computational aspects of their research remotely upon return to their home
institutions, with continued supervision by their Czech mentors. Success of the
program is assessed using a combination of participants' oral and written
feedback and a standardized online assessment
tool.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students apply to the program using an online
application form, and phone interviews are conducted before students are
selected for participation in the program. Students who are rising sophomores,
especially those from schools with limited undergraduate research and those from
underrepresented groups, who are majoring in chemical engineering, chemistry,
computer science, mathematics, or physics are encouraged to apply.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU Site program prepares students for
interdisciplinary and collaborative research. The opportunity to work with
foreign mentors and get exposed to foreign culture is an intrinsic feature of
the program. It is expected that participants will be able to present their work
at conferences and/or in publications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Participants are
required to be tracked after the program and must respond to an automatic email
sent via the NSF reporting system. More information is available by visiting
www.princeton.edu/reumolbiophysics, or by contacting the PI (Professor Jannette
Carey: jcarey@princeton.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. Istvan Pelczer:
ipelczer@princeton.edu).