* 1358362
* RUI: High-Resolution Lacustrine Records of Precipitation Variability in the Northeastern United States during the Last Millennium
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2018
* Jay Stager, Paul Smith's College of Arts and Sciences
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 05/31/2018
* USD 296,621.00

The award provides funds to develop continuous high-resolution hydro-climate
records from diatom assemblages (algae with glassy shells), over the last
millennium, in lake sediment cores from the Adirondack region of northern New
York.

A central aim of the research is to clarify the nature and causes of
northeastern precipitation variability and extreme events, particularly in
relation to the North Atlantic Oscillation (NAO) and global to regional
temperatures, and to evaluate conflicting climate model projections of
precipitation trends.

The broader impacts involve potential improvements in understanding regional
precipitation patterns and water availability in the populous northeast as well
as helping to clarify the influences of the NAO and temperature on climate.

Undergraduate students will participate in field work and sediment core
analyses, representing an important enhancement of the academic environment at a
college that serves an under-represented rural region of upstate New York.
Collaborations with regional stakeholders will enhance access to research
facilities, professional networks, and expertise for both the research and
students.

Results of the research will be presented at science conferences and published
in peer-reviewed journals with student co-authors. The analytical data resulting
from the research will be archived at the NOAA World Data Center and physical
sediment samples will be archived at Queen's University and Paul Smith's
College.