* 1358619
* Collaborative Research:  Simultaneous Imaging of the Megathrust and Volcanic Systems in the Aleutian Islands Using Hybrid Mini Seismic Arrays
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2019
* Clifford Thurber, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Margaret Benoit
* 05/31/2019
* USD 219,095.00

The Alaska-Aleutian subduction zone is one of the most active areas in the
world, in terms of its seismic and volcanic activity. The megathrust experiences
large damaging fast (normal) earthquakes, slow earthquakes and associated
tectonic tremor revealing a wide spectrum of slip behavior. The volcanoes show a
complex blend of seismicity, from volcanic tremor to deep long-period (DLP)
events. Many of these tectonic and volcanic natural systems remain relatively
unexplored because of the challenging logistics leading to poor instrumentation.
We propose to install 4 hybrid mini seismic arrays and 6 stand-alone seismic
stations on Unalaska and Akutan Islands, to capture this rich variety of seismic
activity, both tectonic and volcanic, and image earth structure in high
resolution. The experiment is designed such that it simultaneously images
multiple sources, thereby illuminating both megathrust and volcanic systems at
the same time. Deployment of mini arrays is logistically convenient in this
challenging environment compared to conventional network-style deployments with
similar number of stations maximizing scientific gain with relatively low cost.
This study will be an important step forward in our understanding of the complex
volcanic and tectonic systems and their interplay in Alaska-Aleutian subduction
complex. This intertwined natural system will be investigated by combining novel
array techniques to image multiple sources with an augmented conventional
seismic network. This study will examine a wide spectrum of fault slip dynamics,
volcanic plumbing system and earth structure in this area. It will not only
enrich our knowledge of the subduction system in this area but also might be
extrapolated to other areas like Cascadia that are not so productive
seismically.

The Alaska-Aleutian subduction zone has witnessed a number of large damaging
earthquakes in instrumental history. The Unalaska-Akutan area is located near
the eastern edge of the 1957 M8.6 megathrust rupture zone. The proposed study
will help better understand the dynamics of the subduction fault, and therefore
aid in seismic hazard analyses. In addition, Akutan and Makushin are among the
most frequently active volcanoes in the United States and are defined as ?very
high threat?. They both pose threat to nearby population centers. This study
will help us image and understand the volcanic plumbing systems leading to
improved monitoring of precursory phenomena. Moreover, this project will help
advance the career of an early-career faculty member, post doctoral researchers,
and graduate students, and foster collaboration between educational and
government institutions.