* 1358071
* IRES: Undergraduate Research at CERN - Explorations in Accelerator-Based Science
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Philip Rubin, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Roxanne Nikolaus
* 08/31/2018
* USD 214,176.00

Through this three-year International Research Experiences for Students (IRES)
program for U.S. students, George Mason University (GMU) will conduct a nine-
week, combined research internship-training program for eighteen undergraduates
in cooperation with counterparts at CERN, the European Organization for Nuclear
Research. Located in Geneva, Switzerland, CERN is a world-class international
research center that supports all aspects of accelerator-based science: theory,
research and development, information technology, experiments, and data
analysis. Users of the facilities, including students, work in these areas along
with research counterparts and staff at CERN. With access to technically complex
particle accelerators and detectors, experiments and research activities carried
out there are among the most advanced in accelerator-based science. Each year,
scientists from almost 600 institutes and universities (and 85 nations) visit
the laboratory to collaborate. U.S. scientists, including the Principal
Investigator, are engaged in experiments based at one or another of the
accelerators at the CERN complex, including the Large Hadron Collider (LHC). In
this exceptional setting, CERN conducts an annual Summer Student Research
Programme for up to 300 undergraduates from Europe and other countries. With
direction from the P.I., six U.S. students supported by this IRES grant will
work with CERN-affiliated mentors and participate in the summer program, where
they will learn alongside fellow students and professionals from every corner of
the globe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To ensure opportunities for broader
participation in the IRES at CERN, George Mason University will recruit by
inviting advanced students to apply who are in science, technology, engineering
and mathematics (STEM) fields and attending member institutions of the diverse
Consortium of Universities of the Washington Metropolitan Area, an historically
Black or women's college or university in the greater District of Columbia
region, or a Northern Virginia community college. Selected student participants
will spend their first of nine weeks at GMU in a preparatory workshop, followed
by eight weeks at CERN for a well-planned program that includes skill
development, research experience under the co-supervision of the P.I. and an on-
site expert, academic and career advising, and multiple professional networking
opportunities. Participating students must make one or more presentations at
CERN and author a technical report on their project for posting on the IRES
program web site and evaluation by mentors. IRES participation will contribute
not only to on-going accelerator-based science, but also-very importantly-to
workforce preparation of junior U.S. scientists and engineers with a full range
of scientific experience, including areas that involve hardware, software, data
analysis, computer engineering, and design and simulation.