* 1358919
* RET Site: The Great American Biotic Interchange (GABI)--The Panama Connection
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/2014,04/30/2019
* Bruce MacFadden, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Aisha Morris
* 04/30/2019
* USD 350,000.00

This three-year project focuses on professional research experiences for middle
and high school STEM teachers through investigations of the Great American
Biotic Interchange (GABI). Each year 10 teachers (in diverse fields including
biology, chemistry, earth and environmental sciences, and oceanography) and
three to five professional paleontologists will participate in a four-phase
process of professional development, including: a (1) pre-trip orientation
(May); (2) 12 days in Panama in July collecting fossils from previously
reported, as well as newly discovered, sites; (3) a post-trip on-line (cyber-
enabled) Community of Practice; and (4) a final wrap-up at the end of each
cohort (December). In addition, some of the teachers may also elect to partner
with scientists in their research laboratories, principally located in
California, Florida, and New Mexico. The partners in Panama are from the
Universidad Autónoma de Chiriquí (UNACHI), including faculty and students, as
well as STEM teachers from schools in Panama. Teachers that participate in this
RET will develop lesson plans related to fossils, paleontology, evolution,
geology, past climate change, and related content aligned with current STEM
standards.

The GABI, catalyzed by the formation of the Isthmus of Panama during the
Neogene, had a profound effect on the evolution and geography of terrestrial
organisms throughout the Americas and marine organisms globally. For example,
more than 100 genera of terrestrial mammals dispersed between the Americas, and
numerous marine organisms had their interoceanic distributions cut in half by
the formation of the Isthmus. Rather than being considered a single event that
occurred about 4 million years ago, the GABI likely represents a series of
dispersals over the past 10 million years, some of which occurred before full
closure of the Isthmus. New fossil discoveries in Panama resulting from the GABI
RET (Research Experiences for Teachers) are thus contributing to the
understanding of the complexity and timing of the GABI during the Neogene.

This award is being co-funded with the Office International and Integrative
Activities.