* 1358189
* IRES: U.S.-Italy Student Research on Mediterranean Silvo-Arable-Pastoral Ecosystems
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Armen Kemanian, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 07/31/2018
* USD 248,239.00

This International Research Experience for Students (IRES) project will provide
experience in ecological modeling to U.S. students interested in ecology and
agroecology through a partnership between The Pennsylvania State University and
the University of Sassari in Sardinia, Italy. In the Sardinian setting with
mentors of diverse background, student participants will examine the dynamics of
carbon and nitrogen in a Mediterranean silvo-arable-pastoral ecosystem, at the
Berchidda Long Term Observatory (LTO). Ecosystems such as the Berchidda LTO have
high biodiversity and cultural value, being the source of many domesticated
grain and forage crops in use throughout the world. Such ecosystems are also
important carbon and nitrogen sinks, and their integrity can be considered at
risk due to climate and land use changes. The students' collective experience
will encompass field research, laboratory work and computer modeling and follow
a structured professional development plan. During each year of the three-year
IRES, cohorts of five undergraduate and graduate students will train to
integrate measurements and modeling to study landscapes with high temporal,
spatial, and ecological diversity that are strongly influenced by humans.
Overall, the students' research should contribute to our basic knowledge of
relevant Mediterranean ecosystems, which may be extended to other ecosystems in
the U.S. and abroad, at global and local scales.

Fifteen U.S. students, divided into three cohorts, will work on the diverse
silvo-arable-pastoral ecosystem of Sardinia to understand carbon and nitrogen
fluxes in the mosaic land-use of the Long Term Observatory of Berchidda, in
northeastern Sardinia. Their IRES experience will consist of three phases: 1)
scientific and cultural pre-departure preparation, 2) five-week research project
at the Berchidda LTO, and 3) post-arrival work which will comprise preparation
of posters, presentations or publications, and IRES evaluation. Students will be
mentored by the U.S. PIs and three counterpart scientists from the University of
Sassari who lead research at the Berchidda LTO. Additionally, graduate students
will gain educational experience by teaching a workshop at the host institution
in Sardinia and undergraduate students will contribute to a seminar at the
Pennsylvania State University. As an international research team, the U.S. and
Italian partners expect to deepen understating of the identified Mediterranean
systems and the role human activity plays in driving the changes of carbon and
nitrogen stocks. Furthermore, for broader impact, because the IRES students
participate and gain this timely experience, they should benefit from the
valuable early career exposure to collaborative research in a area where general
ecological principles and modeling techniques may be applied to similar local
and regional landscapes, for more sustainable environmental management.