* 1358135
* IRES: U.S.-Hungarian Research on Harvesting Light Energy for Redox Chemistry and Biosensors
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Timothy Peelen, Lebanon Valley College
* Standard Grant
* Roxanne Nikolaus
* 08/31/2017
* USD 177,789.00

This U.S.-Hungarian International Research Experiences for Students (IRES)
project supports undergraduate students' research visits to Budapest, Hungary,
for an immersive collaboration with Hungarian mentors and students. With overall
direction by the Principal Investigator, Dr. Timothy Peelen of Lebanon Valley
College, twelve U.S. students from the mid-Atlantic region, work in laboratories
at Eötvös Loránd University guided by two lead Hungarian mentors, Drs. Zoltán
Novák and Péter Kele. Prior to departure, all students prepare for their eight
week research experience abroad during a two week orientation at Lebanon Valley
College to learn about Hungarian culture and language, and for instruction in
concepts and techniques related to fundamental applications of light energy,
spanning organometallic and bioorthogonal chemistry. In Budapest, students work
in the Novák and Kele laboratories on a cluster of activities centered around
the theme of applications of light energy. While designed around this unifying
theme, specific projects allow participants to pursue individual interests in
the areas of inorganic, organic, photophysical, and biological chemistry. Each
of the IRES undergraduate participants also gains experience with the
application of chemical tools that can be used to manipulate the photophysical
properties of metal complexes and fluorogenic probes for applications in
photoredox catalysis and bioorthogonal chemistry, respectively.

Overall, IRES activities at Eötvös Loránd University offer a valuable early
immersive research experience that will prepare the undergraduate researchers to
engage productively with international colleagues as they pursue their future
careers. The P.I. will reach out to serve different underrepresented groups,
including a commitment to select equal numbers of male and female participants
while striving to include underrepresented minorities and students with
disabilities. Participation in a rigorous research project as an undergraduate
has been linked to important gains such as thinking and working like a scientist
and clarification of career or graduate school plans. As a capstone experience
for the program, IRES students will be strongly encouraged to participate in the
Undergraduate Research Symposium in the Chemical and Biological Sciencesheld
each October at Unniversity of Maryland, Baltimore Campus.