* 1358274
* SHINE:  Estimating Source Locations of Interplanetary Type II Radio Bursts with Direction Finding Technique
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2018
* Pertti Makela, Catholic University of America
* Continuing Grant
* Ilia Roussev
* 05/31/2018
* USD 193,977.00

The main goal of this 3-year SHINE project is to study the locations of the type
II radio bursts at frequencies around and below 1 MHz by utilizing measurements
from the Wind/WAVES and STEREO/WAVES radio instruments. The obtained radio
source locations will be compared with the white-light images of Coronal Mass
Ejections (CMEs) taken by the SOHO/LASCO and STEREO/SECCHI coronagraphs and
heliospheric imagers. This research project will shed more light on the origin
of the type II radio emissions during CME events and related shock waves.
Furthermore, the project team aims to test the validity of various theoretical
models of the type II radio bursts.

This research project contributes to broader societal activities, such as
advancing the participation of women in science and improving the scientific
literacy of the general public. The project team will present the results of
this research project at national scientific meetings and will publish them in
peer-reviewed scientific journals. In addition, the team will setup and maintain
a website, where all relevant data for each analyzed radio event will be made
available to the general public. The research and EPO agenda of this SHINE
project supports the Strategic Goals of the AGS Division in discovery, learning,
diversity, and interdisciplinary research.