* 1358747
* Making the Most of Big Data: Current and Future High-Impact Collaborations
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2013,02/28/2014
* Gheorghe Tecuci, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 02/28/2014
* USD 71,202.00

The emergence of "Big Data" provides us with some of the biggest challenges and
opportunities. The challenges include the capture, storage, sharing, search,
visualization, analysis, understanding, and processing of massive amounts of
data that are complex and heterogeneous and are being gathered at rates that
exceed our current capacity for handling such data. The opportunities stem from
the potential for extracting useful knowledge from Big Data for more informed
decisions, helping accelerate discovery and innovation, and supporting their
transition into practice to benefit society. To address the challenges and
opportunities of "Big Data", the U.S government has launched, in March 2012, the
National Big Data Research and Development Initiative. But making the most of
Big Data requires a joint effort from all the stakeholders: the government,
industry, universities, and non-profits.

The workshop "Making the Most of Big Data: Current and Future High-impact
Collaborations" aims to examine high-impact collaborations and identify
additional areas for possible collaboration between the public and private
sectors, with a special emphasis on projects and initiatives that: advance
technologies that support Big Data and data analytics; educate and expand the
Big Data workforce; develop, demonstrate and evaluate applications of Big Data
that improve key outcomes in economic growth, job creation, education, health,
energy, sustainability, public safety, advanced manufacturing, science and
engineering, and global development; demonstrate the role that prizes and
challenges can play in deriving new insights from Big Data; and foster regional
innovation.

The workshop engages the key Big Data stakeholders from academia, government,
and industry: representatives of the many federal agencies that support
significant Big Data projects, leading academics engaged in Big Data research,
leading Big Data innovators from industry, as well as participants from the
state and local governments, non-profits, foundations and other organizations
engaged in Big Data research, applications, workforce development, and
technology transfer activities. Discussion of existing high-impact
collaborations, keynote addresses on Big Data topics, privacy and ethical
issues, a plenary panel and in breakout sessions covering critical Big Data
issues (such as Workforce Development, Big Data Research and Development, Issues
of Public Concern, and Big Data Innovation) is expected to lead to a better
understanding of the current status of the Big Data efforts, and the
identification of the best ways to address the challenges that remain and
leverage the combined resources of private and public sectors to more fully
realize the potential of Big Data.

Anticipated broader impacts of the project include recognition and appreciation
of current high-impact collaborations; increased collaborations among the
multiple Big Data stakeholders leading to transformative advances in the core
Big Data technologies of capturing, storing, sharing, searching, visualizing,
analyzing, understanding, and processing of huge, diverse, complex, and
distributed data sets; and fostering of innovation in science, engineering, and
education necessary for advancing national goals and priorities in economic
growth, education, health, clean energy, and security.