* 1358103
* SHINE:  Self-Consistent Resonant-Cyclotron Heating of Protons and Alpha Particles in the Solar Wind and Solar Corona
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2017
* Philip Isenberg, University of New Hampshire
* Continuing Grant
* Ilia Roussev
* 05/31/2017
* USD 343,400.00

This 3-year SHINE project is expected to yield new, more detailed kinetic models
of the heating of charged particles (protons and alpha particles) in
turbulently-driven collisionless plasmas, such as the solar corona and the solar
wind. By utilizing a new computational technique, these studies will determine
the self-consistent behavior of waves and particles in the presence of solar
wind concentrations of alpha particles. The research agenda of this project
directly addresses the SHINE goal of "understanding or characterizing the
background solar wind and how it evolves." The project will be carried out
within the excellent educational environment in space physics at the University
of New Hampshire, which allows the PI and Co-I to continue their productive
research interactions with graduate and undergraduate students there. The
research and EPO agenda of this SHINE project supports the Strategic Goals of
the AGS Division in discovery, learning, diversity, and interdisciplinary
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goal of this 3-year SHINE project is to
investigate the self-consistent cyclotron-resonant wave-particle interaction
resulting from continual heating of protons and alpha particles by Ion-Cyclotron
Waves (ICW) dissipation. Using homogeneous 1.5D and 2.5D hybrid simulations, the
project team will drive the ICW spectrum with a new technique that allows the
wave properties to evolve self-consistently, without imposing particular wave
modes. In this way, the team will determine the self-consistent wave properties
responsible for shaping the proton and alpha-particle distributions in a
collisionless plasma. The researchers will explore this self-consistent wave
dispersion as a function of plasma beta and alpha streaming speed, to obtain
results appropriate for the in-situ solar wind and for solar coronal holes. They
will then incorporate this new information into their kinetic-guiding-center
equations to compute the wave and particle evolution in the inhomogeneous
expanding solar wind. The results from this project will be compared with in-
situ solar wind measurements, and they will yield predictions for the ion
distributions to be measured near the Sun by the future Solar Orbiter and Solar
Probe Plus missions.