* 1358072
* IRES:  U.S.-Hungary Research Experience for Students on Non-Boolean Computer Architectures
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Wolfgang Porod, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Roxanne Nikolaus
* 08/31/2018
* USD 238,847.00

The objective of this U.S.-Hungarian project is to provide early career
international research experience (IRES) for U.S. students who will study
emerging technologies based on cellular neural networks(CNN)with the goal of
enhancing and developing information processing systems. The IRES program of
activities will take place in Budapest, overseen by the principal investigator,
Michael Niemier, in partnership with colleagues from the University of Notre
Dame and faculty at Pázmány Péter Catholic University (PPKE). A CNN is an analog
array processor architecture designed to significantly improve the power and
performance of various computation-intensive applications, such as image
processing, pattern recognition, and motion detection. Together, the
U.S.-Hungarian team will pursue effective ways to move away from chip stored
program models. By seeking additional functionalities and capabilities, the
research mentors and their students expect to leverage new information
processing technologies and algorithms to further enhance the functionality of
and application spaces for the CNN paradigm.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary:&lt;br/&gt;Via collaboration and mentoring by faculty from the
University of Notre Dame and Pázmány Péter Catholic University (PPKE) in
Budapest, Hungary, the impact of emerging technologies on architectures,
algorithms, and programming will be addressed by IRES student participants.
Cooperative research activity will focus on determining whether emerging device
technologies that are organized in a CNN-like fashion can be "programmed" and
are amenable to template-based operations. U.S. student participants and their
PPKE counterparts will study existing hardware designs for improvement by
emerging technologies, possibly via lower energy, and if likely, what the
resulting impact on programmability will be. For example, the viability of
hardware realizations of new CNN-computing models (e.g., frameless computing and
delay-based templates) that presently exist only mathematically will be
explored. For new application spaces, team efforts will target tactile sensing
and focus on developing CNN circuitry with integrated sensing technology. Also
of interest are graphene based electronics and developing algorithms to process
sensed data. If successful, the U.S.-Hungarian IRES team's combined research
activities may lead us to consider new, integrated sensing and tactile data
processing techniques for potential heavier load applications in areas such as
robots or prosthetic feet.