* 1358145
* GOALI: Advancing Membrane Bioelectrochemical Reactors For Domestic Wastewater Treatment
* ENG,CBET
* 08/10/2013,08/31/2017
* Zhen He, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 08/31/2017
* USD 366,628.00

CBET-1335930&lt;br/&gt;Zhen He&lt;br/&gt;University of Wisconsin -
Milwaukee&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sustainable wastewater treatment should
significantly clean polluted water while minimizing energy consumption,
improving water reuse, and decreasing the carbon footprint. To achieve this
goal, exploring new treatment technologies becomes increasingly important. This
research aims to scientifically investigate a novel membrane bioelectrochemical
reactor (MBER) system for sustainable wastewater treatment that integrates
ultrafiltration membranes into microbial fuel cells either in the anode
(submerged) or the cathode (side-stream). Such cooperation between the two
technologies enables a new treatment system to simultaneously treat wastewater
in an energy-efficient way, recover electric energy from organic wastes, and
produce high-quality effluent that requires minimal post-treatment. The specific
objectives of this GOALI project are: (1) to understand the interaction between
fouling-control methods and energy production/consumption in the MBER system;
(2) to investigate nitrogen removal in the two MBERs with different membrane
installations; and (3) to functionally scale up the MBERs system to a
transitional stage. The project will systematically compare hollow-fiber
membranes with cross-flow membranes in terms of treatment performance, fouling
and economical cost. It will experimentally interpret whether motional granular
activated carbon can provide colony sites for electrochemically active bacteria
and collect electrons during organic oxidation. It will also examine whether
both nitrification and denitrification can be accomplished on the cathode of an
MBER system and understand the pathways in which nitrogen is removed. The scaled
MBER system will provide a new research platform to bridge fundamental research
and system development and fill the knowledge gap on how to scale up a
bioelectrochemical system. The project will be carried out through close
collaboration with Veolia Water Solutions &amp; Technologies, which will provide
substantial support to the project through membrane materials, student training,
data analysis, and other active communication/interaction. The project will also
involve Pall Corporation, a leading company in membrane materials, as an
unofficial collaborator that will provide guidance and help with membrane tests.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide new insights into the
development and optimization of a new treatment technology through fundamental
understanding of the key problems. It will also reveal the critical relationship
between fouling control and energy, which will guide practical operation of the
MBER system. The project will benefit the economy (wastewater business) and
society (new technology for environmental sustainability) through advancing
anaerobic treatment of domestic wastewater and interaction/collaboration with
the water industry. The results from the research will help to improve the
existing treatment process and to expand the scope of the business with cutting-
edge technologies. The research findings will be integrated into current
academic programs in environmental engineering to prepare future
engineers/scientists for academic and industry careers.