* 1358370
* CAREER: Mean Free Path Spectroscopy - Experimental determination of the mean free path distribution in solids
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2016
* Chris Dames, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Jose Lage
* 06/30/2016
* USD 287,235.00

1055317&lt;br/&gt;Dames&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Engineering the conduction of heat
in solid materials is essential for numerous applications ranging from thermal
management and insulation, to power generation, to information technology. Many
modern systems including lasers, thermoelectric energy converters, and
transistors are based on materials containing structures much smaller than one
micron. These structures can cause very large reductions in the thermal
conductivity, sometimes by a factor of ten or more, as compared to the familiar
bulk values reported in handbooks. To predict and engineer the thermal
conductivity in both bulk and microstructured materials, it is essential to
understand the mean free paths of the energy carriers, that is, the average
distance between their collisions. Although various models of the thermal
conductivity have been used widely for more than half a century, when these
models are applied to microstructures they often exhibit large disagreements
with each other. The heart of the model disagreements is their different mean
free path calculations, yet direct experimental measurements of the full
distribution of mean free paths have not been reported to date for any material.
Therefore, the primary goal of this CAREER proposal is to experimentally measure
the full distribution of mean free paths in several standard materials.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To accomplish this objective, this project will pursue two
complementary experimental strategies, designed to cover a very large range of
length and time scales. The first approach involves systematic measurements of
steady-state conduction in microstructures with sizes ranging from around 50 nm
to around 100 microns. The data will then be transformed into mean free path
spectra using a new Fredholm integral equation. The second approach involves
measuring ultrafast thermal transients ranging from around 0.1 ns to around 10
microseconds, and analyzed using the Boltzmann transport equation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this CAREER proposal is in
advancing the fundamental understanding of thermal conductivity. By
experimentally quantifying the real mean free path distributions, these
measurements will help identify which of the standard models in use today can
actually be correct. This project will also test a postulate recently introduced
by Y. K. Koh and D. Cahill to relate their observed frequency-dependent thermal
conductivity to a mean free path distribution. The project also proposes to
develop an all-electrical pump-probe apparatus that should be more accessible
and less costly than the important optical pump probe experimental technique.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this project include both
engineering relevance and an education/outreach component. The fundamental
knowledge gained will be relevant for a wide range of materials systems
including alloys, crystalline materials, and amorphous materials, and for
thermal engineering of numerous applications including lasers, transistors, and
thermoelectric energy conversion. The outreach activities are built around
workshops at regional high schools based on thermoelectric energy conversion and
visualizing the nanoworld at the human scale. At the end of each workshop the
workshop materials will be donated to the classroom for their future use. The
workshop content has already been strengthened by two iterations with the
intended high school science teachers, and one teacher will be recruited and
supported for a summer to optimize the workshop content and disseminate it on a
website.