* 1358939
* REU SITE: Multidisciplinary Research Experiences for Undergraduates in the Internet of Things
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2014,02/28/2019
* Anne Ngu, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Continuing Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 02/28/2019
* USD 343,481.00

This funding renews a Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Site at Texas
State University - San Marcos. Undergraduate students will engage in summer
research involving a variety of interesting and challenging problems associated
with the Internet of Things. Internet of Things represents a vision for the next
generation of the Internet where everyday physical objects can be attached with
sensors and seamlessly integrated with the Internet. This REU Site provides
opportunities for a cohort of undergraduate students to work during the summer
on research and development of innovative Internet of Things technologies that
could have significant societal impacts. The site emphasizes the participation
of a diverse group of students, in particular women, minorities, and non-
traditional students. This project is co-funded by the Cyber-Physical Systems
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the project rests with
the project leadership, an experienced research group with excellent expertise
and experience in the research area. All of the student projects have a strong
research basis derived from the synergistic research expertise of the five core
faculty members from the Computer Science and Engineering departments. The
projects will advance the state-of-the-art in big data analysis and management,
information retrieval, computer vision, and software engineering in the context
of the Internet of Things.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts include
providing a unique opportunity for undergraduate students with limited research
opportunities to experience research in the interdisciplinary theme of Internet
of Things. The participating faculty members are committed to including under-
represented and non-traditional students in their research and have an
established recruitment network to reach these students. Thus this project has
the potential to produce new computer science graduate students and faculty
members and to advance discovery and understanding while promoting learning.