* 1358270
* SHINE:   Exploring a New Technique for Measuring the Vector Magnetic Field in the Solar Corona
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2014,03/31/2018
* Jeffrey Kuhn, Predictive Science Incorporated
* Continuing Grant
* Carrie E. Black
* 03/31/2018
* USD 347,075.00

Solar magnetism is what powers the solar wind and coronal mass ejections (CME)
and it is the ultimate source of space weather. Forecasting space weather and
the onset and acceleration of CMEs is a critical goal of solar and space
physics. For modern society it is crucial to respond to geo-effective CMEs that
can damage satellites or ground-based technology. Reliable forecast of geo-
effective events requires knowledge of the coronal magnetic field within a few
solar radii where its structure and variability affects space weather by
modifying solar wind conditions and CME propagation. Unfortunately, measurements
of the coronal magnetic field are inherently very difficult to make and,
therefore, constitute a weak link in our understanding of many physical
mechanisms at work in the heliosphere. This project introduces and explores a
new technique for measuring both the strength and direction of the magnetic
field in the solar corona. If successfully demonstrated, this will pave the way
to synoptic (whole sun) measurements of the coronal fields with the upcoming NSF
Major Research Equipment and Facilities Construction project, the Daniel K.
Inouye Solar Telescope (DKIST, formerly the Advanced Technology Solar Telescope,
ATST), which is scheduled to begin operation soon after the completion of this
project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will promote hands-on Science
Technology Engineering and Match (STEM) education through the NSF funded Akamai
Workforce Initiative (AWI) for which the investigators on this project have
served as mentors, participants and organizers. Three STEM AWI students will be
involved in summer projects with hands-on experience in remote sensing
technology. In addition, the project will fully enable one graduate student and
partially enable a second student to complete their PhDs in solar and
heliospheric physics. Furthermore, the new magnetometry technique that is
developed under this grant will be integrated into the community coronal study
tool FORWARD developed at the High Altitude Observatory of NSF's National Center
for Atmospheric Research in Boulder, Colorado.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
concerns the development, implementation, and demonstration of a new technique
for measuring coronal magnetic fields. It employs simultaneously linear
spectropolarimetry of (i) the unsaturated Hanle effect in permitted lines, such
as He I 1083 nm line being adsorbed from inter-planetary or comet matter in the
hot corona and (ii) the saturated Hanle effect in the bright forbidden [Fe XIII]
1074.7 nm and [Si X] 1430 nm lines. The technique does not depend on the Zeeman
effect in these lines. Observing these lines (quasi-) simultaneously can provide
unambiguous measurements of the full magnetic vector in the corona. The goals of
this project are to implement this new approach, determine specific requirements
for observations and sensitivity limits, obtain a catalog of line polarization
measurements, and infer vector images of magnetic fields in the solar corona. In
addition to the He I line other permitted lines of neutral atomic and molecular
species sublimating from Sun-grazing comets near their perihelion will be
investigated. Observations will be carried out with the Scatter-Free Observatory
for Limb Active Regions and Coronae (SOLARC), an IR imaging spectropolarimeter
located on the summit of Haleakala, Maui. Furthermore, potential and nonlinear
force-free field extrapolations as well as MHD-based magnetic field models will
be computed and compared with magnetic vector maps inferred from observations.