* 1358008
* Research on Strategic Uncertainty: Applications
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2014,04/30/2015
* Amanda Friedenberg, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Sudipta Sarangi
* 04/30/2015
* USD 88,350.00

Understanding how individuals or groups interact is at the core of virtually
every economic and social problem. A central difficulty in studying such
interactions is the fact that, in practice, players face strategic uncertainty,
that is, they (often) do not know what their opponents plan to play and how
their opponents will react to choices they adopt. For instance, a country may be
uncertain about which tactics a terrorist organization is planning. And,
likewise, the terrorist organization may be uncertain about what defense
measures the country is adopting. Of course, which defense measures the country
adopts will be influenced by what tactics it thinks the terrorist organization
is planning. And, likewise, which tactics the terrorist organization adopts will
depend on what defense measures it thinks the country has put in place. As such,
which defense measures the country adopts will be influenced by what it (the
country) thinks the terrorist organization thinks about its own defense
strategy. And so on.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is aimed at bringing
strategic uncertainty to bear on economic and social phenomena by using
epistemic game theory to model it. There are two aspects of the project. First,
it develops a set of tools aimed at bringing strategic uncertainty to bear on
economic problems. Second, it uses these tools to show how, in important
applications, strategic uncertainty can give way to novel behavioral
predictions. One natural application of strategic uncertainty is to bargaining
problems: If negotiators face uncertainty about how others bargain, then there
may be difficulties in reaching agreements. The project identifies strategic
uncertainty as a source of inefficiency in bargaining problems. It argues that
these inefficiencies can arise, even if bargainers are strategically
sophisticated (in the sense of engaging in forward induction reasoning) and even
if strategic uncertainty only arises after surprise moves in the negotiation
process. It derives testable implications. It goes on to address the extent to
which efficiency can or cannot be improved, if the source of inefficiency is
strategic uncertainty. This research can also have important implications for
policy prescription, particularly in the area of mediated bargaining