* 1358149
* High Resolution Imaging of the Mantle of North America with 3D Wavefield Imaging
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2018
* Gary Pavlis, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Margaret Benoit
* 04/30/2018
* USD 241,018.00

Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;This project will analyze data from the
Earthscope Transportable Array (TA) using a novel three-dimensional, seismic
wave imaging method called plane wave migration. This method has produced what
is arguably the highest resolution image produced from the TA to date. It
accomplishes this with a technology derived from the seismic reflection method,
which is the primary technology used in oil and gas exploration. The project
will use this technology to address three main scientific questions. (1) What is
the geometry of the Farallon Plate that North America has been overriding for at
least 100 million years? (2) Are dipping interfaces in the upper mantle we have
imaged in previous work markers of mantle flow processes? (3) What do these high
resolution images tell us about the nature of the region of Earth?s mantle
called the transition zone that lies between two global discontinuities at
depths of 410 and 660 km? The project will address these questions through four
approaches. (1) 3D visualization using tools commonly available for
interpretation seismic reflection data in the oil and gas industry. (2)
Application of forward modeling methods to appraise the reliability of our
imaging results and to test more detailed hypotheses that will arise form
approach (1). (3) Comparison of our results with different approaches produced
by other scientists. (4) Further technical developments of the imaging
technology that will be applied in the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
significance and importance&lt;br/&gt;The USArray element of Earthscope was
built to provide the data to provide a new understanding of the processes that
have shaped the North American continent. Seismic imaging technologies were the
main approach to addressing this large issue. This project is important for
providing the highest resolution images yet obtained with these data and
relating them in true geometry to related work by others. This has the potential
to dramatically change our perspectives on many elements of North American
geology by being able to see what was previously not possible. This has broad
impacts for the oil and gas industry as fundamental work that can impact
understanding of geologic processes that shape North American geology. We also
plan to produce a number of data products that can be used for science education
at all levels.