* 1358756
* Rethinking the reaction time
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2014,03/31/2018
* John Krakauer, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Uri Hasson
* 03/31/2018
* USD 674,030.00

Whether stepping on the brake pedal when a hazard appears in the road ahead,
beginning a sprint in response to the starter's pistol, or reaching to catch a
tipping glass, we possess a remarkable ability to respond rapidly and accurately
to demands for action. These responses occur within a reaction time of around
250 milliseconds, during which we must perceive the need to act, decide
precisely what action to take, and generate motor commands to coordinate the
activity of dozens of muscles to make the movement. It is currently not clearly
understood what steps in this pathway take the greatest amount of time, which
brain regions are responsible for which computations, and whether or not the
reaction time could be reduced even lower. With support from the National
Science Foundation, Dr. John Krakauer and colleagues Dr. Adrian Haith, Dr. Pablo
Celnik and Dr. Joshua Ewan will use innovative behavioral experiments with human
participants to stress the limits of the reaction time and tease apart its
constituent processes and limitations. They will record brain activity during
these same tasks (using EEG) in order to identify the underlying brain networks
responsible and will apply non-invasive brain stimulation to establish the
specific function of these brain networks in generating rapid motor responses.

A number of neurological disorders, such as Parkinson disease, are associated
with slowing of motor responses. Such symptoms are not well-understood at
present. The knowledge gained from this study will yield important insights as
to why this slowing may occur and what, if anything, could be done to treat it
from a therapeutic and/or clinical perspective. A deeper understanding of the
reaction time will also be of significant interest to those seeking to push the
limits of human performance, such as athletes and race car drivers, or amateurs
seeking to better their own performance. Furthermore, data collected in this
study are likely to be of broad interest and therefore will be made available to
other researchers. EEG recordings will be of particular interest to researchers
developing advanced analytical techniques for mapping human brain activity.
Finally, students from under-represented minorities, including those from
economically disadvantaged backgrounds, will have the opportunity to directly
participate in this project and gain valuable research experience through the
Johns Hopkins Diversity Summer Internship Program.