* 1358340
* REU Site: Psychology Research Experience Program
* SBE,SMA
* 03/01/2014,02/28/2017
* Karl Rosengren, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 02/28/2017
* USD 248,412.00

The Psychology Research Experience Program (PREP) at the University of
Wisconsin-Madison provides intensive mentoring and experience in scientific
research and in professional development to undergraduates from historically
underrepresented populations: racial and ethnic minorities, low-income, and
first-generation college students -- who have expressed and demonstrated an
interest in a career in scientific psychology. Pedagogically, PREP has been
designed within the framework of social constructivist models of learning,
whereby students participate in a broad range of activities with others who are
more capable and, as a consequence, appropriate (internalize) the outcomes
produced by working together. It features a balance of mentored laboratory
research (approximately 30 hrs./week) and a curriculum of scientific
instruction, professional development, and networking opportunities.

Intellectual Merit:

The intellectual focus of PREP for the years 2014-2016 is plasticity and
processes of change. Over the past several years it has become increasingly
evident that these are factors that no scientific psychologist can ignore,
regardless of sub-discipline, and PREP provides a thorough grounding in the
principles of plasticity and processes of change from the perspectives of five
traditional sub-disciplines within psychology: biological; clinical; cognitive
and cognitive neuroscience; developmental; and social.

Broader Impacts:

The explicit motivation of this program is to address the well-documented
achievement gap whereby members of the targeted populations (1) apply to PhD
programs in psychology and (2) successfully complete their doctoral training in
proportions far lower than their representation in the overall population.
PREP?s combination of intensive research experience and training in professional
development and networking is designed to equip its participating students with
the skills that are necessary for a successful career in academic psychology.
Thus, it will broaden the participation of underrepresented groups in many
branches of psychological science. In addition, PREP contributes quantitative
and qualitative survey research to The Student Assessment of their Learning
Gains (SALG) instrument, an NSF-supported project to improve teaching and
mentoring in the STEM disciplines.