* 1358216
* IRES: US-South Africa Collaboration on Sustainable Sanitation and Energy and Resource Recovery from Wastewater
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2014,10/31/2014
* Natalie Mladenov, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 10/31/2014
* USD 249,304.00

Technical Description &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the rise in global population
and rapid growth of urban and coastal areas worldwide, providing clean water is
a major challenge particularly when basic sanitation needs are not met. Water
scarcity, poor sanitation, and economic disparity tend to characterize many
densely populated urban areas throughout the world. There is no doubt that new
solutions are needed to improve the availability of clean water and basic
sanitation for underserved populations. Moreover, solutions that also recover
energy and resources for net-zero impact have the potential to dramatically
change communities dealing with water scarcity, and energy and food
security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Consequently, there is a need to improve
fundamental knowledge on decentralized wastewater systems technologies (DEWATS)
that lead to net-zero energy and resource use. Research on sustainable DEWATS
solutions that address the challenges of densely populated urban and peri-urban
developing communities is a novel approach for providing solutions to sanitation
and harnessing resources. IRES students will contribute to fundamental research
on various ongoing University of KwaZulu-Natal (UKZN) projects on the biological
and physico-chemical processes in wastewater treatment and resource and energy
recovery. This IRES project aims to be a transformative scientific and cultural
experience for US students that will advance fundamental knowledge of ABR and
other DEWATS treatment processes implemented at the full-scale in South African
communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Description
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a unique opportunity for fifteen US
students to visit the UKZN in Durban, South Africa, where they will conduct
fundamental research on a wide range of environmental engineering topics related
to resource and energy recovery from wastewater, new perspectives on wastewater
treatment, and sustainable sanitation. Environmental science and engineering
undergraduate and graduate students will be working on novel research at the
nexus of water, energy, and food with the Pollution Research Group at UKZN,
while also obtaining an enriching international experience on topics highly
relevant for environmental scientists and engineers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research experience will equip upper-level undergraduates with research skills
needed to transition to graduate school and strengthen the research and
mentoring skills of graduate student participants. The US student cohorts will
be drawn from two contrasting regions of the U.S., one being California?s
densely populated urban corridor and the other, sparsely populated rural Kansas.
They will be recruited from groups underrepresented in environmental science and
engineering at Kansas State University and the Hispanic-serving California State
Poly-technical University in Pomona. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The week-long
orientation program is designed to promote team building, cultural sensitivity,
and adequate preparation for students to conduct collaborative research
internationally. As part of the evaluation of this project and for knowledge
transfer from cohort-to-cohort, exit surveys, videos of the research, and
student perceptions will be disseminated to subsequent cohorts. Participants
will present their research at UKZN during the final week in Durban. Upon return
to the U.S. they will have the opportunity to make presentations at local and
regional research symposia and conferences. IRES participants will also present
videos and research findings to K-12 institutions via after-school programs.