* 1358004
* IRES: U.S.-India Collaborative Research in Mechanical, Biomedical, and Materials Science Engineering for Undergraduates
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Tammy Haut Donahue, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Mangala Sharma
* 08/31/2018
* USD 82,659.00

Technical Description IRES: The US-India Collaborative Research in Mechanical,
Biomedical, and Materials Science Engineering for Undergraduates is a joint
research project between Ohio State and Colorado State Universities, and the
Jaipur Engineering College and Research Centre in India. US-students will
conduct research on a prosthetic device that was pioneered several decades ago
at the Dr. P.K. Sethi Rehabilitation and Jaipur Limb Training Centre. It
continues to be used throughout India due to the low-cost, cultural
appropriateness, and magnitude of the amputee population. At present, the number
of amputees in the world is significant, particularly in the developing
countries. This IRES project will provide internships for five talented US-
undergraduate engineering students each year over three years to conduct
research and development activities that will provide a thorough understanding
of this prosthetic device. At present, little is known about the properties of
the individual components that comprise the device. The goal of this research is
to improve the product for wider distribution within India and for eventual mass
production so that it?s potential for relieving the suffering of amputees in the
developing world and beyond may be realized.

Broader Description This project will make significant advances in prosthetic
devices for the developing world. Although much is known in the U.S. regarding
prosthetic devices, understanding the various design and production constraints
for developing countries is less well-known. The project evaluation will lead to
a better understanding of the impact of humanitarian projects on the development
of engineering students. The research has the potential to transform the way
that prosthetic devices are made in non-western regions in the world.

The benefit to society accrued through this project is significant. Researchers
will target women and underrepresented students for participation, encouraging
them to pursue advanced degrees in engineering. This will serve to broaden
participation in STEM fields. The results will be broadly disseminated through a
variety of journals and conference venues. The impact on the World?s poor who
are amputees is potentially significant.