* 1358368
* Energy Technologies and Carbon Dioxide Management Symposium
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2014
* George Spanos, Minerals Metals & Materials Society
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 09/30/2014
* USD 5,000.00

1358368 (Spanos) This award is for partial support of the "Energy Technologies
and Carbon Dioxide Management Symposium" which is to be held at the TMS 2014
Annual Meeting and Exhibition, February 16 - 20, 2014, at the San Diego
Convention Center in San Diego, California. At this symposium, participation by
students and other young investigators is viewed as critical to the fostering of
future generations of materials scientists and engineers. NSF funding will be
employed for registration support and/or partial travel support for at least 5
students and 3 post docs or special attendees. Appropriate students,
postdoctoral fellows, or special attendees will be identified by the organizing
committee of the symposium. This symposium will address issues, intricacies and
challenges relating to energy and environmental sciences. It will cover various
technological aspects of sustainable energy eco-systems and processes that
improve energy efficiency, and reduce and sequestrate carbon dioxide (CO2) and
other greenhouse emissions. It will also emphasize the need for sustainable
technologies in extractive metallurgy, materials processing and manufacturing
industries with&lt;br/&gt;reduced energy consumption and CO2 emission.
Industrial energy efficient technologies include innovative ore beneficiation,
smelting technologies, recycling and waste heat recovery. Topics will include
(but are not limited) to the following areas: CO2 and Other Greenhouse Gas
Reduction Metallurgy, Renewable Energy Resources for Metals and Materials
Production, Photo-electrochemical Reduction of CO2, Waste Heat Recovery and
Other Industrial Energy Efficient Technologies, Energy Education and Energy
Regulation, Life Cycle Assessment and Carbon Footprint,
Carbon&lt;br/&gt;Sequestration Techniques, Energy Process Fundamentals, and
Thermo-electric/Electrolysis. Contributed talks are encouraged for inclusion in
a special session on energy education. The support provided to student attendees
will contribute to U.S. workforce development by giving students and other young
investigators the opportunity to learn from and network with leaders in the
field. Additionally, some of the supported students may present their own
research.&lt;br/&gt;The question of how to reduce CO2 emissions is of broad
concern for both the scientific community and society at large given the
emerging concern surrounding global climate change. In light of this,
fundamental technical research exploring all aspects of CO2 emission reduction
from manufacturing process modification, to novel carbon recapture technologies,
to changes in basic educational approaches is needed. This symposium provides
the ideal forum for leaders&lt;br/&gt;in the materials arena to tackle this
challenge.