* 1358214
* The Madden Julian Oscillation, Tropical Cyclones, and Extratropical Circulation Responses
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2019
* Paul Roundy, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Ming Cai
* 03/31/2019
* USD 396,969.00

The project will investigate the following: the extent to which observations and
reanalyses of the extratropical outcomes associated with the Madden Julian
Oscillation depend on the presence of tropical cyclones (TC) at different
general geographical locations; whether different preferred extratropical
outcomes occur during MJO events with or without tropical cyclones in many
different general geographical regions; the relative impact on the
predictability of the extratropical circulation associated with MJO events that
include or do not include tropical cyclones in select geographical regions; the
subsequent propagation patterns of MJO events that include or do not include TCs
in particular initial states and the predictability of the MJO itself between
different MJO initial states that include or do not include TCs in particular
geographical regions. The research is focused on the Northwest Pacific basin and
emphasizes the period September through October, when Northwest Pacific TCs are
most frequent and MJO amplitude is often strong. Analysis of TCs in other basins
will also concentrate on the 2-3 months of most intense TC activity there.

Results will provide insights that might benefit commodity and energy markets as
well as disaster planners, some of whom already consider the MJO and northwest
Pacific TCs in their assessments of future risks of extreme temperature and
rainfall or drought events. Thus this activity has substantial broader impacts.