* 1358740
* Catalysis in a Collaborative REU Program at the University of Utah
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2014,12/31/2017
* Jon Rainier, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 12/31/2017
* USD 325,000.00

This award from the Division of Chemistry (CHE) and the EPSCoR Program both at
the National Science Foundation supports a Research Experiences for
Undergraduates (REU) Site in the Department of Chemistry at the University of
Utah. The REU program will include joint and parallel activities with other STEM
REU programs in the College of Science, which includes programs in the
Department of Physics and Astronomy, the Materials Research Science &amp;
Engineering Center (MRSEC) and the Center for Science and Math Education (CSME).
Synergistic activities will include career development events, tours of
scientific facilities, optional training sessions on various modern
instrumentation, as well as extracurricular outings. Students will give oral
presentations beginning with their arrival on campus, to group meetings
throughout the program, and culminating with an oral presentation at a final,
celebratory Symposium and Poster Session. Overall, the REU program aims to
foster a sense of confidence in discussing and practicing chemistry by: (1)
Providing undergraduates with transformative research experiences in innovative
chemistry projects under the guidance of faculty members in the Department of
Chemistry at the University of Utah, (2) Educating students about their career
options and providing them with a positive image of a career in chemistry, (3)
Exposing students to the greater scientific community by having our REU
researchers interact with other researchers in the College of Science, many of
whom will be outside of their immediate field of study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Site will offer research internships that will focus on catalysis, the unifying
theme of the collaborative REU. The department's strengths span the entire
spectrum of catalytic chemistry and these strengths have been consolidated to
offer the REU students an interconnected program designed not only to teach them
about catalytic chemistry but also to provide them with a needed foundation in
the fundamentals of chemistry and chemical research. A career-development
workshop as well as optional training workshops that cover modern chemical
instrumentation will be offered. Built into the program are opportunities for
the students to hone their communication skills, both oral and written, and a
comprehensive evaluation model has been created to assess how effective the REU
program is at increasing a students' ability to present scientific data.