* 1358470
* Cross-Frontal Fluxes in the Antarctic Circumpolar Current near Udintsev Fracture Zone
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2014,02/28/2019
* D. Randolph Watts, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 02/28/2019
* USD 895,358.00

Overview: Across the Antarctic Circumpolar Current (ACC), fluxes of heat and
momentum and other dynamical quantities establish the heat budget for the whole
Southern Ocean, govern the strength of the ACC and its vital inter-ocean
exchanges, and arguably govern the main vertical density structure of the world
oceans. Yet, theoretical concepts, numerical models, and the sparse
observational records give conflicting views of the mechanisms and magnitude of
transfers across the ACC. South of about 55Â° S the puzzle is further confounded,
because the heat fluxes associated with wind-driven Ekman transport and its
counterbalancing meridional overturning circulation, that are strong and
dominant at lower latitudes, become weak. At that latitude, it falls to cross-
frontal processes arising from mean and eddying flow to complete the heat
budget. It is particularly puzzling how fluxes cross the several ocean fronts,
e.g., from Subantarctic Front to Polar Front to Southern ACC Front. Observations
of heat and momentum fluxes and mixing are vitally needed at additional sites
around the ACC to inform global climate modeling efforts. Of particular interest
is how the oceanic meridional overturning circulation absorbs and redistributes
heat and carbon that is critical to the earth's climate. In this study, an array
of Current and Pressure recording Inverted Echo Sounders (CPIES) will be
deployed for a period of two years to observe and quantify exchanges of
buoyancy, heat, momentum and potential vorticity across the ACC as it flows near
the Udintsev Fracture Zone in the central South Pacific sector of the Southern
Ocean. The CPIES have been shown to be particularly well suited for these
measurements. The Udintsev Fracture Zone has been selected because the three
main fronts (Subantarctic Front, Polar Front, and Southern ACC Front) converge
closely together as they deflect equatorward where they encounter complex
shallower ridges and exhibit strong eddy variability in the lee. Therefore, the
Udintsev Fracture Zone emerges as a likely location for mean and eddy fluxes to
combine to cross the entire ACC system. This project is an international
collaboration with a team of French and Korean scientists with complementary
goals to deploy tall current meter moorings and conduct CTD surveys in this
region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Mesoscale eddies are thought to
play a key role in ACC dynamics, with cross-frontal exchange by eddies forming
the underpinning of the meridional overturning circulation. Recent studies
suggest that this exchange occurs locally in "hot spots" found in the lee of
bathymetric obstacles, yet direct estimates of eddy fluxes from ocean
measurements are scarce, both globally and especially within the Southern Ocean.
Two Current and Pressure recording Inverted Echo Sounders (CPIES) arrays are
proposed. The northern array is within the strong eddy region between the
Subantarctic Front and Polar Front (where they neighbor closely), and the
southern array is located near the Southern ACC Front where historically few
measurements have been made. These sites have been selected as candidates where
eddy and mean cross-frontal fluxes are likely to be strongest. The CPIES arrays
will quantify the role of eddies in redistributing heat, momentum and energy
throughout the full water column. The French and Korean tall moorings will
provide measurements of currents and temperature at fixed levels, providing
complementary estimates of mean and eddy fluxes. The knowledge gained regarding
eddy fluxes is crucially important for conceptual understanding of the dynamical
balances that control the ACC and drive the overturning circulation and to
quantitatively guide future modeling efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: A quality-controlled daily time series of density and currents
determined from the CPIES measurements will be disseminated broadly. Combined
with data from the current meter moorings, data products suitable for validating
numerical models and improving prediction of the cross-frontal flux of momentum,
heat, and potential vorticity will be produced. New technology for remote
transmission of CPIES data via pop-up data capsules will be tested for use in
the strong current, high sea state remote Southern Ocean. Dual pressure sensors
will be installed in two CPIES to investigate the calibration-drift of these
sensors. An engineering undergraduate student will join the University of Rhode
Island technical team and assist CPIES upgrades and preparations.