* 1358593
* Collaborative Research:  From Turbulence to Weather and Climate: Unraveling the Multi-scale Nature of Dust and Sand Transport in the Atmospheric Boundary Layer
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2014,09/30/2016
* Marcelo Chamecki, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 09/30/2016
* USD 291,644.00

The focus of this research project is on the lifting of sand by the wind, known
as saltation, and how it is portrayed by weather and climate models. Wind-blown
sand has direct impacts, such as forming dunes, but also secondary impacts when
the sand particles impact and eject much finer dust particles. These particles
are known as mineral dust aerosols and are one of the major contributors to
global particulate matter, which affects human health, weather, climate,
ecosystems, atmospheric chemistry, and the hydrological cycle. Current numerical
models treat saltation as a uniform process, when studies have shown that
saltation is actually driven by turbulent winds close to the surface and is
highly intermittent. The researchers plan to improve the representation of the
saltation process through a combination of theory, field campaigns, fine-scale
modeling (Large-Eddy Simulation) and global-scale (Earth System) modeling. The
work will involve four main tasks: 1) Linking the intermittency and intensity of
sand transport to atmospheric turbulence, 2) linking atmospheric turbulence to
the overall atmospheric boundary layer properties from weather and climate
models, 3) developing an improved dust emission parameterization that accounts
for turbulence-drive intermittency, and 4) testing the hypothesis that
intermittency plays an important role in the timing and magnitude of dust
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the project will include
societal and education &amp; outreach components. A successful completion of the
project will result in an improvement to the Community Earth System Model (CESM)
and other weather and climate models which should result in more accurate
forecasts of weather and regional climate changes in dusty regions such as the
southwestern US and North Africa. Two graduate students will be trained during
the project, and the students along with the lead researchers and a professional
educator will collaboratively develop an educational module, based on wind
erosion and turbulence, that addresses a range of national and state standards
in the physical sciences. The modules will be disseminated via a workshop for
high school teachers and through a website that collects physics-based lesson
plans. The researchers and graduate students will also interact with high school
students through guest lectures and participation in the Adopt-a-Physicist
program.