* 1358723
* EAGER: Integrating Cognitive and Computer Science to Improve Cyber Security: Selective Attention and Personality Traits for the Detection and Prevention of Risk
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2014,03/31/2018
* Golden Richard, University of New Orleans
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 03/31/2018
* USD 223,022.00

Increasingly, there is a need for better understanding of behavioral and
cognitive factors in cyber security. This project is a novel collaboration
between computer science cyber security researchers and a cognitive science
researcher to generate data on the links between personality traits and cyber
security. The broad theoretical premise of the proposed research is that there
are particular cognitive preferences and related personality factors that can be
assessed in real time, real world scenarios and these may be associated with
individual user's secure/insecure cyber behavior. The personality
characteristics of trait anxiety and callous unemotional traits are tested via
innovative software architecture for immersing subjects in realistic cyber
scenarios, to examine the links between response latencies for certain stimuli,
personality factors, and cyber behaviors. By studying the links between
personality traits and cyber behaviors, it may be possible to develop adaptive
software systems, such as user interfaces, alerting systems, and security
monitors that tap individual stimuli preferences to substantially reduce the
risks or effects of cyber-attacks. The data from the study will inform future
work in adaptive cyber security mechanisms, better tailored to individual user
traits. The research potentially impacts all sectors of society, since
individual citizens, as well as the law enforcement, military, and corporate
communities all benefit from research efforts that could facilitate development
of better cyber security methods. Furthermore, the psychology and cyber security
research communities will benefit from the results of this project and the
developed software architecture.