* 1358150
* IRES: Research Opportunities in Continental Rift Initiation for U.S. Undergraduate Geoscience Students in Malawi
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2018
* Estella Atekwana, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 09/30/2018
* USD 244,276.00

Technical description &lt;br/&gt;This International Research Experience for
Students (IRES): Research Opportunities in Continental Rift Initiation for U.S.
Undergraduate Geoscience Students in Malawi will allow students from Oklahoma
State University (OSU) to investigate the geodynamic processes involved in the
initial rifting of the continental lithosphere. There is a knowledge gap for
understanding the mechanisms involved at the earliest stages of continental
rifting that is ascribed to the paucity of data from nascent rift environments.
Our understanding is incomplete as to where and why continental rifts initiate
and to the relative role of pre-existing structures in rift initiation and
strain localization. The Malawi rift is one of the world?s best places to study
the interplay between neo-tectonic rift structures and Precambrian basement
structures during the initiation and propagation of continental rift. It is also
a natural example of how major structures in the crust try to find the most
efficient pathway through a complex array of inherited structures.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the next three years, 12 undergraduates from OSU will
work with mentors and peers from the University of Malawi and the Geological
Survey Department to conduct field-based, multi-disciplinary research on the
geodynamic processes at play during rift initiation. This research expects to
answer the questions: what is the role of pre-existing structures in the
localization of strain during the early stages of continental extension, how is
strain partitioned and accommodated throughout the upper crust during the early
stages of continental extension, and how are fault dip, slip, and
displacement/length ratios modulated by pre-existing structures. The research
sites in Malawi afford IRES students the opportunity to do original research.
Student projects will focus on detailed investigations of the rift border
faults, transfer zones, and the nature of the upper crust using broadband
magnetotellurics, gravity, magnetic, structural, and remote sensing surveys and
analyses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader description &lt;br/&gt;A major goal of
this IRES is to attract underrepresented students to the geosciences and inspire
them to develop the critical thinking skills needed to succeed in research
careers as geoscientists. The geosciences are considered the least ethnically
diverse of all scientific disciplines. As an international research experience,
this project could have significant impact on the development of future
international research collaborations. These could be seeded as a result of
interactions with African peers, from the enriching cultural experience, and the
acquisition of personal contacts that could contribute to building relationships
upon which future international research collaborations could be initiated.
Results of this research will reach a broad audience as student participants are
required to present their individual research findings at regional, national,
and international scientific meetings, and potentially publish results in peer-
reviewed journals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Other broader impacts include the
enrichment of the geophysical and structural databases for Africa, since IRES
students will acquire geophysical and structural data that will have the
potential to transform current geodynamic understanding of continental rifting.
Lastly, since continental rifts are prolific hydrocarbon producers as are active
tectonic sites, the results of the student projects could provide scientific
input into sustainable resource management for natural resources and
environmental hazard mitigation efforts in Malawi.