* 1358127
* IRES: International Research Experiences for Students in Infrastructure Remediation in Informal Settlements in Santo Domingo, Dominican Republic
* O/D,OISE
* 01/15/2015,12/31/2019
* Charles Hale, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 12/31/2019
* USD 249,854.00

This International Research Experiences for Students (IRES) will provide
mentored research opportunities for U.S. graduate students to investigate
community-based infrastructure remediation strategies in marginalized
communities of large developing cities. The project focuses on the lack of
sustainable solid waste and storm management in slum settlements of the
Dominican Republic and includes collaborations between the University of Texas
at Austin and the University of Santo Domingo in Dominican Republic. Several
Dominican organizations, including NGOs, government officials, slum residents,
and academics will also take part in this collaboration. The IRES program will
involve four U.S. graduate students per year in trans-disciplinary mentored
research projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mentored projects include independent
research in infrastructure remediation related to local adaptive practices,
strategies, and community based governance. The program will develop students'
ability to work effectively with international research partners representing
academia, professional organizations, and community groups. The program will
also develop best practices for ethical and empirically rigorous service
learning applicable to multiple STEM disciplines in marginalized areas of large
developing cities. Community-based knowledge documented and disseminated through
the IRES program will have disciplinary impacts in infrastructure remediation,
community-based solid waste and storm water management, and participatory
planning.