* 1359244
* REU Site: Research Experience in Developing Software for Mission Critical Space Systems
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2017
* Ronald Marsh, University of North Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Sushil K Prasad
* 09/30/2017
* USD 372,450.00

The site is supported by the Department of Defense in partnership with the NSF
REU program. Software development for mission and safety critical systems is
critical to the United States economy, national security, and growth. The use of
appropriate design, development and testing techniques is particularly important
when a system must sustain human life or has the capability to injure humans
through mal-operation. This REU experience makes students aware of and begins to
get them used to designing, programming, debugging and testing for reliability.
Even if students do not end up working professionally on or researching mission
critical systems, these same techniques can help prevent software errors which
may cause mal-operation or leave the software susceptible to attack and
compromise.

This REU Site introduces students to the design criteria of mission critical
systems. They are gaining hands-on experience working on a real mission-critical
cyber-physical system and gaining an appreciation of the importance of design
processes. The participating students will visit the nearby Stanley R. Mickelsen
Safeguard Complex, Missile Launch Area (home to the United States but now
deactivated, anti-ballistic missile defense system). The participants will be
involved in the design of an Open-Source/Open-hardware CubeSat class satellite
(Open Orbiter) that has been under development at University of North Dakota
(UND). Open Orbiter (OPEN) is a student led effort that is building up the full
spectrum of systems required to develop, launch, and manage a CubeSat space
mission. In order to test the variety of systems required and provide the
participants with hands-on experience of conducting a real mission, the PIs are
conducting one launch per year of an Open Orbiter prototype on a solar balloon.
This includes the preparation and testing of the prototype, the launch, the
recovery operation, and the post mission debriefing. Participants play key roles
in all of these aspects. As Open Orbiter uses a Raspberry Pi and four Gumstix
computers for the on-board processing, multithreaded programming/parallel
programming is required to manage the satellite. In fact, the Open Orbiter
system requires development in all areas of computer science, control software
(operating system), ground station software and graphics, payload sensor
interfacing and data management, mission and spacecraft planning software (task
scheduling), software testing (validation), providing the participants with a
variety of topics to focus on. At the end of their participation at UND,
participants will travel to the Jet Propulsion Laboratory where they will be
mentored by scientists in the mission and software design groups and conduct a
review of their work at UND and a mock mission. They will also tour the facility
and learn about the importance of software design systems and processes for past
JPL missions. Finally, as an aerospace system, software development will abide
by DO-178B/C (Software Considerations in Airborne Systems and Equipment
Certification).