* 1359406
* REU Site: Applications in Modern Materials (AiMM)
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Carrie Menke, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 07/31/2017
* USD 296,703.00

ID: 1359406 PI: Menke, Carrie ORG: University of California-
Merced&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: REU Site: Applications in Modern Materials
(AiMM)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL PART:&lt;br/&gt;The UC Merced REU Site
(Applications in Modern Materials--AiMM) is a comprehensive, collaborative
research experience for undergraduates mentored by physics, chemistry, and
engineering faculty at UC Merced. The program uses a three-pronged design of
mentoring, networking, and professional development using known best practice to
support women and underrepresented minorities throughout (and beyond) the
program. Participants can choose from a wide array of interdisciplinary research
projects with applications in soft matter, biomaterials, nanomaterials, opto-
electric materials (including solar applications), and thin films. Participants
will be closely mentored by research-active faculty who have strong extramural
funding and experience in the supervision of undergraduate research students.
Activities will connect participants with peers, graduate students, and faculty
within AiMM and to scientific professionals at Lawrence Livermore National Lab
(LLNL) and industry. The program culminates with AiMM students participating in
Annual Summer Research Symposia at both UC Merced and LLNL.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL PART:&lt;br/&gt;Participants will
be selected primarily from four year and community colleges that provide few
opportunities for undergraduate research experiences. Housing and meals will be
provided in on-campus facilities, and each student will receive a stipend to
cover additional expenses. Professional development activities include active
participation in faculty-led group meetings, formal and informal discussions
(e.g. during weekly research seminars), and workshops on research ethics,
graduate school and fellowship applications, writing personal statements, and
oral and poster presentations. These activities, in conjunction with the
opportunity to participate in a cutting-edge materials research project, are
designed to prepare the participants for the next steps in becoming an
independent researcher in the materials field. Contacts will be maintained with
participants after their summer on the UC Merced campus as part of an assessment
plan designed to measure and improve the effectiveness of the program.