* 1359691
* US-China Planning Visit: Understanding earth's Solar Wind-Magnetosphere-Ionosphere system from the Antarctic
* O/D,OISE
* 03/15/2014,02/28/2017
* Calvin Robert Clauer, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 02/28/2017
* USD 19,007.00

NSF funding will support planning visits to promote and develop a new
collaboration with Dr. Yonghua Liu and his research group at the Polar Research
Institute of China, in Shanghai. The collaboration centers on the combination of
data obtained from autonomous space weather stations operated in remote polar
Antarctic locations by the Chinese group and the Virginia Tech Center for Space
Science and Engineering Research. The stations are at synergistic locations in
the Antarctic to enable investigations of: 1) the coupling of energy from the
solar wind to the magnetosphere and ionosphere through the associated
development of electrical current systems in space and in the ionosphere; 2) the
production of density irregularities in the high latitude ionosphere that can
disrupt communication and navigation systems and 3) the energization of charged
particles in space that can damage satellite electronics. The Solar Wind-
Magnetosphere-Ionosphere is a complex natural system that can impact a variety
of human technology. To forecast and mitigate that impact is a major goal of the
U. S. National Space Weather Program. Achieving this goal is hampered, however,
by the lack of sufficient data coverage to validate global models, particularly
in the southern hemisphere. The recent availability of data from autonomous
space weather stations deployed along a latitude chain in the Antarctic by
Virginia Tech enables new investigations of the Sun-Earth system. China, one of
the leading countries actively involved in the Antarctic programs, is operating
stations in the East Antarctic that complement the Virginia Tech stations by
adding a longitudinal chain. Considering the extreme conditions of weather and
logistics in the Antarctic, international collaboration enables more efficient
and more wide-ranging investigations using data from the combined stations. The
Virginia Tech and Chinese stations together monitor the region where the
geomagnetic field lines that interact with the solar wind intersect the dayside
high latitude ionosphere, thus enabling investigation of the processes that
couple energy from the solar wind to the magnetosphere and ionosphere. The
collaborative work will greatly expand scientific investigations that could not
be accomplished by either data set alone.