* 1359826
* Collaborative Research: The Scale of Governance in the Regulation of Land in  Community Land Trusts
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2014,01/31/2019
* Deborah Martin, Clark University
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 01/31/2019
* USD 89,252.00

Addressing housing needs of all citizens and scientifically understanding the
implications and impacts of various approaches to affordable housing provision
provides a major challenge for urban policy. Community Land Trusts (CLTs) offer
one strategy that is increasingly adopted in the housing policy realm. This
project will address the question of how the geographical scale of a Community
Land Trust affects its relationships in regional land and housing governance
including interactions with other non-profit and government agencies, and its
geographical identity. CLTs are private, not-for-profit organizations that own
residential land in trust for a community, and are defined by membership and
geographical boundaries at varying scales, from the sub-neighborhood to the
urban region. CLTs offer long-term renewable leases for the use of their land to
members, who in turn own the homes built on that land. A grassroots approach,
CLTs initially developed in particular urban neighborhoods, but they are
increasingly expanding their territories to cover large geographical areas, such
as an entire city or county. Since CLTs are a potential and growing vehicle for
supporting community-led redevelopment, their successes and failures have public
policy implications. The project will offer insights about how CLTs relate to
various levels of government as well as to their members, in geographically
dispersed land trusts. Consequently, it will enhance understandings of urban
development, community identity, and land regulation. The researchers will
develop local and national advisory committees drawn from policy makers in CLTs
and relevant government and non-profit institutions in order to drawn upon
insights from, and disseminate research findings to, individuals and
organizations working within and with housing-oriented community land trusts.

The project examines the importance of law and public policy in shaping land
governance and the impacts on residents' perceptions of place and community.
Through a combination of archival research, semi-structured interviews and
roving interviews, the researchers will explore how community land trusts are
structured legally, socially, and geographically. They examine the relationships
of CLTs with members and non-members within the CLTs' territories as well as
their relationships with local, regional, and federal governments. A case study
of five CLTs within the Minneapolis - St. Paul metropolitan area allows for
examination of the different ways that geography affects community identity and
land use governance in CLTs, because the five CLTs vary in territorial extent.
This comparison of neighborhood- and regional-scale impacts highlights the
different ways that local and regional state institutions can engage with the
project of CLT development with differential effects.