* 1359329
* REU Site: Trustable Computing Systems Security Research
* CSE,CNS
* 02/15/2014,01/31/2018
* John Chandy, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 01/31/2018
* USD 359,409.00

This funding renews a Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site at the
University of Connecticut focused on computer systems security research. This
site is co-funded by the CyberCorps: Scholarship for Service Program and the
Secure and Trustworthy Cyberspace (SaTC) program. Students will participate in
research projects that are timely and in an area of national priority. Specific
activities include collaborative projects in the Electrical and Computer
Engineering Department and the Computer Science and Engineering Department,
including research in hardware support for computer security, hardware Trojan
detection, and IC authentication, and access control. A series of seminars will
equip students with knowledge specific to the various research projects as well
as general skills required in graduate school. In addition, the undergraduate
students will have the opportunity to participate in the Hardware-Oriented
Security and Trust Symposium. This will broaden students' vision by allowing
them to witness research projects conducted worldwide. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of this project lies with the strong research team and the
focus on computer systems security, an area of national need and of interest to
students. The students will participate in research initiatives that investigate
algorithmic techniques, hardware and software design principles, computer
architecture, and other aspects of trustable computing systems. A major goal of
this project is to introduce such interdisciplinary research work to students in
the early stages of their academic careers to spark their interests. At the same
time, the research has the potential to contribute to the research core of the
computing disciplines.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project is aimed at preparing
undergraduate students for graduate study in a research area of vital national
interest. Computer systems are integrated into every part of our national
infrastructure, including financial systems, communication systems,
transportation, and defense. A primary national need is research and researchers
who can address the security of these systems. The research opportunities that
this proposal provides will help develop the next generation of researchers
investigating these important computer security issues.