* 1359535
* Collaborative Research:   Askaryan Radio Array Ultra-high Energy Neutrino Detector
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2013,11/30/2014
* Amy Connolly, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Vladimir Papitashvili
* 11/30/2014
* USD 25,000.00

At high energies (> 10 PeV), neutrinos can be most efficiently detected in
dense, radio frequency (RF) transparent media via the Askaryan effect. The
abundant cold ice covering the geographic South Pole, with its exceptional RF
clarity, has been host to several pioneering efforts to develop this approach.
Within the last years, a two-phased experiment ? the Askaryan Radio Array (ARA),
designed to ultimately accumulate hundreds of high-energy GZK neutrinos - has
been initiated at the South Pole Station, combining the drilling and logistics
experience of the IceCube project, as well as the in-situ RF experience of the
RICE experiment and the sub-nanosecond-scale data acquisition of the long-
duration balloon project ANITA. The goal of ARA's Phase 1 (2010?2013) was to
make deployment of a few testbed-type stations that used equipment designed and
built under the NSF-funded MRI award. The next phase is to continue observations
with these testbed stations to accumulate knowledge about RF properties of the
upper layers of the ice sheet at South Pole and develop reliable hardware and
software for deployable in-ice stations in the future. Recently-deployed three
testbed stations are currently operational collecting data. Although the
deployment of three testbed stations was generally successful, a number of
problems were found in the full, 37-stations array deployment plans. This award
is to provide bridge funds to keep the deployed testbed stations operational for
another 12 months, while the project team reworks their proposal devising a
staged approach for the full array deployment.