* 1359125
* REU SITE: Research in Consumer Networking Technologies
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2014,01/31/2017
* Wenjun Zeng, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 01/31/2017
* USD 359,993.00

This funding renews a Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Site at the
University of Missouri - Columbia. Undergraduate students will engage in summer
research involving a variety of interesting and challenging technical issues in
consumer networking. Experienced faculty mentors will lead projects in five
major research areas including software defined networking, social media
computing, social health networking for eldercare, body-area sensing and emotion
recognition, and network performance optimization. The students will participate
in the faculty mentors' on-going funded research, investigate technically
challenging issues, and develop viable solutions and insights. They will have
opportunities to present their research results at various venues at the
university, national, and international levels. The site will focus on
recruiting students from non-PhD granting institutions with particular emphasis
on institutions in and around the state of Missouri.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of the project rests with the leadership an experienced
research group with excellent expertise and experience in the research area. The
research activities will lead to a better understanding of the multitude of
efficiency, performance, reliability, scalability, and security issues and
tradeoffs in emerging consumer networking technologies. The approach of
integrating future Internet technologies such as Internet-of-Things and
software-defined networking in the REU Site will foster the rapid deployment of
advanced consumer networking services and applications that are of significance
to the economy and quality of life in areas such as social computing and health
care.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts include providing a unique
opportunity for undergraduate students with limited research opportunities to
experience research in the interdisciplinary areas of consumer networking. With
an already established recruitment network, the project team plans to reach the
targeted students and encourage applications from women engineers and under-
represented minorities as well as students from predominantly undergraduate
institutions. The program should be of great interest to undergraduate students
due to its close interaction between daily life and exciting consumer networking
technologies. The research experiences offer students insight into the
requirements of advanced degrees by closely working with faculty mentors and
graduate students, and may lead to students ultimately pursuing advanced degrees
and fulfilling careers in science and engineering. The professional evaluation
by an external assessment specialist should contribute to educational research
on effective structures for involving undergraduates in research.