* 1359911
* Collaborative Research:  Mixing at Stream and River Confluences
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2014,08/31/2020
* Bruce Rhoads, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Scott Freundschuh
* 08/31/2020
* USD 152,162.00

This research project will use field data for small and large river confluences
in the United States and Europe and a numerical model of river flow to examine
the mechanisms that enhance or inhibit mixing water, solutes, contaminants and
sediment immediately downstream of river confluences. The project will address
the processes through which solutes and suspended solids are mixed in river
systems, a major issue that geomorphologists, hydrologic scientists, and
scholars in related fields have addressed in recent decades. The project will
provide fundamental theory-based insight into the factors that promote or
inhibit mixing at river confluences and the role of different hydrodynamic
mechanisms in mixing. Knowledge gained from the project will benefit society by
identifying mechanisms by which potential contaminants are dispersed when moving
through river networks. This knowledge will also be useful for management of
river ecosystems by showing how mixing influences the biogeochemical conditions
on which ecosystems within confluences and downstream of these locations depend.
The investigators will collaborate with the National Great Rivers Research and
Education Center, Lewis and Clark Community College, and the National
Mississippi River Museum to enhance pre-collegiate and public education, involve
undergraduate students, and disseminate project findings. Educational materials
sharing new knowledge about river mixing and the scientific methods used to
generate those insights will be developed and included in K-12 student-learning
and teacher-training activities. The project will involve interdisciplinary
education and training of two graduate students, and work with an international
collaborator in Germany will enhance infrastructure for research and education.

Past research on this topic has shown that some confluent flows mix almost
completely within the immediate vicinity of the confluence, whereas others
remain generally unmixed hundreds of channel widths downstream of a confluence.
The factors governing whether a confluence is characterized by large or small
amounts of mixing have yet to be determined. This project will identify the main
mechanisms that control flow structure; generation of large-scale turbulence;
and mixing of water and suspended sediment within confluences. The project will
determine how these mechanisms change as the shape, form, incoming flow
characteristics, and size of confluences vary. The investigators will conduct
detailed field investigations of mixing at several small stream confluences with
different geometrical configurations of the incoming tributaries. They also will
develop and validate numerical models of flow and mixing. The detailed field
investigations will generate data for rigorously evaluating and refining the
predictive capabilities of the numerical model of confluence mixing over a range
of flow conditions and confluence geometries. Predictions from simulations will
be compared to available data for other confluences to ascertain the
capabilities of the model to accommodate scale effects and differences in
confluence form and size. The refined and calibrated model will be used to
perform numerical experiments to evaluate mixing at confluences over a broad
range of environmental conditions.