* 1359904
* Collaborative Research: Pattern Emergence and Resilience of Rill Networks and Their Relation to Soil Loss, Landscape Degradation, and Erosion Prediction Technology
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2016
* Sean Bennett, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 12/31/2016
* USD 168,926.00

Soil erosion remains the principal cause of soil degradation worldwide, and soil
loss continues to be a critical concern for the sustainable management of
agricultural resources. Furthermore, off-site sedimentation from upland sources
severely affects water quality and ecology. Areas of intense, localized erosion,
such as rills and gullies, often are the primary cause of soil loss and are the
dominant source of sediment removed from these landscapes. This collaborative
research project will examine the fundamental mechanics of soil erosion and
landscape degradation by rill development. The investigators also will analyze
the fundamental topographic organization and evolution of these systems under
laboratory and natural conditions. The project will enhance basic understanding
of the fundamental mechanics of soil erosion and landscape degradation by rill
development as well as the fundamental topographic organization. The project
will increase the recognition and understanding of geopatterns and the
initiation, development, and evolution of surface water drainage networks at
various time and space scales. The project will improve capabilities for
predicting soil loss before any erosion takes place, which will help improve
watershed and agricultural-management tools, thereby reducing the further
degradation of soil resources in the U.S. and elsewhere. The project also will
provide special education and training opportunities for graduate and
undergraduate students.

The project will combine laboratory, analytic, and field investigation to focus
on the emergence, evolution, and resiliency of rill networks on soil-mantled
landscapes at the field-plot scale. The investigators hypothesize that rill
networks display rapid pattern-emergent characteristics and long-term resiliency
on hillslopes and that the location, organization, and dimensions of these rills
can be predicted before any erosion takes place. Full-scale soil erosion
experiments will be conducted during which terrain analysis will be combined
with state-of-the-art physical models and analytical formulations for soil
erosion processes. The theoretical framework and terrain analysis tools
developed in the experimental landscape then will be applied to a field
experiment, where erosion plots will be created to replicate the in-house
experiments and monitored over time.