* 1359948
* Collaborative Research: Cross-Scale Interactions Among Climate, Land-Use, and River-Water Quality
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2014,01/31/2019
* Christopher Weaver, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 01/31/2019
* USD 155,562.00

Water quality is one of the world's most valued natural resources. Given recent
and predicted changes in both climate (more frequent and intense droughts in
some regions) and land use (agricultural intensification associated with
increasing global demand for meat, dairy, and forestry products), it is
important to understand how simultaneous changes in climate and land use affect
water quality. For example, does agricultural intensification during a drought
increase sediment runoff into rivers, and at what scales do these effects take
place? This project will use remote sensing and computer visualization tools to
analyze how interactions between shifting climate and land use affect river
water quality across multiple interacting scales: from minutes to decades, and
from small catchments to regional drainage basins. The proposed research will
demonstrate how these cross-scale interactions affect a natural resource with
multidimensional societal relevance: water treatment, recreation, safety,
tourism, and ecosystem health. Findings from this research will inform emerging
US data monitoring networks as to at which spatial and temporal scales water
sampling should be conducted to capture interactions from climate and land use.
Project results and data will be communicated to the public through various
means, including open-access journals, a public website, and college/high school
workshops. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A fundamental question that this project will
investigate is whether simultaneous shifts in climate and land use result in
positive feedbacks and cascading events that lead to dramatic and widespread
changes in river water quality. Previous studies have not been able to assess
the effects of climate-land use interactions on river water quality over
multiple spatial and temporal scales simultaneously due to (1) not having a
toolkit that can analyze multiple dimensions and spatial-temporal scales
simultaneously; (2) lack of resources (i.e., long-term and consistent water
quality datasets with fine resolution); and (3) lack of technology (i.e.,
ability to capture land cover changes with fine spatial and temporal
resolution). This project overcomes these limitations by using (1) a
sophisticated set of visualization tools to analyze in combination; (2) one of
the world's most comprehensive and extensive water quality datasets (25 years
with corresponding climate data); and (3) a fused 8-day temporal resolution and
30-meter spatial resolution land cover dataset that has been developed for the
entire country of New Zealand. Thus, this research will be the first time that
the interactive effects of climate and land use changes on a suite of water
quality variables will be assessed over multiple spatial-temporal scales
simultaneously. Further, the application of sophisticated visual analysis tools
to investigate landscape dynamics across multiple scales simultaneously could be
the impetus for a new paradigm in Geography and Spatial Sciences.