* 1359889
* Third University of Florida SIAM Gators Conference, March 27-29, 2014
* MPS,DMS
* 03/15/2014,02/29/2016
* William Hager, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 02/29/2016
* USD 15,300.00

Third University of Florida SIAM Gators Conference, March 27-29,
2014&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A three day student conference will be hosted by the
student chapter of the Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics (SIAM) in
the Mathematics Department of the University of Florida. The conference will be
organized by students with faculty acting as advisors. There will be 6 keynote
talks given by invited professors, while 21 talks will be given by students. The
conference will have 3 focus areas: numerical optimization and applications,
mathematical modeling and algorithms in imaging, and mathematical biology and
modeling. The conference will showcase the latest computational techniques in
the fields of optimization and imaging, as well as state-of-the art models in
biomathematics. Students will have the opportunity to meet experts in their own
and related fields, and will be able to network with other students in the focus
areas of the conference. The student organizers of the conference will develop
organizational skills, and skills in interacting and communicating with other
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference will help students from the
three interrelated fields of numerical optimization, imaging sciences, and
mathematical biology achieve a broader view of their research and their field as
they learn from and interact with researchers who work in application fields
such as medical imaging technology and disease modeling and treatment. The
conference will plant the seeds for future research projects. By networking with
other students, a foundation for future collaborations will be established. The
abstracts of the presented papers will be publicly available on the conference
web site.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Conference web site:
siam.math.ufl.edu/conference/