* 1359596
* Development of an Instrument to Allow Rotary-Shear Friction Experiments at High-Pressure and Seismic Slip Rates
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2022
* Terry Tullis, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 08/31/2022
* USD 577,505.00

This project will develop a new instrument that will be able to measure the
frictional properties of rock that is simultaneously subjected to high confining
pressure and slipping at rates typical of faults during earthquakes. No machine
like this currently exists anywhere in the world. As with any development of new
instrumentation and procedures, there is considerable benefit to a wide range of
interested parties if the project is a success. The individuals participating in
the project, including an early career scientist, will benefit from the
professional growth represented by overcoming the challenges the project
presents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The increase in understanding of the physics of
the earthquake source made possible by the new experimental capability will
benefit many earthquake scientists and lead to a better understanding of the
generation of seismic waves, including those producing strong damaging ground
motions. Experimental rock deformation has already made important contributions
to our understanding of earthquake physics, but critical questions remain that
can only be addressed by laboratory experiments. Although there are other ways
in which such experiments are relevant to understanding earthquakes, this
project focuses on friction, since friction plays such an important role in
understanding the occurrence of earthquakes and what takes place at the
earthquake source. Gaining this understanding is not only of intrinsic
scientific interest, much of the greatest uncertainty in understanding when and
why earthquakes occur and the contributions of the earthquake source to damaging
strong ground motions is due to our limited understanding of friction on faults.