* 1359344
* REU Site: Materials for Energy &amp; Sustainability
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2014,02/28/2017
* Rick Ubic, Boise State University
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 02/28/2017
* USD 359,876.00

ID: 1359344 PI: Ubic, Rick ORG: Boise State
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: REU Site: Materials for Energy &amp;
Sustainability&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this 9.5-week REU/RET program is to provide undergraduates and
teachers an intensive research-team experience with state-of-the-art facilities
while exploring activities within the theme "materials for energy and
sustainability." The projects used to deliver this experience are highly
interdisciplinary, allowing students to be exposed to the forefront of science
and engineering. The activities can be broadly categorized as: energy generation
(e.g., photovoltaics, solid-oxide fuel cells, nuclear energy, magnetic shape-
memory alloys), energy storage (e.g., sodium-ion batteries), energy conservation
(e.g., radiation sensors, energy piles, magnetic semiconductors,
nanoelectronics), or sustainability (e.g., atmospheric impacts on watershed).
Participants have their own individualized projects but are also integrated
within an interdisciplinary summer research community, training them to both
communicate effectively across disciplines and more clearly understand the
concepts central to their own work. Students also participate in a number of
supplemental workshops on library resources, intellectual property, ethics,
collaboration, and graduate school; and they will ultimately present their
results at the annual summer research conference. A comprehensive assessment
program has been developed to gauge the learning and growth of participants as
well as their confidence, satisfaction with the REU experience, and the factors
which influence their perceptions of the lab environment and research
generally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION&lt;br/&gt;Materials
science is the enabling technology behind everything from modern electronics to
fashion, safe and recyclable packaging, faster and fuel-efficient vehicles,
novel energy generation and storage, aerospace propulsion systems, affordable
housing, medical engineering, sensors, nanotechnology, and micromachines. One of
the most exciting directions in science and policy-making is sustainability,
with its emphasis on energy conservation, storage, and renewable production. The
objective of this Research Experience for Undergraduates program at Boise State
University is to provide an intensive research-team experience with state-of-
the-art facilities while exploring activities within the theme "materials for
energy and sustainability." The program was created to expose a diverse group of
individuals, including Native Americans, African Americans, Hispanic students,
and women to the research environment and to help them develop as professionals.
Inclusion of mentors from various disciplines enables students to develop skills
needed to excel in both academic and industrial research environments, where
interdisciplinary teams are standard. Students ultimately present their results
at the annual summer research conference. The Site incorporates a Research
Experience for Teachers component as well, aiding the integration of research
with education and multiplying the benefit to both students and teachers.