* 1359342
* REU Site: Interdisciplinary Working Group for Chemical Analysis in Low-Resource Settings
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Marya Lieberman, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 08/31/2018
* USD 270,000.00

This award from the Division of Chemistry (CHE) at the National Science
Foundation supports a Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Site led by
Professors Marya Lieberman and Toni L. Barstis at the University of Notre Dame.
This REU site and its companion faculty research program will train students and
faculty from primarily undergraduate institutions (PUIs) to design, develop, and
test novel analytical methods and instruments for use in low resource settings.
It will give early career students a chance to use their science or engineering
knowledge and skills to help people in the poorest nations of the world. The
projects will be aimed at different goals such as to identify low quality
pharmaceuticals, diagnose human and animal diseases, detect environmental
contamination or food adulteration, and discover and manage bacterial drug
resistance. The experience will empower the participants to use their science
knowledge and skills to solve real problems, and it will enlarge their view of
themselves as global citizens and agents of change.

The objective of this REU site is to bring chemical analysis out of the lab and
into the world, particularly in resource-limited locations. Students will study
diagnostic tools and technology, portable instruments, sample-
collection/analysis methods, or new ideas for remote imaging or monitoring, and
they will also learn about the differences between technological infrastructure
in developed and developing countries. The intellectual focus of the site is
developing and testing better (cheaper, faster, more practical) ways to perform
chemical analyses that are relevant to problems in developing countries.
Students will study diagnostic tools & technology, portable instruments and
sample-collection/analysis methods. The target analytes may be biological
(disease markers, pathogens) or chemical (falsified drugs, environmental
contaminants, organophosphates in the cooking oil). To develop analytical
methodology and instruments that work reliably outside a controlled lab setting
is a both a challenge and an opportunity for students to apply their budding
skills in building instruments, designing experiments and rigorously analyzing
data.