* 1359585
* The Cultural Authority of Science in the Public Sphere: Creating Data Streams for Further Advances
* SBE,SES
* 08/19/2013,01/31/2015
* Joseph Morrissey, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 01/31/2015
* USD 91,696.00

Introduction&lt;br/&gt;Survey research on public attitudes toward and
understanding of science has been plagued by a lack of theoretical focus. The
objective of this application is to develop new measures that previous surveys
on this topic have yet to address. The rationale for this project is that it
will create the foundation for a vibrant research community that can examine how
social groups vary in their trust and their distrust of organized
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research
will accomplish this objective by pursuing two aims. The first aim is to bring
together scholars from multiple backgrounds to discuss the core issues related
to the cultural authority of science, provide new perspectives on existing data,
and suggest measures for future surveys. This aim will be completed by
organizing an expert panel that will bring together scholars who possess
specialized knowledge related to the overlap of social theory and public
opinion, social studies of science, survey research on public understanding of
science, current data archives, and the development of public opinion
questionnaires. The second aim is to develop new measures and collect new data
to examine the social and cultural factors that shape the cultural authority of
science in the public sphere. Building on the knowledge gained from the expert
panel described above, the next step will be to collect new survey data using a
nationally representative sample of U.S. adults. The survey will consist of new
items that previous national surveys have overlooked and will allow us to
address new issues and develop measures for future NSF surveys.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Potential Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The outcomes of this
project will have wide-ranging benefits. First, the outcome of the expert panel
will be a summary report that will be publically available. Second, the project
involves the development of a new questionnaire and dataset that will be shared
with other researchers. These outcomes will directly benefit the NSF's survey on
public understanding of science and the broader social science research
community. In addition, research will be presented at professional meetings and
disseminated to local and national news media. Furthermore, understanding the
mechanisms that the divide the public sphere will help the NSF and other
scientific organizations engage the public and improve public participation in
science, both among adults and children.