* 1359644
* Collaborative Research: The Emergence Of Social Inequality
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Christina Torres-Rouff, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2018
* USD 121,299.00

How and why social inequality emerges and becomes institutionalized within human
societies represent some of the most fundamental issues facing the social
sciences. The ramifications of these choices and changes reverberate through
modern human societies and have tangible impacts on the lives of modern people.
Archaeology is uniquely well suited to examine these issues and to tease out the
process(es) by which egalitarian human groups made their first steps towards
distributing power and resource access unequally among the members of a given
society. It is in this broad vein that the present work will examine the Andean
Middle Horizon (AD 500-1000) societies of the San Pedro de Atacama oases
(northern Chile), a time and a place in which institutionalized social
inequality was just beginning to emerge from a long-standing foundation of
egalitarianism. To reconstruct the complex aspects of social inequality, the
researchers will focus on detailed analyses of a vast sample of human burials
and skeletal remains, revealing both how emerging inequality affected the lives
of different individuals in these societies and proposing why these drastic
social changes were being made. In the process, undergraduate and graduate
students from the investigators' institutions, and in particular Latin American
and Hispanic students, will be encouraged to participate and thereby gain
invaluable training in archaeological and bio-anthropological research
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While archaeologists have examined the processes
driving the emergence of social inequality, most studies have viewed the
phenomenon of its emergence on the level of whole societies rather than
evaluating its effects on the lived experience of individuals and communities.
It is in this context that the present work will provide invaluable data: this
project will focus on the skeletal remains of various individuals and the manner
of their burial for evidence of how and why inequality manifested in each of
their lives. To do so, this project will explore the effects of the emergence of
differences in social status as it is crystallized in individual experience
through a combined research methodology that includes: 1) the study of skeletal
remains for evidence of diet, bodily stress, disease, activity patterns, and
violence; 2) the evidence of social inequality as expressed by how, and with
what each individual was buried; 3) an expansive program of carbon dating that
will allow for detailed reconstruction of cemetery use; and 4) a focused
analysis of diet through biochemical analysis (stable isotopes). This
methodology in combination with the unique archaeological record of the Atacama
oases will permit the researchers to address chicken-and-egg debates about
whether specific physical manifestations of unequal treatment (dietary
difference, greater rates of bodily injury) preceded or postdated other
manifestations of burgeoning inequality (e.g. the appearance of exotic goods,
the building of elite houses, etc.). Such findings will contribute to a much
broader discussion about the profoundly unequal distribution of wealth in
contemporary societies and its impact on individual lives, by adding historical
depth to our understanding of these processes.