* 1359814
* CAREER: Efficient Atomic Decompositions of Massive Data Sets
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2013,05/31/2018
* Benjamin Recht, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 05/31/2018
* USD 356,249.00

Scientists and Engineers often struggle to deduce the state or structure of a
system from partial, noisy measurements. The corresponding problems are ill-
posed because there are fewer measurements available than the number of
parameters they would like to estimate. In practice, however, many interesting
signals or models contain considerably fewer degrees than the apparent number of
parameters: a small number of genes may constitute the signature of a disease,
very few parameters may specify the correlation structure of a time series, or a
sparse collection of geometric constraints may determine a molecular
configuration. Discovering, leveraging, or recognizing such low-dimensional
structure plays an important role in posing inverse problems well. This project
pursues a unified approach to transform notions of simplicity and latent low-
dimensionality into convex penalty functions. The investigators focus on a
theoretically sound suite of data analysis algorithms designed to decompose
complex signals into sums of a small number of simple atoms. The work first
catalogs the objects and structures that can be recovered from a small number of
measurements using atomic decomposition algorithms, in order to show that many
structures of significant scientific and technological interest need only be
probed a few times to extract complete and accurate knowledge. Second, the
project explores a range of practically useful implementations of atomic
decomposition algorithms for data recovery, enabling efficient solutions of
large-scale problems with guaranteed success. Finally, practical implementation
in a diverse set of applications, including web-scale data analysis, high-
throughput biology, and experimental physics, continually motivate and refine
this mathematical research program.