* 1359476
* REU Site: Bringing Us Together, Improving Communications and Lives
* ENG,EEC
* 03/01/2014,02/28/2018
* Thomas Montoya, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Amelia Greer
* 02/28/2018
* USD 274,400.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

The National Science Foundation Research Experience for Undergraduates Site
"Bringing Us Together, Improving Communications and Lives" at the South Dakota
School of Mines and Technology (SDSM&T) is an integrated 10-week summer
undergraduate research program in electrical and computer engineering (ECE). The
focus of the research projects will reflect the strengths of the ECE department
at SDSM&T, namely applied electromagnetics, autonomous/embedded systems,
wireless communications and power. The site is designed to expose a diverse
group of undergraduate students, particularly veterans and women as well as
others underrepresented in ECE, to a research environment. The recruitment goal
is for veterans and women to comprise at least half of the participants with the
intent of expanding the national engineering and science talent pool. In light
of evidence that students are motivated to learn when a broader context for the
research is established, the students will engage in professional development,
research, and historical development seminars on an ongoing basis as well as in
collegial activities to foster an appreciation for the historical development
and current applications of ECE and the role they play in improving
communications and lives. The weekly professional development activities will
feature a strong emphasis on technical communications led by the Communications
Coordinator (an English professor) that develop the skills needed to pursue
higher level work. Also, a comprehensive assessment program will be implemented
by the Assessment Coordinator to quantitatively assess student gains in skills
related to research, the impact of the program on students from differing
backgrounds, and their long-term development as professionals. Further, the
students will engage in outreach activities to secondary students, particularly
those of underrepresented groups, as well as to active duty service members and
veterans.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY

The National Science Foundation Research Experience for Undergraduates Site
"Bringing Us Together, Improving Communications and Lives" at the South Dakota
School of Mines & Technology (SDSM&T) is designed to expose a diverse group of
undergraduate students, particularly women and veterans as well as others
underrepresented in electrical and computer engineering (ECE), to a research
environment and help them develop as professionals with the intent of expanding
the national engineering and science talent pool. The research projects deal
with topics related to improving communications and the lives of people which
are of vital importance in our global society as well as in the economic and
defense interests of the nation. These projects led to the unifying theme of the
site "Bringing Us Together, Improving Communications and Lives." In addition to
hands-on research, the students will engage in professional development,
research, and historical development seminars. The purpose of the seminars is to
develop the skills needed to pursue higher level work, as well as to foster an
appreciation for the historical development and current applications of ECE and
the role they play in improving communications and lives. Further, the students
will engage in outreach activities to secondary students, particularly those of
underrepresented groups, as well as to active duty service members and veterans.

"This award is co-funded by the Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (EHR/EPSCoR)."