* 1359064
* REU SITE: INTERDISCIPLINARY RESEARCH ON SUSTAINABLE INFRASTRUCTURE MATERIALS
* ENG,EEC
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2017
* Aaron Sakulich, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 03/31/2017
* USD 299,142.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;Over $100 billion is spent on infrastructure
maintenance in America each year. Despite this spending, groups such as the
American Society of Civil Engineers rate US infrastructure to be on the D+
level, and the Department of Homeland Security considers "ageing infrastructure"
to pose as much of a threat to the nation as terrorism or pandemic. New
materials and new technologies, with improved durability and longer service
lives, are needed to address this growing infrastructure crisis. The REU site
hosted at Worcester Polytechnic Institute and supported by the National Science
Foundation's Division of Engineering Education and Centers will focus on
developing such materials and technologies. The performance of a variety of
conventional and experimental infrastructure materials exposed to deterioration
mechanisms will be investigated. Materials of interest include alternative
cements, novel asphalt systems, and bio-inspired materials for structural
applications; deterioration mechanisms include electrochemical corrosion, frost
damage, and fatigue due to mechanical loading. The objective of this research is
to identify the fundamental material properties that lead to improved durability
in infrastructure materials, ensuring that current and future infrastructure
needs can be sustainably supported. An interdisciplinary approach, blending
materials science and civil engineering methodologies, will ensure that the
fundamental scientific and technical issues are investigated in a holistic,
multiscalar manner. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;The
nation's infrastructure, including buildings, transportation systems, energy
facilities, and other public services, is in a critical state of disrepair.
Infrastructure materials with improved durability and longer service lives would
lead directly to less frequent maintenance carried out at lower cost; improved
safety for the average user and for maintenance personnel; and a reduction in
the environmental impact of the built environment through reduced consumption of
energy and material resources. The goal of this research is to identify the
fundamental scientific principles on which such materials can be developed,
ensuring that current and future infrastructure needs can be sustainably met.
The results of this research will be applicable in the US as well as globally. A
recruitment plan designed specifically for this REU site, based on interpersonal
relationships with local institutions, will ensure the participation of a high
percentage of students from under-represented groups that would otherwise have
limited opportunities for undergraduate research. Programmatic assessment by an
experienced third-party evaluator will lead to the continuous improvement of the
research program, as well as wide-spread dissemination of the results. Finally,
two educators participating in the site will be supported in the development of
lesson plans, so that the research conducted can be used to inspire and
encourage high school students for years to come.