* 1359025
* High Reynolds Number Boundary Layer Turbulence: Integrating Descriptions of Statistical Structure, Scaling and Dynamical Evolution at Univ of New Hampshire, Nov 20-22, 2013.
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2013,10/31/2014
* Joseph Klewicki, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Dimitrios Papavassiliou
* 10/31/2014
* USD 9,750.00

1359025&lt;br/&gt;Klewicki&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The past decade has seen
transformational advances in turbulence experimentation and simulation, and
these have allowed the unprecedented capability to study the detailed temporal
and spatial structure of turbulent boundary layers. Furthermore, recently
developed facilities and sensors around the globe are now allowing access to
turbulence structure at significantly higher Reynolds numbers than previously
studied. As a result, our understanding of boundary layer dynamics is now
progressing at an ever increasing pace. It is timely to review, discuss and
advance beyond these developments. The proposal seeks funds to partially cover
expenses related to the organization of a workshop on "High Reynolds Number
Boundary Layer Turbulence: Integrating Descriptions of Statistical Structure,
Scaling and Dynamical Evolution", to be held at the campus of the University of
New Hampshire, from November 20-22, 2013. The workshop will be targeted
specifically to high Reynolds number turbulence.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;Boundary layer dynamics are
pervasive in numerous scientific processes and technologically important
applications. For these reasons, the capacity to better predict boundary layer
behavior, and especially at high Reynolds numbers, persists as a high value
objective. The specific aims of this workshop are to (i) provide an interactive
setting where the latest findings of this rapidly advancing field can be
presented and discussed at length, and (ii) bring together the established and
emerging protagonists of boundary layer research (experts in experiments,
simulation and analysis) with a cadre of applied mathematicians who are leaders
in advancing the systematic development of reduced order models of complex fluid
flows. An overarching aim is to more deeply explore how our new and emerging
understandings of boundary layer dynamics can be used to benefit the development
of more accurate, computationally efficient and more well-founded models of the
high Reynolds number boundary layer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact&lt;br/&gt;Better understanding of turbulent boundary layers at very high
Reynolds numbers will lead to improved understanding of a number of engineering
and physics problems, such as aerospace applications, meteorology and weather
prediction, pollutant dispersion in the atmosphere and in rivers and oceans,
energy production with wind farms, etc. This understanding may also allow the
design of fluid transportation systems or vessels that require less energy to
operate. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed workshop will bring together
researchers who work on a number of allied problems, but, in many cases, are not
yet natural collaborators. The expertise of the attendees is chosen to cover the
disciplinary foci that are deemed to span the elements required to develop and
refine the systematic construction of the accurate reduced order models for the
high Reynolds number turbulent boundary layer; a timely goal that now seems
within reach. Given this, the proposed workshop will promote two primary broader
impacts. The first is directed toward the formation of a research community
whose members have an understanding of the full scope of elements that must
rationally be understood if the envisioned modeling paradigm(s) are to be
realized. The second is to initiate collaborations amongst the participants, and
thus substantively promote the specific areas of inquiry required to advance
reduced order model development and implementation. While there will be no
formal proceedings of the workshop, the individual presentations will be
collected in electronic form, and will subsequently be made available on a
public website.