* 1359306
* REU Site: An Interdisciplinary Exploration of the Convergence of Science and Engineering: Micro to Nanoscale Materials, Processing, and Devices
* ENG,EEC
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2017
* Ken Vickers, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 03/31/2017
* USD 359,866.00

Technical Summary: Stereotypical science faculty drive toward the discovery of
new physical phenomena, while stereotypical engineering faculty drive toward
stabilization and control of new phenomena in order to create value for society.
But as the materials and structures under investigation have shrunk from the
microscale to the nanoscale (and beyond), neither of these stand-alone
approaches are sufficient to create the full understanding and implementation of
new phenomena. At the micro to nanoscale new and innovative potential uses of
materials and structures evolve, driven by cross-fertilization of ideas between
traditional engineering disciplines. Successful engineering research in this
size regime requires close coordination with leading edge underlying sciences if
the discoveries are to exit the laboratory to become products benefiting
society. This REU site will provide students with an opportunity to work for ten
weeks on cutting edge micro to nanoscale engineering and leave having created
knowledge that could only have been imagined a decade ago. This REU site will be
structured in an industry-like natural work-group environment that will give
skills and practice in effective and efficient execution of this research-based
educational experience. Full participation in an ethics class with Ã¬EP grad
students will lead participants to question their prior assumptions and adopt
the mantle of "citizen technologists", while also demonstrating that rapid
positive changes are best enabled through mutual support and
cooperation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical Sumamry: This three year REU
site will provide students with research opportunities in labs that bridge the
gap between science and engineering. Students will spend ten weeks working in a
research lab with professors, postdoctoral researchers, graduate students,
and/or other undergraduate students. This research experience will provide
participants the opportunity to personally experience the thrill of advanced
discovery. In addition to a vigorous and rewarding research experience, student
discussions in weekly ethics classes and research meetings will examine issues
of gender, religion, nationality, physical ability, age, race, and economic
class. They will be taught to learn from different points of view, a skill
needed to be a creative, competent, and effective engineer. The outcome will be
the future leaders of our technical community who have converted new fundamental
science into engineering reality, worked in research teams, developed
communication skills, learned to appreciate people for their abilities, and
gained enthusiasm toward graduate studies at the micro to nanoscale.