* 1359614
* Collaborative Research: Low-level Jets in the Nocturnal Stable Boundary Layer: Structure, Evolution, and Interactions with Mesoscale Atmospheric Disturbances
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2017
* Wayne Feltz, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Edward L. Bensman
* 07/31/2017
* USD 391,092.00

Observations from mobile and fixed sites of the Plains Elevated Convection at
Night (PECAN) project will be used in conjunction with analytical and numerical
modeling approaches to investigate the principal physical mechanisms affecting
the formation, evolution, and structure of Nocturnal Low Level Jets (NLLJs) in
relation to night-time convection. Data from the PECAN Integrated Sounding
Arrays (PISA), each measuring kinematic and thermodynamic profiles with a suite
of instruments (including radiosondes, lidars, radiometers, and radars) will be
complemented by turbulence measurements conducted using coordinated scanning
strategies with two mobile platforms. These integrated datasets will provide a
novel, holistic picture of the spatial and temporal evolution of the NLLJ as it
interacts with the developing nocturnal stable boundary layer (SBL) and
mesoscale disturbances. The effects of terrain slope, thermal SBL structure,
environmental stratification, and synoptic-scale forcing on the evolution of
NLLJs over gently sloping terrain characteristic of the Great Plains will be
investigated in detail, as well as the role of interactions between NLLJs and
mesoscale atmospheric disturbances (gust fronts, gravity waves, bores, solitons)
in the initiation and development of night-time
convection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit :&lt;br/&gt;The nocturnal
low-level jet (NLLJ) is an atmospheric boundary-layer phenomenon that is
commonly observed over the Great Plains of the United States and in many other
locations worldwide. The NLLJ typically begins to develop around sunset under
dry cloud-free conditions conducive to strong radiative cooling at the surface.
It reaches peak intensity late in the night, and then decays with the onset of
daytime convective mixing. Despite many theoretical, numerical, and
observational analyses conducted to date, which make a strong case for the NLLJ
arising from a force imbalance induced by the sudden release of the frictional
constraint near sunset, many aspects of NLLJs structure and evolution are still
not well understood. A claim perpetuated in the literature regarding a close
association between the height of the NLLJ and the top of the SBL does not hold
up to scrutiny: the depth of the SBL generally increases throughout the night
while many observations indicate that wind maxima often descend, remain steady,
or rise during the night. It is also not clear how the terrain slope angle
influences the relationship between the SBL and NLLJ structures. A number of
recent studies suggest that the nature of turbulence within the developing SBL
as it interacts with an NLLJ should be further investigated. Open questions also
remain concerning the impacts of wind-profile curvature associated with NLLJs on
bore propagation, interactions of NLLJs with mesoscale disturbances, and the
mechanisms by which NLLJ/bore interactions may lead to convective initiation.
Our study aims at providing new knowledge about the interactions between the
NLLJ, developing nocturnal SBL, propagating mesoscale disturbances, and
convective initiation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts :&lt;br/&gt;NLLJs
exert significant and wide-ranging impacts on regional weather and climate by
providing dynamic and thermodynamic support for the development of deep
convective storms and heavy precipitation events over the Great Plains. They are
efficient conveyors of moisture and lower-tropospheric air pollutants, such as
ozone and fine particulates, as well as agricultural pests including fungi,
spores, and insects. NLLJs also have major impact on the wind-energy industry
since the enhanced winds provide a dependable source of energy, but the
associated wind shear and turbulence can damage wind-turbine rotors. The
downward transport of NLLJ momentum in the morning by convective turbulent
mixing may produce strong and gusty surface winds that can intensify wildfires
and generate dust storms. The integrated analysis of high-resolution
observations and numerical model output in the proposed project will allow
improving of SBL parameterizations currently employed in atmospheric models and
lead to better predictions of the NLLJ and its role in the initiation of
nocturnal convection. The use of state-of-the-art observational systems and
advanced numerical simulations techniques will provide a superb opportunity for
student training. Both graduate and undergraduate students will play important
roles during field operations, in model studies, in data processing, and in
scientific analyses.