* 1359172
* REU Site: Cell and Molecular Visualization at Brandeis University
* BIO,DBI
* 04/15/2014,03/31/2017
* Susan Lovett, Brandeis University
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 03/31/2017
* USD 337,123.00

This REU award to Brandeis University, located in Waltham, MA will support the
training of 10 undergraduate students for 10 weeks in the summers of 2014-2016.
The research theme of modern cell and molecular visualization techniques
reflects the common interest among 50 faculty in the Life Sciences at Brandeis.
These mentors will introduce undergraduate students to a broad range of topics
concerning biological structure and function. Training will take place in a
supportive and interactive environment with state-of-the-art facilities, and the
participating faculty have a strong record of mentorship of undergraduates for
research. In addition, students will participate in weekly lunch seminars, which
will include faculty research presentations, professional development
activities, and career panels. Students will have an opportunity to interact
with scientists with diverse interests and at different stages in their careers.
In addition, there will be group discussions of ethical issues and the
mentorship relationship in science. Students will develop a written synopsis of
their summer work, with feedback and editing and will participate in a capstone
symposium including poster presentations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students will be
recruited from a nation-wide pool through the web, as well as personal outreach
at undergraduate research conferences and visits to institutions with limited
opportunities for research. Participants will be selected based on academic
record, recommendations and potential for research in biology. The value of the
experience for students and mentors will be measured by various assessment
instruments, including the BIO REU common assessment tool.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The impact of the experience will be monitored by tracking
students for continued interest in science, further educational choices and
career paths. More information can be obtained by visiting
http://www.bio.brandeis.edu/undergrad/summerresearch or by contacting Director,
Dr. Susan Lovett at lovett@brandeis.edu or the Co-Director, Dr. Joan Press at
press@brandeis.edu.