* 1359499
* REU Site: Summer Undergraduate Program in Engineering Research at Berkeley-Information Technology for Sustainability (SUPERB-ITS)
* CSE,CNS
* 02/15/2014,01/31/2017
* David Culler, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 01/31/2017
* USD 314,968.00

This award renews a Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) site at the
University of California, Berkeley. The intellectual focus of the proposed
research is information technology for sustainability through the efficient
extraction, distribution and use of energy. The site will bring together a
cohort of 8 undergraduate students per year who, together with faculty mentors,
will participate in a range of projects based on the energy and sustainability
theme. The site focuses on recruiting a sufficiently diverse pool of students,
including women and underrepresented minorities.

The main intellectual merit of the proposal is the innovative projects designed
to optimize energy consumption and thereby promote sustainability. Example
projects are (a) optimal control of building systems; (b) energy efficient air
traffic control; (c) energy efficient, power proportional data centers; and (d)
energy management systems for smart building infrastructures. A separate strand
of work will consider how to retain performance speedups in the presence of low
energy devices since often performance and energy consumption are inversely
related. Students will be mentored by both faculty and graduate students and
will be exposed to all aspects of the research process.

The project's broader impacts are technological contributions to the significant
national challenge of developing an optimized energy infrastructure for the 21st
century. The projects are designed to find ways of reducing wasteful expenditure
of energy and to manage energy systems in an efficient way. Thus the project can
have a positive impact on the environment, which will lead to an improved
quality of life. Moreover, the project trains a diverse pool of undergraduate
students including women and underrepresented minorities, students of low
socioeconomic status, as well as veterans of the US Armed Services, in acquiring
basic research and problem solving skills. Because the proposed activities
address critical national problems, students will be inspired to contribute to
solutions to these problems by deepening their understanding which, in turn,
will lead to their pursuing advanced degrees in science and engineering