* 1359703
* Improving the Understanding and Prediction of Nocturnal Convection through Advance Data Assimilation and Ensemble Simulations for Plains Elevated Convection At Night (PECAN)
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2021
* David Parsons, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 03/31/2021
* USD 602,144.00

Researchers have long established that summer thunderstorms and convective
precipitation are most frequent not in the afternoon, but after sunset over a
large swath of the Great Plains of North America. Nocturnal rainfall is critical
to the hydrology and agriculture of this region, and nocturnal mesoscale
organized convection is often accompanied by severe weather. However, a
conceptual framework describing how nocturnal convection initiates and evolves
at night is still lacking, and the prediction of nocturnal convection still
remains a scientific and technical challenge. To improve both our understanding
of and our ability to forecast nocturnal convection, the Plains Elevated
Convection At Night (PECAN) field experiment is planned to occur across portions
of Oklahoma, Kansas and Nebraska from June 1 to 15 July 2015. PECAN promises to
collect unprecedented observations that capture the multi-scale aspects of
nocturnal convection. Such data will not only advance the understanding of key
processes associated with nocturnal convection through observational analysis ,
but also will enable investigators to use advanced data assimilation (DA) and
ensemble modeling systems to significantly advance both the understanding and
prediction of nocturnal convective systems. This research focuses on the
prediction component of PECAN, but also makes major contributions to the other
three components of PECAN. Specifically, this research seeks funding to : 1)
Support the dry run and field-phase of PECAN through generation of real-time
convection-permitting ensemble forecasts initialized using an advanced ensemble
based DA and ensemble forecast system; 2) Assimilate special PECAN observations
including ground-based remote sensing and compare these simulations against the
real-time simulations and the observations to assess the role that the unique
PECAN observations play in improving predictive skill; 3) Comprehensively
diagnose the ensemble analyses and simulations to determine the dynamical and
physical processes that initiate and maintain nocturnal convection and control
their structure and evolution; 4) Comprehensively evaluate ensemble analyses and
forecasts against special PECAN observations to determine the appropriate
modeling strategies (e.g., grid spacing; physical parameterization) for improved
prediction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit :&lt;br/&gt;This effort will
advance our knowledge of the processes that control the initiation, maintenance,
evolution and structure of elevated nocturnal convective systems. These goals
will be accomplished through a focus on the next generation of convection-
permitting models and advanced DA techniques. The simulations under this project
will play an important role in bridging between efforts of other PECAN
investigators focused on observational analysis of PECAN data and on idealized
modeling. This effort will also address the inherent role that bores and stable
layer disturbances play in the maintenance of elevated nocturnal systems through
analysis of simulations and comparison against observations. Ensemble
diagnostics will allow for a novel assessment of the capability of a convection-
permitting model simulation to reproduce these key processes. The research
findings will provide new insights into advancing DA strategies, model physics
and observing strategies of high impact convective weather
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts :&lt;br/&gt;This research will
address one of the most important goals of weather research - to improve our
ability to accurately predict intense hazardous weather that causes large
monetary loss, injuries and fatalities. It will directly address three
established national priorities in weather: Warn on Forecast for High Impact
Weather, the Next-Generation Forecast System, as key component of the Next-
Generation Air Transportation System, and Observing Weather and Climate from the
Ground Up: A Nationwide Network of Networks. It will provide much needed
education and training in the areas of advanced DA and high-resolution ensemble
modeling and numerical prediction and expose the next generation of modeling and
DA experts to a major scientific field experiment. The research findings have a
direct path to operations because the ensemble DA system to be used is developed
based on the new US operational DA system, and because of the significant roles
of the PIs in and/or linkage of the PIs have made with NOAA National Severe
Storm Lab (NSSL), National Centers for Environmental Prediction (NCEP) Storm
Prediction Center (SPC) and Environmental Modeling Center (EMC).