* 1359160
* REU Site: Scripps' Structure and Function Summer Institute (SFSI)
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2017
* James Williamson, The Scripps Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Ann Sakai
* 09/30/2017
* USD 297,995.00

This REU Site award to The Scripps Research Institute, located in La Jolla, CA,
will support the training of ten students in a ten-week program during the
summers of 2015-2017. This program offers its diverse participants an academic
structure that integrates cutting-edge research with professional skills
development and faculty mentoring. Professional development workshops and
research experiences will be made up of several elements that work together and
provide a stepwise, scaffolding approach to improving interns' critical thinking
skills, scientific preparation skills, knowledge base, and research expertise.
Students will have an opportunity to present their results at a national
conference. The REU program provides an experience to its students that is
typically not available to them at their home institutions. Students from
schools with limited opportunities for research and from underrepresented groups
are encouraged to apply.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The heart of the program will be
the hands-on research experience in one of our 150 state-of-the-art laboratories
that probe the structure and function of macromolecules. Potential projects
include: defining the structure and function of key proteins in both the innate
and acquired immune systems; production of databases cataloging the molecular
components of the cell; integration of computational methods with the current
arsenal of biophysical techniques to determine protein structure; and
exploration of brain function. In addition to the lab research, program
participants will attend themed weekly professional development workshops and
scientific seminars where they will be expected to read current scientific
articles and participate in discussions about the rationale behind the
experiments, analyze the work critically, and engage in scientific discourse
with their peers. The program culminates with oral and/or poster presentation.
By providing this experience, we endeavor to improve interns' research and
communication skills and prepare the most talented students to pursue careers in
biomedical research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A common web-based assessment tool
used by all REU programs funded by the Division of Biological Infrastructure
(Directorate for Biological Sciences) will be used to determine the
effectiveness of the training program. Students will be monitored after the
program and must respond to emails sent by Scripps and the NSF reporting system.
More information is available on the web
(http://education.scripps.edu/undergraduate/careu/index.html), or by contacting
the PI (Dr. Jamie Williamson at jrwill@scripps.edu) or co-PI (Dr. Dawn Eastmond
at eastmond@scripps.edu).