* 1359321
* REU SITE: POLYMER SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING AT THE UNIVERSITY OF AKRON
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2014,10/31/2017
* Mesfin Tsige, University of Akron
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 10/31/2017
* USD 321,000.00

ID: 1359321 PI: Tsige, Mesfin ORG: University of
Akron&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: REU Site: Polymer Science and Engineering at
the University of Akron&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
DESCRIPTION&lt;br/&gt;This REU Site (UA-REU) will focus on the training of 12
NSF-supported undergraduate students for 12 weeks each summer in the general
area of Polymer Science and Engineering. Despite the increased utilization of
polymers across scientific disciplines, specialized curricula covering polymers
are often neglected as a component of undergraduate STEM education. This Site
will expose students to cutting edge polymer education and research that will
help to bridge the competitive gap in the workforce needed to fuel innovation in
the United States. Special efforts will be made to recruit a diverse group of
students, especially those from educational institutions that offer few
opportunities for undergraduate research. Activities associated with the UA-REU
are designed to broaden the students' knowledge of polymers with significant
efforts made to ensure students comprehend the societal implications of their
research. These include innovative short courses on polymers led by faculty
experts, trips to local polymer industry to tour facilities, career panels
including participation from small and large companies and government, and
entrepreneurship and innovation workshops. Research projects involving REU
students will cover the breadth of Polymer Science and Engineering in four
generalized cluster areas: Chemistry, Physics, Engineering, and Biomaterials.
Such projects include, but are not limited to, synthesis of advanced polymer
materials, materials fabrication for energy storage and water purification,
structural and dynamic polymer characterization, and computer-based design of
materials through molecular dynamics (MD) simulations. At the conclusion of the
program, students will present their research work at a joint symposium with
Case Western Reserve University, NASA, and Kent State
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION&lt;br/&gt;The vision
of this REU site is to be a nurturing academic environment for undergraduate
exploration, education, and research. It will focus primarily on the training of
12 undergraduate students each summer in the area of Polymer Science and
Engineering. The REU students will be exposed to interdisciplinary research
projects that emphasize problems at the frontiers of polymer science and
engineering that are specifically designed to take into account the limited
research experience of REU students. The faculty participants mentor the REU
students through a multidimensional approach involving facets associated with
polymer fundamentals, professional development, and development of research
skillsets. The professional development components include an intensive one-week
series of lectures about the fundamentals of Polymer Science and Engineering and
a faculty research seminar series. Multiple student-led presentations are
designed to develop solid communication skills for the effective oral
dissemination of their research results. This REU site, which was initiated in
2004, will continue to bring a diverse and highly motivated group of
traditional, underrepresented, and low-income students to the University of
Akron.