* 1359610
* Collaborative Research: Mind Mapping Consumers and Activists' Response to NGO-Corporate Partnerships
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2014,03/31/2018
* Michelle Shumate, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* chu-hsiang chang
* 03/31/2018
* USD 232,214.00

Increasingly, nonprofits and corporations have created partnerships to address a
variety of social issues. The partnerships can take many forms including
philanthropy, cause marketing, brand certification, and collective impact
arrangements. Through communication, the contours of the partnership are made
known to different stakeholder groups thereby influencing attitudes, intention
to purchase, intention to donate, and intention to engage in activism. The
research examines both activists and consumers' reactions to a variety of
messages about corporate-NGO partnerships by using a series of three on-line
experiments to map both consumers and activists' mental models of corporations
and NGOs. This project fulfills three important objectives: (1) to further our
understanding of the impact of communicated NGO-corporate partnerships on
consumers and activists' attitudes, intention to purchase, intention to donate,
and intention to engage in activism, (2) to understand the ways that such
messages might overcome initially incongruent pairings through the inclusion of
or exclusion of certain message characteristics, and (3) to understand how the
different forms of NGO-corporate partnership may moderate these relationships.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The intellectual merit of this project
is three-fold. First, it contributes to the study of semantic networks by
investigating factors that shape how individuals' mental models evolve to
incorporate new information. Second, this project extends previous marketing
research on brand pairings to include a broader spectrum of social issues,
stakeholders beyond consumers (i.e., activists), and multiple types of NGO-
corporate partnerships. Third, it contributes to a broad-based understanding of
the network of NGO-corporate partnerships through its testing of theoretically
driven propositions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This research offers
three broader impacts for educational, policy and industry sectors. First, the
project advances social science and computer science interdisciplinary
collaboration and innovation by bringing together undergraduate and graduate
student researchers. As such, it aims to train a new generation of students in
scientific methods. Second, the findings will illuminate why some nonprofits are
less likely to be supported by public funding thus allowing policymakers to make
informed decisions about which social issues could be turned over to private
funding sources and which will continue to need taxpayer support. Third, as
companies seek to improve relationships with consumers and limit risk exposure
from activists, the findings will offer industry leaders information regarding
how communication influences stakeholders support of partnerships.