* 1359079
* REU Site: Research Experiences in Marine Organism Health: Resilience and Response to Environmental Change
* BIO,DBI
* 04/15/2014,03/31/2018
* Robert Podolsky, College of Charleston
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 03/31/2018
* USD 272,932.00

This REU Site award to the College of Charleston will support the training of 10
students for 10 weeks during the summers of 2014-2016. Student research training
will be done at the Grice Marine Laboratory, located in Charleston, SC. This
award is supported by both the Directorates for Biological Sciences (Division of
Biological Infrastructure) and Geosciences (Division of Ocean Sciences). The
program focuses on the theme of marine organism health, which addresses how
organisms, populations, communities, and ecosystems respond to natural or
anthropogenic changes in oceanic and estuarine environments. Student projects
involve issues on climate change, coastal development, natural disasters,
species introductions and pollution -- conditions that are creating special
challenges to organisms because of more rapid changes in variables like
temperature, pH, salinity, oxygen level, and presence of harmful
pharmaceuticals, metals and other pollutants. In addition to being engaged in
full-time research in the lab or field, students will participate in seminars,
field trips, and workshops on topics like the responsible conduct of research,
communication with professional and public audiences, and the graduate school
application process. Students from schools with limited research opportunities
and those from underrepresented groups are encouraged to apply. Participants are
selected based on potential benefits to the student's career, on the diversity
that each student contributes to the intern group, and on evidence of strong
potential for academic and personal achievement.

REU students will learn how research is conducted and many will present the
results of their work at scientific conferences. REU students will be housed in
the dormitory of the Grice Marine Laboratory at the Fort Johnson Marine
Resources Center. The program will use the REU common assessment tool (Student
Assessment of Learning Gains) and its own instrument to assess student gains in
the program, and will continue to assess participant interest in science and
math disciplines, their career paths, and the lasting influences of the research
experience.

Students are required to be tracked after the program and must respond to an
automatic email sent via the NSF reporting system. More information is available
by visiting http://reu.cofc.edu, or by contacting the PI (Dr. Robert Podolsky at
podolskyr@cofc.edu).