* 1359751
* An Evaluation of Dispersal Distances of Two Treeline-Forming Species
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2017
* David Cairns, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* sunil narumalani
* 12/31/2017
* USD 136,801.00

As environments change over time, vegetation must adapt, migrate or die. The
ability of plants to migrate is one of the more intractable and unanswered
problems in both biogeography and ecology. Recent advances in genetics allow
analysis of plant migration potential that previously had been impossible to
assess. Under a changing climate, vegetation zones may shift. The magnitude of
those shifts as well as the speed at which those shifts occur can be determined
by both the rate of climate change and the rate at which elements of vegetation
communities are able to respond to those changes. The ability of plants to
disperse their seeds and for those seeds to become established under climate
change is not well known. This research will make a vital contribution to the
literature on transition zones (ecotones) among different vegetation types by
finally answering the question whether new individuals at one wide-spread
vegetation transition (the alpine treeline) are derived from the local
environment versus if they are traveling long distances. The procedures
developed to determine dispersal distances at treeline could also be extended to
other ecotones or ecosystems.

This study will examine the central questions above by employing microsatellite
(short sequence) analysis of genomic DNA to identify the genetic sub-populations
of both white spruce and mountain hemlock in southcentral Alaska. These
populations will be used to determine if recruits to the treeline are more
closely related to near or far populations, thereby determining the prevalence
of long versus short distance dispersal. A parentage analysis will also be
conducted to estimate actual dispersal distances and directions. This research
will aid in the training of both graduate and undergraduate students and
strengthen ties between scientists in the US and Germany. Efforts will be made
to recruit under-represented groups of students in the study. Furthermore,
interaction with the general public will be facilitated through the connections
that have been made and will be further strengthened with the US National Park
Service (NPS) and the US Fish and Wildlife Service. Educational outreach
opportunities will include public presentations to NPS personnel as well as
dissemination of key findings to visitors to the Kenai Fjords National Park, the
Kenai National Wildlife Refuge, and to local schools in Texas.