* 1359223
* REU Site: Undergraduate Research in Collaborative Data Visualization Applications
* CSE,OAC
* 03/01/2014,02/28/2018
* Vetria Byrd, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Sushil K Prasad
* 02/28/2018
* USD 265,988.00

This award funds a new CISE REU Site to provide a novel approach to broadening
participation in visualization, while accelerating discovery and progress.
Visualization plays a significant role in the exploration and understanding of
data across all disciplines with a universal goal: gaining insight into the
complex relationships that exist within the data. A multi-disciplinary team of
faculty and visualization staff plans to establish a site that focuses on
research across several domains including Computer Science, Genetics and
Biochemistry, Geophysics, Sociology, Molecular Modeling and Simulation,
Inorganic Chemistry, Social Media, Parks Recreation Tourism Management,
Biological Sciences, and Digital Humanities.

The overall objectives of the REU Site are to broaden participation in
visualization, to explore visualization jointly with research projects while
accelerating discovery and progress, and to utilize visualization as a conduit
for collaboration. The REU Site achieves these objectives by: exploring
visualization in parallel with research, involving students directly in data-
driven visualization with an interdisciplinary aspect, providing training in
tools and technologies that are common in visualization research, inspiring
students to consider visualization as a career path and pursue visualization at
the graduate level, and targeting participation of women and underrepresented
groups, as well as students from institutions with limited cyberinfrastructure
resources.