* 1359645
* Airborne Measurements of the Nocturnal Low-level Jet and Wave Disturbances in the Stable Boundary Layer in PECAN (Plains Elevated Convection At Night)
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2020
* Thomas Parish, University of Wyoming
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 12/31/2020
* USD 749,999.00

This award is for participation in the Plains Elevated Convection at Night
(PECAN) field campaign. PECAN will take place in the central United States in
the summer of 2015. The focus of the project is on overnight thunderstorm
complexes that regularly occur in the Great Plains area. A variety of
observational systems will be put in place for the field experiment including
multiple aircraft, mobile radars, and ground-based systems that can profile the
wind and particles in the lower atmosphere. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
individual award provides funding for researchers to take part in the campaign
and make use of data from the University of Wyoming King Air (UWKA) research
aircraft. The UWKA will sample the near-surface environment near thunderstorm
complexes and areas of anticipated thunderstorm development in order to better
understand the triggers and forcing mechanisms that help these complexes
survive. This project will help to increase understanding of these convective
systems in order to better predict and warn the public of hazardous weather. The
project will also help to train the future generation of scientists by involving
multiple graduate students in the research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The steering
committee for the PECAN campaign has identified four main research topics to be
addressed: 1) Nocturnal convection initiation and early evolution of mesoscale
convective clusters; 2) Bore and other wave-like disturbances; 3) Dynamics and
microphysics of nocturnal mesoscale convective systems; 4) Prediction of
nocturnal convection initiation and evolution. This research under this award
will help to address each of these topics. The project will document the
structure, properties and evolution of bores and solitons in unprecedented
detail, gain insight in the behavior of bores/solitons in the context of the
observed ambient stability and shear profiles, and to examine their role in
convective initiation. An associated project goal is to study the mesoscale
kinematics and dynamics of the nocturnal low level jet over the Great Plains.