* 1359302
* REU Site: Research Experience in Structural and Functional Neural Biology for Undergraduates
* BIO,DBI
* 05/15/2014,04/30/2017
* William Atchison, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Ann Sakai
* 04/30/2017
* USD 293,584.00

This REU Site award to Michigan State University, located in East Lansing, MI,
will support the training of 8 students in a 10-week program during the summers
of 2014-2016. The REU program is open to all undergraduate students who are
citizens, nationals or permanent residents of the United States. Students
trained in the program will gain skills in lab research, develop their critical
thinking and problem-solving skills, understand the process of science, and be
able to communicate their research results to their peers and the general
public. Students will have an opportunity to present their results at a national
conference. The REU program provides an experience to students that is typically
not available to them at their home institutions. Students from schools with
limited opportunities for research and from underrepresented groups are
encouraged to apply.

This REU Site program will focus in research on the structure and function of
neurons and their circuitry. The program has been designed to enable early
undergraduates (freshman and sophomores) to conduct research in their area of
interest. Students will have the option of working individually on their own
project, or in collaborative pairs under the same research advisor. Each student
will have his/her own independent scientific question to investigate. Example
projects include the neurobiology of the autonomic/enteric nervous systems, ion
channels structure and function, neuronal cytoskeleton, sensory function,
neuronal regeneration, and synaptic physiology. Students apply principles of
neurobiology to novel, contemporary research projects and gain deeper knowledge
in their topical area of research. During the 10-week program, students will
participate in activities that enhance their research experience, such as
orientation, seminars and workshops, and other organized activities for the
group. At the end of the program, students will present their research in a
poster and/or oral presentation.

A common web-based assessment tool used by all REU programs funded by the
Division of Biological Infrastructure (Directorate for Biological Sciences) will
be used to determine the effectiveness of the training program. In addition, an
MSU faculty member will conduct an exit interview with program participants.
Students are required to be tracked after the program and must respond to an
automatic email sent via the NSF reporting system. More information is available
by contacting the PI (Dr. William Atchison, atchiso1@msu.edu) or a designed
Facebook® site.