* 1359323
* REU Site: CyberSAFE@UALR: Cyber Security and Forensics Research at the University of Arkansas at Little Rock
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2014,01/31/2018
* Kenji Yoshigoe, University of Arkansas Little Rock
* Standard Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 01/31/2018
* USD 289,662.00

This site is co-funded by the CISE Secure and Trustworthy Cyberspace (SaTC)
Program. This funding establishes a new Research Experiences for Undergraduates
(REU) Site at the University of Arkansas Little Rock. Undergraduate students
will participate in summer research focused on the integration of fundamental
security and forensics research with the latest technical advances in mobile
computing, cloud computing, and social networks. The research is led by an
experienced faculty team that plans to offer a balance of theory, applications,
and practical skills as well as mentoring and professional development
opportunities for the students. The site will focus on recruiting students from
the South Central region of the United States using established regional
connections.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project lies in
strong research basis and the expertise of the faculty. The projects are in
research areas that are current and address national priorities. The site will
leverage its National Security Agency designated Center of Academic Excellence
in Information Assurance Education and NSF funded Cloud Computing Research
Instrument and Computational Research Center to enhance and enrich participants'
competitive research experiences. The undergraduate student participants will be
able to gain a broad and unified picture of the significance of security and
forensics through interactions with university professors, professionals and
researchers in forensics labs, practitioners in IT industry, and security
officers in military service. The research has the potential to contribute to
the research core of the emerging field of cyber
security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts are centered on the
opportunities for a diverse pool of students to gain research experiences in
cyber security and forensics. The site will capitalize on the established
collaborations and communication channels with regional institutions for student
recruitment. Through extensive research training and careful mentoring, this
program has a great potential to attract fresh young minds into graduate schools
and advance the state of the art of research and education in cyber security and
forensics at undergraduate level in the South Central part of the United States.