* 1359538
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Development of a new technique to measure ecosystem-level soil nitrous oxide fluxes using micrometeorological towers
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2016
* Mark Zondlo, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 07/31/2016
* USD 59,998.00

Nitrous oxide is the third most important greenhouse gas in the atmosphere, with
an atmospheric lifetime of about 114 years and a global warming impact per
molecule that is about 300 times greater than that of carbon dioxide.
Atmospheric concentrations of nitrous oxide are increasing, primarily due to
agriculture, which is thought to be responsible for about half of the total
output to the atmosphere that can be attributed to human activities. Current
trends in land-use change and agricultural intensification (in particular
increasing fertilizer use) suggest that an additional 20% increase in global
nitrous oxide emissions will occur by 2030. However, difficulties in measuring
the output of nitrous oxide from ecosystems make it hard to manage and predict
nitrous oxide production from major human sources. This project we will test a
promising new technique to measure the ecosystem-level exchange of nitrous oxide
with the atmosphere using a laser sensor. This novel approach will provide
opportunities to measure whole system nitrous oxide dynamics at hourly to daily
time scales over areas that are too large to effectively sample with traditional
techniques. With this novel approach, a new understanding of the factors that
control the production and consumption of nitrous oxide in forests, grasslands,
and agricultural lands may be possible. This would lead to much better ability
to manage and minimize the production of this important greenhouse gas, because
management is currently hampered by significant uncertainties in the measurement
of nitrous oxide. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major barrier to understanding and
mitigating emissions of nitrous oxide from agricultural and other managed soils
is the difficulty with which fluxes are measured, given temporal and spatial
variability that often exceeds an order of magnitude at scales of meters and
hours. In this project, open-path quantum cascade laser sensors will be
integrated with standard micrometeorological measurements to develop a solar-
powered measurement system to quantify nitrous oxide fluxes. This novel approach
will provide opportunities to measure whole system nitrous oxide fluxes at
hourly to daily time scales over multi-hectare areas, and thereby resolve and
integrate the spatial and temporal variability that makes this flux so difficult
to quantify and model in situ. A newly developed open-path quantum cascade laser
(OP-QCL) sensor will be used on each of two existing carbon dioxide
micrometeorological eddy covariance towers to measure ecosystem-level nitrous
oxide exchange. In addition to the OP-QCL sensors, multiple standard static
chambers will be deployed within the study area to perform ground based
validation of the OP-QCL measurements. One of the sensors will be deployed in a
high-emission fertilized continuous corn system; the other will be deployed in
grassland that has not been farmed for 25 years. In addition to validating the
micrometeorological method, the project will test hypotheses related to the
temporal variability of fluxes at diurnal to seasonal scales, which cannot be
answered without continuous observations. Specific project objectives include 1)
to develop, test, and validate an OP-QCL sensor for ecosystem-level measurements
of nitrous oxide fluxes using micrometeorological towers; and 2) to relate and
assess the significance of changes in nitrous oxide flux with temporal
environmental variability, including daily, seasonal, and episodic events such
as large rain events and management activities such as tillage and fertilization
in cropped systems.