* 1359081
* REU Site in Chemistry at the University of Connecticut
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2018
* Mark Peczuh, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 06/30/2018
* USD 270,000.00

This award from the Division of Chemistry (CHE) supports a Research Experience
for Undergraduates (REU) Site at the University of Connecticut (UConn).
Professors Mark Pezuh and Jose A. Gascon who will recruit motivated
undergraduates from primarily non-Ph.D. granting institutions to participate in
a graduate-level research project over a 10-week period. Students with limited
opportunities for independent research, women, and students from under-
represented groups are especially encouraged to apply. As a unique thrust, the
program targets participation from nearby Central Connecticut State University
(CCSU), a non-Ph.D.-granting institution. The program pays special attention to
develop communication skills and ethical behavior in the research setting.
Participants also obtain a foundation for making informed choices about future
careers in chemistry and establish networks with peers from a range of
disciplines and experiences. Overall, the UConn Chemistry REU program aims to
enhance students' enthusiasm for chemistry and prepare them for post-graduate
success in the field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The core aim of this program is to
introduce participants to the full breadth of research-related activities, a
number of ancillary technical workshops, and professional development seminars.
In addition to the research conducted in the host laboratories, students
participate in two hands-on workshops: one on computational chemistry and the
other on single crystal X-ray crystallography held at CCSU. These activities
introduce an intellectually challenging technical component to the program that
involves the entire cohort and provides a deeper understanding about techniques
that are instrumental to all fields of chemistry. The program incorporates a
graduate assistant as a near-peer leader to cultivate a group identity for each
year's cohort. Activities culminate in oral presentations and a poster symposium
for which the University community, parents and faculty from the students' home
institutions are invited.