* 1359188
* REU SITE: Assessment and Sustainable Management of Ecosystem Services
* BIO,DBI
* 04/15/2014,03/31/2017
* Marty Matlock, University of Arkansas
* Continuing Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 03/31/2017
* USD 314,883.00

This REU Site award to the University of Arkansas, located in Fayetteville, AR,
will support the training of 10 undergraduate students for 10 weeks during the
summers of 2014-2016. The theme of the REU is sustainable management in
ecosystem services. Students will select from a diverse group of field- and
laboratory-based projects designed to integrate biogeochemical, hydrological,
and ecological processes. Additionally, students will engage in cultural
enrichment activities through which they will explore the social and economic
factors that influence ecosystem services. For example students will take a
field trip to Tar creek in Pitcher, Oklahoma to witness first-hand the
consequences of ecosystem destruction. Students will meet with experts from the
Tribal Environmental Program and learn about how Tribal governments have
developed explicit land use and land management policies that both support
sustainability and reflect the unique cultural perspectives of the Tribe.
Students will also participate in professional development seminars on the
ethics of sustainability, responsible conduct of research, preparation for
graduate school, and leadership development. At the end of the program, students
will present their research results in oral and written form at the REU Student
Symposium. Applicants will be selected based on academic record, background and
experience, two letters of recommendation, and a short essay. Members of groups
traditionally under-represented in science are strongly encouraged to apply.

One of the major goals of the REU is to provide Tribal communities, in
particular, with a gateway to scientific educational and research opportunities.
It is thus anticipated that students will present their results at regional and
national scientific meetings. The effectiveness of the program will be assessed
using the BIO REU common assessment tool

Students are required to be tracked after the program and must respond to an
automatic email sent via the NSF reporting system. More information is available
by visiting http://www.bioreu.org, or by contacting the PI (Dr. Michelle Evans-
White at mevanswh@uark.edu) or the co-PIs (Dr. Thad Scott at jts004@uark.edu;
Dr. Marty Matlock at mmatlock@uark.edu).