* 1359086
* REU Site: Summer Internships in Nanomaterials, Nanomechanics, and Leadership Training in Engineering
* ENG,EEC
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2018
* Uchechukwu Wejinya, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 06/30/2018
* USD 359,565.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: This three year REU site will provide 9 talented
undergraduate students including underrepresented minorities with research
opportunities in labs that bridge the gap between science and engineering, and
provide them with top-notch leadership training in engineering. Women
participants in particular will be provided a custom-tailor leadership training
specific to them. Program recruitment will target a diverse group of
participants from a broad spectrum of colleges throughout the nation, especially
minority-serving and small colleges without research know-hows. Eight faculty
members and nine graduate students from the Departments of Mechanical
Engineering and Chemistry/Biochemistry will serve as mentors. Research topics
will be theoretical, computational and/or experimental, involving short,
challenging, self-contained, cutting-edge problems in nanoscience and
nanoengineering. The program includes seminars and workshops to expose interns
to nanoscale engineering as well as professional development, emphasizing
research, team building, leadership, and graduate studies. The complementary
social program includes tours of regional research and industrial facilities,
and group outings to local areas of interest in collaboration with the other UA
REU programs. The interrelationships of the engineering process and its
management within the life cycles of technology, innovation, products, and
systems will be an essential part of the REU program. The basic functions of
management relative to their implementation in technical organizations will be
examined. Strategies for leading engineering teams and technical organizations
will be explored, particularly as they affect individual and organizational
productivity and creativity.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: The objective of the proposed REU Site program is to provide
a diverse group of 9 STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics)
undergraduate students with both computational and hands-on (experiment)
experience in nanoscale-nanomaterials and nanomechanics research. Student
participants will be hosted by various faculty members in well-equipped research
laboratories. The intellectual focus of this research program will be to
introduce students to nanoscale materials research and device application as an
interconnected subject of study. The program will expose students to the
different areas of research that embrace the basic background of a modern
materials program. Notably, students will also receive a series of lectures on
laboratory safety, research ethics, and leadership training in engineering. This
unique leadership training program module presents an overview of the
fundamental concepts underlying the leadership and management of engineering and
other technical functions in the contemporary technology-driven organization.
All participants will present their research findings both orally and in a
written report, sometimes leading to scientific publications.



"The site is funded by the Department of Defense in partnership with the NSF REU
program."