* 1359367
* Undergraduate Research into the Cultural, Economic and Ecological Significance of Church Forests in South Gondar, Ethiopia
* SBE,SMA
* 04/15/2014,12/31/2018
* Margaret Lowman, Colby College
* Standard Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 12/31/2018
* USD 406,038.00

-------------&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This is an international
REU Site to provide eight undergraduate students from diverse backgrounds an
opportunity to conduct interdisciplinary research on the cultural, economic and
ecological roles of church forests in Ethiopia. Under the proposed eight-week
REU students receive training at Colby College in social survey research,
spatial analysis using Geographic Information Systems (GIS), ecological field
methods, and written and oral communication. They then travel to South Gondar,
Ethiopia where they work closely with mentors from Colby College, North Carolina
State University, and local institutions to conduct and share their original
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Church
forests are patches of Afromontane forest surrounding Ethiopian Orthodox
churches. Preserved by church leaders and communities as religious sanctuaries,
church forests are, in many parts of Ethiopia, the only indigenous forests left.
From an institutional perspective, church forests show how non-state actors such
as religious institutions can play major roles in conservation. From an
ecological perspective, church forests are crucial reserves for Ethiopia's
vanishing biodiversity. "Outsiders" are rarely allowed into church forests, but
after years of outreach efforts in Ethiopia, Dr. Meg Lowman of the North
Carolina Museum of Natural Sciences has a Memorandum of Understanding for access
to the church forests and cooperation with church leaders. Working closely with
faculty mentors and Ethiopian collaborator Dr. Alemayehu Wassie, students at the
proposed REU Site actively contribute to the design and implementation of
original research including GIS analyses and community surveys examining
cultural and economic values of church forests; and ecological studies of human
impacts on church forest biodiversity and ecosystem
services.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
leadership of the U.S. is critical to the success of global efforts to reverse
environmental degradation in low-income countries. The proposed REU Site is
designed to spark global interest in the conservation of tropical forests, but
also to learn from and strengthen existing conservation institutions in
Ethiopia. Study results will be shared within Ethiopia through meetings of
academic and church community stakeholders, and internationally through a
website, publication of student work in economics, ecology and interdisciplinary
journals, and student attendance at conferences. In addition, the program
exposes students to a unique cultural and educational experience, while
providing them an opportunity to conduct cutting-edge social and ecological
research in a safe and supportive REU setting. With a focus on community college
students, women, low-income students and under-represented groups, this REU Site
establishes the foundations for a more diverse and informed body of scholars and
leaders able to think critically and compassionately about real-world problems
from multiple perspectives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is co-funded by
the International Science and Engineering (ISE) organization and also the Office
of Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR) at the NSF.
In addition, it is designated as an RUI (Research in Undergraduate Institutions)
project.