* 1359231
* An Advanced Instrumentation Emphasis REU
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Charles Garner, Baylor University
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 08/31/2017
* USD 223,942.00

This National Science Foundation award from the Division of Chemistry (CHE)
supports a Research Experience for Undergraduate (REU) site led by Professors
Charles M. Garner, Patrick J. Farmer, and Kevin Klausmeyer all at Baylor
University. In this project, the Site's goal will be to enhance opportunities
for underrepresented students to obtain the quality research experience that
will inspire their development as science professionals. A vital function of the
REU program is to cultivate a passion for science in the students, which will
lead to long and productive professional careers. The REU program is designed to
reach under-served students from smaller colleges who lack access to advanced
instrumentation and have limited research opportunities. Through the Advanced
Instrumentation Workshops, the Baylor chemistry department has developed
extensive contacts with small colleges and universities in a five-state region
and beyond. These contacts have resulted in the participation of more than 160
undergraduates and 48 faculty members from a wide variety of institutions
including several historically black colleges and many with significant Hispanic
populations. A goal of the proposed REU is to increase the level of minority and
female participation above previous programs at Baylor, which averaged 58%
female and 30% minority. An equal number of Baylor undergraduate students,
funded by faculty grants, will be able to participate full-time in the program
along with the NSF-funded students.

This award will provide summer research experiences in Baylor's Chemistry &
Biochemistry department for undergraduates from small colleges and universities
with limited research opportunities. The summer program includes hands-on
workshops on some of the most commonly used instruments in chemical research.
The broader significance of this award is that deliberate exposure to
instrumentation in a research context will provide students with a deeper
understanding scientific methods and practices, and open their eyes to new
career paths. The students will work in active research labs not only with
graduate students and PhD researchers in the Chemistry & Biochemistry
department, but also in the Environmental Science, Geology, and Physics
departments. In addition to the instrumentation workshops, the 10-week program
is structured to include weekly lunchtime seminars, safety and ethics training,
career perspectives, a field trip to chemically-relevant facilities, a
concluding poster session where each student presents their research, and a
written final report.