* 1359073
* REU Site: A Multiscale Approach to Biomechanics
* ENG,EEC
* 03/01/2014,02/28/2017
* Pamela VandeVord, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 02/28/2017
* USD 375,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;A multiscale approach to biomechanical research will
help students understand fundamental biological processes in health, injury and
disease. The overall research goal of this REU program is to investigate the
mechanical properties of structures ranging from subcellular components such as
cytoskeleton structures to the quantification of tissues properties and whole
body analysis. Students will participate in studies that utilize a variety of
experimental and computational approaches to quantify and translate the
mechanical properties of structures. The intended impact is to show students how
biomechanics is a current multidisciplinary research theme which crosses many
spatial scales: intracellular and extracellular matrices; and tissue, organ, and
multi-organ systems. The educational component of this program is centered on
the link between biology and mechanics in the sense that it discusses the
tissue-inherent biological changes triggered by physical stimuli. Students will
develop scientific skills, be exposed to new and exciting avenues of research,
and have the opportunity to make informed decisions and gain presentation and
writing experience. This program is sponsored by the Division of Engineering
Education and Centers of the National Science
Foundation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Biomechanical
engineering is defined as the application of mechanical engineering to
biological systems such as the human body. A multiscale approach to
biomechanical research will help students understand fundamental biological
processes in health, injury and disease. Knowledge gained from biomechanical
studies can be translated to help protect against, diagnosis and treating human
injury and disease. The objectives of this program are to educate undergraduate
students in biomechanical engineering and introduce them to cutting edge
research areas in the subject. The young researchers will be fully integrated
into the participating research groups and will experience hands-on lab
research, group meetings, and close collaboration with the other members of the
group and related research groups which builds confidence and
independence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Undergraduate engineering students will be
recruited from across the U.S and students from underrepresented groups will be
highly sought. The intended impact is to show students how biomechanics is a
current multidisciplinary research theme which crosses many spatial scales:
ranging from examining processes inside cells to investigating effects on the
human body as a whole. Students will be exposed to how multiscale biomechanical
research can translate into novel devices for the prevention, diagnosis and
treatment of human injury and disease.