* 1359297
* REU SITE: Research Experiences in Information Centric Engineering (ICE)
* ENG,EEC
* 07/15/2014,09/30/2020
* J. Cecil, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Amelia Greer
* 09/30/2020
* USD 360,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;Information Technology (IT) practices continue
to revolutionize engineering practices worldwide. This REU project seeks to
provide research experiences to undergraduate students to encourage them towards
research careers in IT oriented approaches in engineering. This emerging field
of Information Centric Engineering holds tremendous potential for numerous
industrial applications. As these practices become more commonplace, there will
be a greater need to expose and encourage students in our nation to pursue
graduate careers in these areas of importance. Undergraduate engineering and
science students should be prepared for the IT oriented 21st century by being
involved in such Information centric research activities. The participating
students will be recruited from a pool of applicants nationwide with an emphasis
on recruiting students with physical challenges as well as minority students
including African American, Hispanic, Native American and Women students. We
plan to work with various minority engineering organizations and universities to
identify a diverse pool of student applicants. Students will also be provided
opportunities to interact with industry partners in the fields of micro assembly
and medical surgery. As part of project activities, seminars will be offered to
participants outlining graduate programs and careers including preparing for
exams to enter graduate school. The outcomes of this innovative project will be
highlighted through special panel and paper sessions organized at national
engineering conferences. This project is funded by the NSF Division of
Engineering Education and Centers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this Research Experiences for
Undergraduates (REU) Site project is to provide meaningful research experiences
in Information Centric Engineering and Digital Manufacturing in emerging process
domains to a new generation of engineers and scientists. These research
experiences provided to undergraduate students will encourage them towards
graduate programs and research careers in these leading edge research areas.
Research activities in this project including design of Digital Manufacturing
approaches (including Virtual Reality based environments to study micro gripping
and assembly in the domain of Micro devices assembly) as well as design of
Virtual Surgical environments to help train surgeons in surgical processes. As
our REU initiative deals with IT and Digital Manufacturing themes, this emphasis
is termed as "Information Centric Engineering" (ICE).