* 1359745
* Collaborative Research: Use of Microbially-Induced Calcium Carbonate Precipitation to Improve Seismic Behavior of Saturated Sands
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Junko Munakata Marr, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 06/30/2018
* USD 274,430.00

This award supports fundamental research necessary to quantify the improvements
made to the engineering properties of sand by microbially induced cementation,
so that this method can be used to mitigate against earthquake-induced
liquefaction damage. Liquefaction is the rapid transformation of a saturated
soil deposit from a solid to a viscous fluid during seismic shaking. Some of the
most dramatic and costly examples of infrastructure damage in earthquakes such
as the 1964 Prince William Sound, Alaska earthquake, the 1971 San Fernando
earthquake, and the 2010-2012 Christchurch earthquakes were caused by
liquefaction. Bio-mediation, the use of naturally occurring microbes to modify
the engineering properties of soils, may be a promising technology for
liquefaction prevention. Bacterial processes can be used to generate natural
cementation within the grains of saturated sand deposits, improving the soil's
resistance to liquefaction. Bio-mediation may additionally be a more
environmentally friendly, sustainable option than traditional chemical soil
improvement techniques. Results from this research will make US infrastructure
and housing more resilient to earthquake damage, resulting in lower loss of
property and life in future earthquakes. This research involves several
disciplines, including civil engineering, environmental engineering,
biochemistry, and sustainability sciences. The multi-disciplinary approach will
help broaden participation of underrepresented groups in research, and
positively impact engineering and science education.

The objective of this project is to test the hypothesis that the efficacy of
microbially induced calcium carbonate precipitation in dynamically loaded
saturated sands is governed by microstructural changes in interparticulate
cementation dependent upon cyclic strain loading magnitude, number of large
strain load cycles, and cementation density. The effectiveness of varying bio-
cementation densities will be quantified in terms of volumetric cyclic threshold
strains and shear moduli, damping ratios, and excess pore water pressures as
functions of cyclic strain magnitudes and number of large strain load cycles.
Saturated bio-mediated laboratory specimens with varying MICCP densities will be
prepared alongside untreated specimens. Bender element, resonant column, and
strain-controlled dynamic cyclic triaxial tests will be used to measure the
effects of bio-cementation densities and dynamic loading conditions under
undrained, unconsolidated conditions. Scanning electron microscopy images of
microbial reinforcement will be used to identify microstructural sources of
macroscopic behaviors. The intellectual merit of this work is in: (1)
identification of microstructural changes in microbially induced cementation at
varying densities due to dynamic loading conditions and (2) quantification of
their effects on the macroscopic shear moduli and damping ratios of saturated
sand, which are necessary dynamic mechanical properties for predictive models of
dynamically loaded soil systems. The microstructural mechanisms responsible for
the changes in the dynamic mechanical properties and behaviors under variable
loading conditions will be identified, advancing a mechanistic understanding of
how bio-cementation physically evolves and reinforces saturated sands under
dynamic loads.