* 1359308
* REU Site: Enhancing Knowledge Integration Through Undergraduate Research -- Particle-based Functional Materials for Energy, Sustainability, and Biomedicine
* ENG,EEC
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2017
* Joseph McCarthy, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 03/31/2017
* USD 383,431.00

This program acknowledges the support of Division of Engineering Education and
Centers of the National Science Foundation, under grant number
EEC-1359308.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;While the NSF's
rationale for funding research experiences for undergraduates largely lies in
the belief that it is "one of the most effective avenues for attracting students
to and retaining them in science and engineering", an equally important factor
is a need to "prepare them for careers in these fields". The University of
Pittsburgh, has fostered a strong educational focus both in research and in
teaching - on facilitating a student's ability to engage in knowledge
integration. This is timely as recent technological advances have altered the
landscape of engineering training in the US, prompting students to eschew simply
mastering one distinct area and instead focus more at the intersections of two
or more technologies. This is especially true in the area of
biotechnology/biomedicine, nanotechnology, and energy, where future challenges
necessitate that research scientists and engineers be trained in a diverse range
of emerging technologies and are able to seamlessly traverse the boundary
between these seemingly disparate technology areas. This is accomplished by
combining the traditional research of an REU site with a tailored workshop
series, a (product) translation exercise, and an innovating cross-training
internship. Workshop topics include: product innovation, particle production -
inorganic and organic, microscopy techniques, suspension/rheology measurements,
particle-based simulation, information literacy, ethics, communication skills.
Project evaluation consists of both assessment of the various goals associated
with the project objective as well as an overall evaluation of the students who
have participated in the program. In monitoring the students who participate,
the proportion of students from underrepresented groups will be tracked (i.e.
gender, ethnicity) and compared to the overall proportion of students studying
engineering. To address the larger, overall success of the project, tracking of
the number of students who participate in the program and matriculate into
either a graduate program or the workforce will be performed via continuing to
build a LinkedIn.com community. Finally, in addition to the direct statistical
measures and fellow tracking outlined above, qualitative and quantitative
measures of the degree to which the program attains its goals will be performed
using a comprehensive assessment plan that includes, surveys, concept mapping,
and process map development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;Today's advances don't happen in isolation, but instead occur
at the intersections of two or more technologies. This is especially true in
biomedicine, sustainability, and energy. This Research Experiences for
Undergraduates (REU) program focuses on Particle-based Functional Materials
(PFM). This research focus is studying particulate materials that fulfill a
specific function, either because of their discrete nature or due to the
influence of particles on macroscopic structure. Such systems include: material
self-healing, controlled delivery of therapeutics, "smart" catalysis, and
particle separations, to name a few. This program is based on the premise that
the successful engineer of the future will need to be able to seamlessly
traverse the boundary between these seemingly disparate technology areas. In
order to equip the participating students to become the "nimble thinkers"
necessary in the changing economy, the PFM-REU program explicitly focuses on
enhancing students' knowledge integration skills as well as their ability to
engage in product innovation, while building their base of knowledge in a
specific area. This program will educate 12 undergraduate research fellows in
each of its three years. These students will be recruited from primarily
undergraduate institutions and students from under-represented groups.