* 1359016
* REU Site:  National Research Experiences for Undergraduates (NREUP)
* MPS,DMS
* 03/01/2014,02/28/2017
* Douglas Ensley, Mathematical Association of America
* Continuing Grant
* Nandini Kannan
* 02/28/2017
* USD 900,000.00

This grant funds the National Research Experiences for Undergraduates Program
(NREUP), administered by the Mathematical Association of America (MAA),
headquartered in Washington, D.C., and held at various locations throughout the
United States. The program is designed to provide undergraduates from
underrepresented groups majoring in mathematics or a closely related field with
challenging research opportunities and will offer these experiences during the
summers of 2014, 2015 and 2016. The length of the experiences can vary from
location to location but will be a minimum of six weeks. The program will reach
minority students at a critical point in their career, midway through their
undergraduate program through an undergraduate faculty member with whom they
have a strong connection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NREUP will continue its track
record of increasing minority students' interest in obtaining advanced degrees
in mathematics. NREUP will invite mathematical sciences faculty to host MAA
Student Research Programs on their own campuses. The MAA will select the best
from competing proposals. NREUP provides key components to encourage students to
pursue graduate studies and careers in mathematics: enriching and rewarding
mathematical experiences, mentoring by active researchers, and intellectual
networking with peers. It also provides an annual full day program to assist the
new REU director with management details of the program and the potential REU
director with further refinement of his/her concept and proposal writing skills.
It also assists attendees in expanding their knowledge of federal and non-
federal funding sources and increasing their knowledge of and skills in student
mentoring. Moreover, by supporting faculty at a diverse group of institutions to
direct summer research experiences, this project supports not only undergraduate
students but also the development of a community of skilled faculty mentors who
are expected to provide ever-increasing opportunities for undergraduate
research. This project is jointly supported by the Workforce and Infrastructure
programs within the Division of Mathematical Sciences.