* 1359462
* REU Site: Preparing a Diverse Workforce through Interdisciplinary Astrophysics Research
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2014,05/31/2018
* Vassiliki Kalogera, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Benacquista
* 05/31/2018
* USD 287,784.00

This award will establish an REU Site at Northwestern University (NU)'s Center
for Interdisciplinary Exploration and Research in Astrophysics (CIERA). The Site
will take advantage of CIERA's interdisciplinary nature, providing students
access to mentors and experience across departments, and insight into the cross-
departmental connections between astronomy and astrophysics and other STEM
disciplines. The Faculty Mentors (all of whom are members of CIERA) come from
four departments: the Department of Physics and Astronomy, Applied Math, Earth
and Planetary Science, and Electrical Engineering and Computer Science.
Available research projects cover a wide range of astronomical topics and
research methods, from theory to computation and from instrumentation to
experimentation. Furthermore, the projects will use a wide range of cutting-edge
facilities, including instrument labs and the Quest high performance computing
facility at NU, instruments at Fermilab and Argonne National Laboratory, and the
Caltech Submillimeter Observatory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through this exposure,
the REU students will learn how astronomical studies prepare them with a wide
range of skills and can lead them to diverse professional paths. NU CIERA's REU
site will give students the experience of doing interdisciplinary astronomical
research, expose them to a wide array of exciting research areas in
astrophysics, and build community among the students themselves and with NU
researchers. The Site also aims to recruit a significant fraction of its
participants from members of underrepresented groups in STEM by partnering with
Chicago-area minority serving institutions. Through high-quality research
experiences and professional development activities, the NU CIERA REU Site will
contribute to the development of a diverse, sophisticated, and highly
competitive STEM workforce.