* 1359095
* REU Site: Interdisciplinary Research Experiences in Nanotechnology and Biomedicine
* ENG,EEC
* 03/01/2014,02/28/2018
* Jonathan Arnold, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 02/28/2018
* USD 379,998.00

The goals of this REU Site Program are to attract and retain students from
diverse backgrounds into science and engineering and prepare them for graduate
programs and careers in these fields. To accomplish this goal, the proposed
program will provide an interdisciplinary research experience at the interface
of nanotechnology and biomedicine to undergraduate students from other
institutions, leveraging the diverse interdisciplinary expertise, resources, and
training opportunities in this area at the University of Georgia (UGA). This
program will host 10 REU students over a nine-week summer program where they
will participate in interdisciplinary research projects that apply
nanotechnology to specific biomedical questions. Each REU student will be co-
mentored by paired faculty from the nanotechnology and biomedical disciplines on
a collaborative research project. In addition to a total-immersion, hands-on
research experience, REU students will participate in enriching activities that
will include an ethics-in-science workshop; weekly lunch presentations on the
opportunities in interdisciplinary research, and what to expect in graduate
school; a career workshop; research seminars; tours to UGA research facilities;
participation in a regional summer symposium in nanotechnology and biomedicine;
and science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) education. The REU
experience will be enhanced for all involved by our efforts to recruit students
from diverse backgrounds, with a major emphasis on participants from
underrepresented groups in STEM disciplines, and is expected to broaden
participation by the next generation of scientists and engineers in
interdisciplinary research endeavors.

The PIs propose a new and innovative REU site program where the central theme is
an interdisciplinary research experience in nanobiotechnology, with research
projects co-mentored by faculty in nanotechnology and biomedicine. The existing
world-class programs and facilities and collaborative research culture at the
University of Georgia (UGA) create a strong setting for this interdisciplinary
REU site. Students will be recruited nationwide with particular emphasis on
African American and Hispanic citizens. This REU site program serves as an
opportunity to bring together researchers across different disciplines,
fostering a collaborative atmosphere. Further, UGA serves a very diverse student
body and the availability of the interdisciplinary education modules will put
UGA students at the frontiers of science and engineering, preparing them for
graduate study or industrial careers in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) disciplines. Materials of this program will be disseminated
to public through publications, conferences, and learning communities. Outreach
efforts include (1) training REU students as STEM mentors to help local STEM
education once they return to their institutions; (2) offering high school
teachers a summer research experience to develop classroom materials based on
nanobiotechnology.

"This award is co-funded by the Division of Biological Infrastructure
(BIO/DBI)."