* 1359720
* Collaborative Research:  Stable Boundary Layer Processes and Their Interaction with Nocturnal Convection over the Great Plains in the Plains Elevated Convection At Night (PECAN)
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2016
* Richard Clark, Millersville University
* Standard Grant
* Edward L. Bensman
* 07/31/2016
* USD 289,976.00

The Plains Elevated Convection at Night (PECAN) field campaign is planned for
the Summer of 2015 in the central Great Plains. The scientific focus of PECAN is
nocturnal convection, with four separate research topics to be addressed: 1)
Nocturnal convection initiation and early evolution of mesoscale convective
clusters; 2) Bore and other wave-like disturbances; 3) Dynamics and microphysics
of nocturnal mesoscale convective systems; 4) Prediction of nocturnal convection
initiation and evolution. The observational campaign plan calls for three
research aircraft, seven mobile Doppler radars, and multiple sounding systems. A
main part of the experimental design is the inclusion of fixed and mobile PECAN
Integrated Sounding Array (PISA) units which consists of a variety of profiling
instruments. The broader societal impact of PECAN is to improve forecasts of
these nocturnal events for hydrology, energy, agriculture and public safety
purposes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given PECAN's four research foci, it is clear
that quantification of the nocturnal stable boundary layer (NSBL) structure is
mission critical. This project is unique due to its focus on the NSBL using a
suite of in situ measurements, a valuable addition to PECAN's remote sensing
capabilities, especially in data validation and calibration. The instrument
package deployed with this project includes tethered balloon based mean and flux
systems, flux towers, SODARs, a 915 MHz wind profiler, a LIDAR, a laser
ceilometer, a rawinsonde system, and three near-surface flux/profiling systems.
Given the spatial separation of the two sites, this research team is ideally
positioned to make coordinated and detailed measurements of the characteristics
of the NSBL in different locations relative to the moving Mesoscale Convective
Systems and their associated NSBL disturbances (density currents and bores).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this project mirror those of PECAN;
that is, the advancement of our knowledge base and improvement of forecasts of
critical weather phenomena. In addition, unique of this project is the planned
involvement of many undergraduate students in the research. This project will
thus provide extensive opportunities for undergraduate students to participate
in cutting-edge research and research training, from project planning and data
collection in the field to coauthoring peer-reviewed publications.