* 1359877
* US-Mexico Planning Visit: Collaborative Study of Active Faulting in Baja California, Mexico
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/2015,10/31/2015
* Whitney Behr, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Dudka
* 10/31/2015
* USD 18,357.00

US-Mexico Planning Visit: Collaborative Study of Active Faulting in Baja
California, Mexico&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
NSF-CNIC funds will support the initiation of a collaboration between
geoscientists at the University of Texas, Austin, and the Centro de
Investigación Científica y de Educación Superior de Ensenada (CICESE). The long-
term research focus of this collaboration will be working toward a better
understanding of rates of active faulting and seismic hazard for faults in
northern Baja California, which are part of the southern San Andreas Fault
system. The primary goal of the initial planning meeting will be to bring
together an interdisciplinary team of scientists that will work towards
addressing these research goals by first (1) examine existing datasets to
highlight critical scientific gaps, (2) compile existing Spanish- and English-
language published and unpublished literature, (3) determine how to combine
resources to answer key scientific questions and develop new research methods,
(4) conduct exploratory field work, and (5) design strategies for disseminating
what we learn to local. From a hazard perpective, the collaboration will be
focused on the city of Ensenada since it sits above and just north of the Agua
Blanca Fault, the largest of two faults in northern Baja California that
transfer displacement away from the Pacific-North American tectonic plate
boundary that lies to the east. Despite having been recognized as an important
structure over half a century ago, because of its location in northwestern
Mexico on the periphery of San Andreas system it has garnered little attention.
However, recent faulting nearby has served as a reminder that this part of the
plate boundary system is too poorly understood given its role in plate boundary
deformation. Earthquakes on the Agua Blanca Fault are a primary concern, but the
first type of measurements we plan to collect will also help to illuminate its
role in transferring slip off shore to other active faults and will lend insight
into the proportion of tectonic plate motion that is expressed as earthquake-
generating brittle faulting versus more benign diffuse
folding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In greater detail, the focus of this project will
be to measure new geologic slip rates for the Agua Blanca Fault and by doing so
to fill three existing gaps in our understanding of southern San Andreas (sSAF)
plate boundary system. First, the new slip rates will inform estimates of the
earthquake hazard this fault poses for US and Mexican cities. Existing slip rate
estimates for the ABF are highly imprecise, but suggest that it may accommodate
as much as 14% of total plate boundary slip. These estimates as well as the
geomorphic expression of the ABF are suggestive of a fault that is capable of
producing damaging surface ruptures, but the new geologic slip rates are needed
to confirm this. Second, new slip rates for the ABF constrain on the amount of
plate boundary slip accommodated by the poorly understood network of faults off
shore of southern California and northern Baja California. Previous estimates
suggest a 2-20% of total plate boundary slip may be accommodated off shore, but
confirming this by collecting sub-marine slip rates is complex and expensive.
However, since the ABF is the primary fault feeding slip offshore, its slip rate
constrains the minimum offshore slip rate. Third, new ABF slip rates will help
to reveal the proportion of plate boundary slip that is absorbed by off-fault
distributed deformation rather than brittle faulting. Geodetic and geologic slip
rates indicate that the major onshore faults in this region accommodate roughly
80% of total relative plate motion. Since the new ABF slip rates will constrain
how much plate boundary slip is accommodated off shore, whatever remains of the
20% slip deficit after both on- and offshore slip is accounted for can be
attributed to undetected off-fault distributed deformation. In these ways, this
we hope to harness the strengths of multiple scientists from universities in
both the US and Mexico to answer key outstanding questions regarding seismic
hazard and slip partitioning in a prominent but poorly understood section of the
southern San Andreas Fault system.