* 1359300
* REU Site: Mathematics Research Experience for Pre-service and for In-service Teachers
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2018
* Saad El-Zanati, Board of Trustees of Illinois State University
* Continuing Grant
* Nandini Kannan
* 03/31/2018
* USD 404,987.00

The Illinois State University REU for Pre-service and In-service Secondary
Mathematics Teachers (ISU REU) will offer projects in discrete mathematics
during the summers of 2014, 2015, and 2016. The ISU REU is an eight-week summer
research experience for 8 pre-service and 4 in-service secondary mathematics
teachers. Participants explore research topics in discrete mathematics with
emphasis on experimentation, formulation of researchable questions, careful
reasoning and justification, and clear, precise reporting. Most of the
investigated topics are the areas of graph designs, affine and projective
designs, graph decompositions and labelings, graph coloring, and vector space
partitions. An added emphasis of the project is on the development and
implementation, by the REU participants, of a one-week Mathematics Research Camp
for 12 high school students from the Chicago Public School (CPS) district.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;REU participants work in teams of three undergraduates,
one practicing teacher, and a faculty mentor on one or more problems with a
common theme. The participants are on campus for 30 hours each week with a
faculty member available at all times. The main objective of the project is to
provide a genuine research opportunity for the participants, helping them to
become highly qualified teachers who can meet the national demands for increased
student proficiency and adapt to the changing needs of our technological
society. Providing teachers an authentic mathematics research experience
develops in them the habits of mind of a mathematician that can then be
encouraged and fostered in their future students. The math camp for CPS students
is held during the sixth week of the REU and is intended to give the REU
participants an opportunity to apply what they learned during the REU in a high
school classroom setting. In the final week of the site, the project teams
devote the bulk of their energy to preparation of results for dissemination,
which includes presentations at the Joint Mathematics Meetings and other venues.
Each REU project generally produces one or more conference presentations, and
many also produce papers published in undergraduate or professional journals.