* 1359461
* REU Site: New-Generation Power-Efficient Computer Systems Design
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2017
* Behrooz Shirazi, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 04/30/2017
* USD 323,660.00

The goal of this REU Site program is to offer a unique training opportunity for
undergraduates to conduct research in the multidisciplinary area of New-
generation Power-efficient Computer Systems Design. In the design of high-
performance massive multicore chips, power and heat, along with performance, are
now considered as dominant constraints. The increasing power consumption is of
growing concern due to several reasons, e.g., cost, performance, reliability,
scalability, and environmental impact. More specifically, timely advances in
exascale computing cannot be achieved without a holistic approach to reducing
energy. The proposed REU program facilitates research and training in the
complementary, multi-layered disciplines ranging from application layer to
middleware to low level circuit design. Due to partnering with other REU
programs on campus, the participating students will have opportunities to
interact with a broad range of REU students from around the country, with many
faculty members, and with graduate students. One of the intellectual merits of
this program is that it will enable high quality interdisciplinary research that
links ideas from compilers and OS, Network-on-Chip (NoC), computer architecture,
parallel and distributed computing, complex networks, optimization techniques,
digital communications, and circuit design to address power and thermal
efficiency in multicore-based computer systems. Another intellectual merit is
that the program creates opportunities for undergraduates to study challenges in
designing new generation of power efficient multicore architectures. As a unique
feature, the participating students are exposed to research and development
activities in the sustainable computing area through planned visits to partner
industries and a national lab. The broader impact of this REU program includes
(1) making contributions to producing a workforce that is trained in the
multidisciplinary topic of sustainable computer system design; (2) advancing
discovery in energy savings in computers for economical and ecological reasons;
and (3) promoting teaching and learning in sustainable computing. This
interdisciplinary effort is valuable for undergraduate students as they are
exposed to research ideas that will have a significant impact on environmental
sustainability.