* 1359632
* EAGER: Consumer Response to Security Incidences and Data Breach Notification
* SBE,SES
* 06/15/2014,09/30/2016
* Artur Dubrawski, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* chu-hsiang chang
* 09/30/2016
* USD 199,908.00

Despite intense media attention on data breaches and identity thefts, very
little is known about how users respond to adverse security events. Effective
security policy making and firm response critically depends on how users respond
when the firm holding their data is breached. Many argue that users may not pay
adequate attention to security events or data breaches. They may ignore firms'
breach notifications, especially if they receive many such notifications or when
the notices are not specific enough. Even when users respond, it may be nuanced
and subtle and not readily measured. This project examines users' responses to
security events by assembling a large and unique field dataset. By collaborating
with a large financial institution, the research team has access to detailed
data for more than half million customers for more than six years spread over
different geographies in the US. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;User response can range
from leaving the firm to aversion to Internet and mobile based banking to
changes in adopting other banking services. Combining econometrics techniques
with machine learning techniques, this project aims to identify degree of
behavior changes in user behavior due to an adverse security event or breach
notification. The research team aims to estimate how the user response is
conditioned by user characteristics (demographic), market characteristics
(competition), and breach characteristics. If successful, this project could
answer a wide variety of questions that may prove helpful for how firms can
successfully overcome such events and how policy makers can fine tune their
policy.