* 1359895
* Refugee Resettlement in Non-Traditional Immigrant Destinations
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2014,11/30/2018
* Pablo Bose, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 11/30/2018
* USD 207,607.00

Refugees are designated by the U.S. Federal government as immigrants who have
been allowed to enter the U.S. to escape dangerous conditions in their countries
of origin. Recent years have witnessed the movement of refugees to locales
different from "gateway" cities such as New York, Chicago, and San Francisco
where they traditionally settled. This project will investigate the resettlement
experience of refugees in small cities in the US, beginning in New England and
eventually expanding the study to other sites in the South, Midwest, and
Northwest. This project will build on the work of other social scientists who
have studied the effects of such settlement patterns -- what the economic
impacts might be, how refugees are adjusting to new lives, how their children
are doing in school, and how their new homes are adjusting to unfamiliar faces.
Many of these new destinations do not have long histories of integrating
newcomers into their midst, making it important to ask what kinds of impacts are
being felt in local schools, industries, and social services because of this
influx. These are important questions not only for researchers, but also for
urban planners and civic leaders, for policymakers, and for residents in these
communities. Because the project is being conducted in concert with community
organizations, including mutual aid associations, resettlement agencies, and
local social service providers, researchers will generate useful information and
insights regarding why refugees are being placed in small cities without large
existing immigrant populations, what the refugees' experience of settlement has
been, and if and how their new communities are being transformed by their
arrival. The project will result in a model with tools and data to assist
scholars, policymakers, service providers, community leaders and refugees
understand and improve the resettlement experience in new destinations
throughout the U.S.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates resettlement
processes in three stages. First, researchers will conduct interviews with the
decision makers who send refugees to their initial resettlement destinations and
with the local leaders who are in charge of helping the newcomers adjust to
their arrival. Second, the project will survey a number of recent refugees
regarding their experiences on two occasions -- shortly after they first arrive
they will be asked about their expectations for their new life, and one year
later the same group will be asked questions about their actual experiences.
These surveys will examine a range of important aspects of refugee and immigrant
life including education, employment, healthcare, housing, social integration,
and transportation. Finally, researchers will conduct a series of workshops on
perceptions of landscape change, some with recently arrived refugees and others
with long-term residents of the neighborhoods into which they have been placed.
These workshops will draw on important tools in geographic research including
mental and sketch mapping, photography, and qualitative GIS. Together these
various forms of inquiry will help to develop a model for incorporating data-
driven local knowledge on resettlement -- from both refugees and the communities
where they live -- into regional and national planning on refugee placement and
reception. Incorporating such local knowledge into policymaking has the
potential for creating better outcomes in refugee resettlement across the
country.