* 1359019
* REU Site: Research Experience for student Veterans in Advanced Manufacturing and entrePreneurship (REVAMP)
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2018
* Chun Zhang, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 04/30/2018
* USD 359,060.00

This REU site is funded by the Division of Engineering Education and Centers of
NSF.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The three year REU Site program at Georgia Institute
of Technology will enhance the educational experience of undergraduate students
in the fundamental principles of (1) advanced manufacturing science and
technology; and (2) the transition of basic discoveries in manufacturing science
into innovative commercial products and processes. This REU program will focus
on training of veterans and minority students and it will engage 10
undergraduate students each year who will perform hands-on fundamental
manufacturing research in several critical areas including additive
manufacturing, precision machining, scalable nanomanufacturing, and sustainable
design and manufacturing. By leveraging Georgia Tech Manufacturing Institute
(GTMI)'s world-class facilities, diverse technical expertise, and inspiring
interdisciplinary research environment, the proposed REU activity will give
students the opportunity to improve knowledge in the critically important
advanced manufacturing technology topic areas mentioned above. Training in
research methodology, performance of scientific manufacturing research, and
completion of technical seminars provided by GTMI faculty will significantly
expand each student?s manufacturing knowledgebase, preparing them for future
careers in advanced manufacturing. The research experience will be enhanced by
entrepreneurship training via seminars focused on the fundamentals of
entrepreneurship offered by the Georgia Tech Enterprise Innovation Institute
(EI2) and interactions with startup company leaders through the Advanced
Technology Development Center (ATDC). With such entrepreneurship training,
students will also have a unique transformative opportunity to develop critical
leadership skills for transitioning basic research discoveries into
commercially-viable innovations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU site focuses on
the critical national need of manufacturing, and more specifically, advanced
manufacturing research and technology, which will play a crucial role in
positioning the U.S. manufacturing sector as a continued world leader. A unique
feature of this REU site is its focus on training of veterans and minority
students. To accomplish this, GTMI will target the top 15 universities/colleges
in the nation for veteran enrollment and several HBCU's and institutions with
high female enrollment for recruiting effort. A minimum of five veteran
participants will be recruited to the program each summer and at least 40% of
all participants will be from underrepresented groups. This REU site will serve
as a new educational model for training 21st century engineers. It will combine
advanced manufacturing research training with the principles of
entrepreneurship, encouraging students to become leaders in innovation and
technology transfer, and thereby helping to fill the current void between
fundamental research and technology commercialization in the US. The site will
benefit from the unique skill sets and maturity of veterans while simultaneously
providing an unparalleled opportunity to ease their transition back into
civilian life as a student and improve their future employability. Consequently,
it is expected that the site will serve as a model for educating veterans in
STEM and entrepreneurship that can be replicated by other colleges and
universities throughout the nation. In addition, the REU site will support and
encourage strong participation by women and minorities in manufacturing-related
STEM fields.