* 1359358
* REU Site: Training Diverse Undergraduate Teams of Veterans and Non-Veterans to Conduct Trauma Research with Veterans
* SBE,SMA
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2017
* Brooks Gump, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 03/31/2017
* USD 285,679.00

Intellectual Merit. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU site is a joint effort
between Syracuse University, SUNY Oswego, and SUNY Upstate Medical University
and constitutes a well-structured program for a cohort of 10 students each year.
The objective is to train veterans and non-veterans to conduct trauma-related
research with veteran participants. The site offers an online 2-week orientation
as well as research mentoring and coursework during a 4-week summer institute by
highly qualified and productive faculty members that have a track record of
involving undergraduates in their research. In addition to these faculty
mentors, several consultants from various military and non-military backgrounds
provide a novel combination of perspectives to address multidisciplinary
research questions as part of a speaker series. The program draws on resources
including seminar rooms, laboratories, and housing through Syracuse University,
SUNY Upstate Medical Center, and SUNY Oswego. With respect to impact on program
participants, we expect to increase students' ability to conduct trauma research
and increase their chances of admission into graduate school. With respect to
scientific merit, multiple projects involve students and address important
research questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current interests include research designed to gain a
better understanding of the chemical, clinical, cognitive, and family factors
associated with various trauma outcomes. Being able to better predict the
development of PTSD following trauma can support efforts at prevention and
treatment of PTSD. Moreover, our society would benefit from a better
understanding of PTSD since the lifetime prevalence of PTSD among adult
Americans is relatively high, estimated at 6.8%. This REU site broadens the
participation of underrepresented groups by recruiting veterans (particularly
minorities and women, when possible) as participants. We also provide an
opportunity for veterans to re-integrate to an undergraduate research culture in
a safe environment with appropriate supports. Moreover, this veteran
participation in the design and implementation of trauma-related research with
fellow veterans constitutes a novel application of "participatory research".
Beyond the direct benefit to veteran participants, non-veteran participants can
learn to appreciate the value of veteran participation in trauma-related
research, particularly when that research involves a veteran population.