* 1359414
* REU Site: Integrating Research in Sustainable Energy and the Environment across Disciplines (IR-SEED)
* ENG,EEC
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2018
* Mohamed Abdelrahman, Texas A&M University-Kingsville
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 06/30/2018
* USD 379,509.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;The REU Site at TAMUK supported by the Division
of Engineering Education and Centers seeks to provide an impactful summer
research experience in the emerging field of sustainable energy and expand
research opportunities for underrepresented students. This will enable them to
understand their own levels of aptitude and interest in a career in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) and give them the tools to
prepare for the next stage in their education and career development. The
intellectual merit of the REU Site lies in constructing a new and critically
needed pipeline for the next generation of sustainable energy researchers,
equipped to address the broad theme of sustainable energy research and social
and environmental issues, which is a theme of local significance and global
implications. The research, educational, and career mentorship provided by the
program is envisioned to stimulate the students to look at their academic work
in a new light and to provide a spark for possible careers in academic research
or industrial innovation. Participating students will tackle various topics of
energy research, interact with faculty mentors and students from different
engineering departments, and develop a holistic perspective of energy research.
The site is designed to guide students to work both independently and as members
of a research team. Each student will be required to write a conference paper
style report of their research for publication and deliver an oral and poster
presentation of their summer research projects in the poster competition at the
end of 10-week program. The REU site fits within an initiative in the College of
Engineering at TAMUK to involve undergraduate students in research, and to boost
the participation of US citizens, especially Hispanic, African-American, and
women students into graduate school. The REU site builds on a vision of grooming
budding researchers from underrepresented students to embrace the challenge of
energy research and building future leaders who proactively contribute to the
nation's energy self-reliance agenda.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY: &lt;br/&gt;This REU Site hosted at Texas A&amp;M University-Kingsville
(TAMUK) and supported by the National Science Foundation's Division of
Engineering Education and Centers is designed to develop and implement a model
environment for multidisciplinary collaborative efforts where research and
education are tightly integrated around the different facets of energy research.
It features a 10-week interdisciplinary team approach to mentor students on
energy research projects. The proposed sustainable energy research consists of
the following major research areas: 1) Renewable energy 2) Traditional clean
energy, and 3) Energy Policy, Environmental and Social Impacts. Specific
objectives are to: 1) provide research opportunities in different aspects of
sustainable energy research to undergraduate students, especially Hispanic,
African-American, and women; 2) increase the number of underrepresented students
who participate in graduate education; 3) use the REU site for building
collaborative links among faculty and students from different departments within
the college of engineering at TAMUK. Through participation in cutting-edge
research with faculty mentors working at the forefront of their respective
disciplines, students will engage in complex scientific studies on sustainable
energy research topics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program is structured to
teach students how to formulate research questions as well as how to develop and
modify research plans with the guidance of their research mentors. Students will
learn to work independently and to collaborate with other group members as they
conduct research in specific topics in energy research. Ten students from
various engineering and science departments will be recruited through a
nationwide search with special emphasis on Hispanic, African-American, and women
students. Students will report and present their research results in multiple
settings. In addition to the hands-on collaborative research experience,
technical and social activities will be incorporated into the program to provide
students with a solid foundation in analytical, writing, and presentation skills
and to enhance interactions between REU students and faculty mentors.