* 1359183
* REU Site: Biomedical Engineering in Simulations, Imaging and Modeling (BME-SIM)
* ENG,EEC
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2018
* Stephanie George, East Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 03/31/2018
* USD 287,949.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: This program is supported by the Division of Engineering
Education and Centers. The goal of the BME-Simulations, Imaging and Modeling
(SIM) Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) is to provide a quality
research experience to students, especially underrepresented minorities, in
eastern North Carolina increasing awareness of and application to graduate
school. At the end of the program students should have a better understanding of
how to conduct research, increased awareness of graduate school, clarification
and reinforcement of STEM career path, and greater identification as
engineer/scientist. To achieve these program goals we plan to engage
participants for longer than the 10 week summer research experience by
collaborating with off-site mentors at our targeted institutions. To ensure a
broad applicant pool, student recruitment will begin at our targeted
institutions: Elizabeth City State University, Fayetteville State University,
and North Carolina Central University, historically black institutions, and
University of North Carolina-Pembroke, a public institution serving a large
Native American population. National recruiting by listserv announcements and
website information will supplement the targeted recruiting. Graduates of the
program will gain a better understanding of graduate school and be competitive
in the graduate school application process increasing diversity in the STEM
pipeline. The educational goals of the REU will be accomplished through a
multidisciplinary approach using simulations, imaging, and modeling as a common
thread. The popularity of computational research models has increased due to
limited use of human subjects and animals. In addition, models can be used to
test hypothetical situations or new devices. The introduction of subject
specific modeling has allowed for detailed analysis using the subject's own
parameters. Generally these parameters can be derived from non-invasive imaging
techniques. Through the REU program students will be exposed to cutting edge
research utilizing advanced computational models with applications in biomedical
engineering.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: This program is supported by the Division of Engineering
Education and Centers. The BME-Simulations, Imaging and Modeling (SIM) Research
Experience for Undergraduates (REU) will provide high quality research
experiences to targeted students, specifically underrepresented minorities.
Exposing underrepresented minorities to innovative research will increase their
awareness about graduate school and ultimately increase the STEM graduate school
pipe line. The proposed REU program will also strengthen their STEM career paths
and increase student's identities as scientists or engineers. These research
opportunities would generally not be available to the targeted student
populations without this program. Due to the multidisciplinary nature of the
faculty mentors, the proposed work will also encourage research collaboration
among the faculty mentors and across academic departments on campus. Including
off-site mentors in the recruitment process will facilitate collaboration
between ECU and the targeted institutions increasing research opportunities.