* 1359307
* REU Site: Mathematics, Applied Mathematics, and Statistics Research Experience for Undergraduates (MAPS-REU)
* MPS,DMS
* 03/15/2014,02/28/2017
* John Benedetto, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Nandini Kannan
* 02/28/2017
* USD 299,492.00

This grant will fund the Mathematics, Applied Mathematics, and Statistics
Research Experience for Undergraduates (MAPS-REU), organized by the Department
of Mathematics at the University of Maryland, College Park. For eight weeks
during each of the summers of 2014, 2015, and 2016, four different projects will
be offered. For each project, specific questions and research tasks will be
posed and isolated for in-depth study; and the principal investigators will
guide the students to experimentally explore these questions and tasks. The PIs
will lead the students to use their experimental findings to formulate
conjectures and attempt to rigorously prove them. There will be projects in
algebra/number theory, applied harmonic analysis, chaotic dynamics, geometry,
mathematical biology, probability and random processes, quantum dynamics, and
statistics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Each year and for each of the four projects, a
faculty member will engage two to three students in one or more problems in one
of the areas mentioned above. The lead faculty (group leader) will introduce
necessary background on his/her projects, will pose specific questions, will
isolate problems, and/or will formulate numerical experiments for the students.
The group leader will schedule two to three weekly meetings with each student of
his/her group. To help mentor and maintain direct contact with the REU students,
a post-candidacy graduate student will be assigned to each group. The role of
the graduate student will be to maintain direct contact with the REU students
through daily meetings and further mentoring. REU students will be asked to give
regular oral presentations on their work or on background material of common
interest. This program will also feature a written component: students will
create handouts to supplement their presentations, as well as a summary of their
results at the end of the project. In addition, the students will be introduced
to searching mathematics literature using various platforms. The program will
close with a final presentation by each REU student. The MAPS-REU students will
deliver their final report to both the lead faculty as well as to the PI and the
co-PI, and these reports will be made available on the program website. The
students will also have opportunities to present their findings at various
mathematical meetings. In addition, results from the MAPS-REU will be published
in mathematics journals.