* 1359187
* REU Site: Mathematical Biology at the University of North Carolina at Greensboro
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2018
* Jan Rychtar, University of North Carolina Greensboro
* Standard Grant
* Nandini Kannan
* 04/30/2018
* USD 275,952.00

Many animals live in populations whose internal structure reflects multiple
factors, for example, the interplay between territorial behavior between
conspecifics and the spatial arrangement of the physical environment or other
interactions demonstrated within the context of a social hierarchy established
by dominance or kinship. This project will develop a unified mathematical
framework for structured models of animal territoriality and social
interactions. Using evolutionary graph theory, student researchers will study
and classify the distribution of finite populations moving and interacting
across a network of distinct sites under different models of interaction. Among
several questions that will be explored, the participants will seek to
understand the effect that the existing population structure has on the level of
aggressiveness between conspecifics.

This project will provide an understanding for the natural emergence of the ways
in which animal populations and social groups organize and partition themselves
into cooperative or antagonistic factions. The participants will endeavor to
create a generalizable framework which could provide insight in multiple fields
such as ecology, evolution, and the behavioral sciences. Many STEM fields are
undergoing dynamic changes as a consequence of cross-disciplinary interactions,
and this project will develop a diverse cadre of new scientists capable of
working across traditional academic and scientific boundaries. This REU Site
project trains undergraduate students to work at the interface of mathematics
and the biological sciences. Each year, eight undergraduate students will
participate in a ten week summer program and will be integrated into research
teams lead by faculty members. The participants will be trained in pertinent
mathematical techniques and biological concepts and they will engage in original
research. This REU experience will improve participants' quantitative,
analytical, and scientific communication skills and will prepare them for
graduate school and scientific careers.