* 1359191
* REU Site: Bio and Soft Matter Research Training (B-SMaRT)
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2014,02/28/2018
* Jennifer Ross, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 02/28/2018
* USD 320,001.00

ID: 1359191 PI: Ross, Jennifer ORG: University of Massachusetts-
Amherst&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: REU Site: Bio and Soft Matter Research
Training (B-SMaRT)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;The
scientific theme of this 10 week Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) is
Soft and Biological Materials. Teaming up with Springfield Technical Community
College (STCC), the University of Massachusetts Amherst (UMass) will train
undergraduates in both experimental and theoretical aspects of soft and
biological materials. Such materials make up most of the world around us from
plastic sheets and our human skin to snow piles and cells all inhabiting similar
energy scales while existing from the nanoscale to the macroscopic. The
objectives of this REU are to: (1) Recruit more students from STCC to UMass for
transfer into Physics. (2) Recruit and increase retention of under-represented
populations of students from STCC to UMass in STEM majors through early exposure
to research. (3) Inspire and motivate students to pursue graduate studies in
soft matter and biological physics. (4) Train students to become independent
researchers who will thrive in collaborative research and excel in connecting
experiment to theory. (5) Train students in scientific communication skills,
with a focus on interdisciplinary communication between physics and the life
sciences. (6) Provide students with strategies for professional success through
a Professional Development Seminar covering career paths, ethics, diversity in
the workplace, identifying mentors, interdisciplinary communication, team-
building, and development of collegial relationships. Students will be oriented
through specific bootcamps in scientific research, experimental methods, and
theoretical and computational methods. Scientific and professional development
workshops will be held through the summer to educate and train students in
scientific reasoning and problem solving skills and give them valuable social
skills such as communication and presentation skills. The program will assess
learning gains for scientific and social skills before and after the 10 week
session and will also evaluate the students' attitudes towards science, physics,
and soft and biological materials science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY &lt;br/&gt;The University of Massachusetts Amherst together with
Springfield Technical Community College is hosting the Biological and Soft
Matter Research Traineeships (B-SMaRT) REU Site. Biological and soft materials
are all around us. Look out your window and you may see snow or sand piling up.
Look at your coffee cup and you will see coffee stains. Look at your skin and
you will see it elastically wrinkle and deform as your muscles move. Although
these examples may seem unimportant because they are everyday occurrences, the
mechanical and dynamical properties of these systems are still not understood at
fundamental levels. Understanding seemingly mundane systems opens us to
understanding of fundamental and important questions about how to prevent grain
silo deaths, how to clean up oil spills, how to make self-folding robots on the
microscale, and how to fight diseases. The program will endeavor to engage
students in the fundamental aspects of physics through these interesting, yet
accessible physical problems of the everyday world. Furthermore, due to the
accessible nature of these problems, students can be exposed to true research
experiences in soft and biological materials and learn techniques of both
experiment and theory.