* 1359488
* REU:   From the intertidal to the ocean deep: Monterey Bay Regional Ocean Science REU Program
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2014,11/30/2018
* Corey Garza, University Corporation at Monterey Bay
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 11/30/2018
* USD 504,942.00

This new REU Site will be based at California State University, Monterey Bay
(CSUMB). The program will bring 12 students to CSUMB to participate in
oceanographic research for 10 weeks each summer for three years. CSUMB, a
Hispanic-Serving Institution with a strong undergraduate research program, will
serve as the hub of this Monterey Bay Regional REU program. In addition to
research opportunities at CSUMB, students will be paired with mentors at five
partner institutions: Hopkins Marine Station of Stanford University, the Naval
Postgraduate School, Moss Landing Marine Laboratories, Monterey Bay Aquarium
Research Institute, and Elkhorn Slough National Estuarine Research Reserve.
Students will live at CSUMB and the PI will organize all professional
development activities, but students will have the opportunity to participate in
research at the partner institutions. This program leverages the scientific and
educational assets of the Monterey Bay region to increase the diversity and
number of students prepared for careers in Ocean Science. To accomplish this
goal the PI will recruit participants with an emphasis on students from
underrepresented groups and those with limited access to oceanographic research.
Students will be recruited nationally and will be provided with stipends,
housing for the duration of the program, a meal plan, and transportation.