* 1359240
* REU Site: Studies in Social Inequality and Social Vulnerability
* SBE,SMA
* 04/15/2014,05/31/2018
* Mark Fossett, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 05/31/2018
* USD 269,997.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Sites program at Texas A
&amp; M University aims to attract undergraduates to careers in social science
research and to increase the participation of talented individuals from under-
represented groups (e.g., African Americans and Latinos). The Departments of
Sociology (SOCI) and Landscape Architecture and Urban Planning (LAUP)
collaborate to host this REU Site that brings undergraduate students majoring in
sociology, planning, and related disciplines to participate in an eight-week
Summer Institute focusing on Studies of Inequality and Social Vulnerability. The
primary student activities are participating in a faculty-supervised research
project leading to a research paper and presentation at a professional
conference, while upporting activities include a seminar providing grounding in
theory, data, and methods relevant for research projects; two research field
trips; and workshops on opportunities for graduate education and research
careers. The site theme "Studies of Social Inequality and Social Vulnerability"
reflects the expertise of the researcher mentors from SOCI &amp; LAUP and is
proven effective in attracting applications from African American and Latino
students. The eight research mentors have strong research and mentoring
credentials and prior experience in overseeing successful NSF REU and SBE
programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students are incorporated into the ongoing
research programs of the mentors and assigned individual research projects.
Selected examples include: documenting disparities in socioeconomic,
residential, and health outcomes by race and poverty-income status; assessing
differential vulnerability of social groups to natural and technical hazards;
assessing how hazards (e.g., hurricanes and floods) differentially impact ethnic
minority, low income, and other vulnerable populations; investigating
correlates, causes, and consequences of residential segregation by race and
income; conducting historical case studies of the evolution of residential
segregation over time in selected cities; and assessing variation in recovery
from the impact of hazards. Diversity goals will be served by practices used in
prior successful REU Sites. These include working closely with faculty at
minority serving universities that have limited STEM student research
opportunities to identify promising, motivated students with interests in
graduate education and research careers. The proposed REU Site draws on the
faculty expertise and institutional resources of two nationally prominent
doctoral departments to provide students intensive research experiences based on
participating in ongoing research projects, some funded by NSF, relating to
social inequality and social vulnerability. Students undertake individual
projects directed by faculty mentors and designed to be feasible over the summer
institute and within the capabilities of advanced undergraduates. Although the
mmediate contributions of student projects to science could be modest, the
larger intellectual merit is enhancing student research capabilities,
understanding of and interest in research, and odds of going on to graduate
education and research careers.