* 1359581
* I-Corps:  Advancing Precision Manufacturing in Non-Factory Environments with Low-Cost Positioning Sensor
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Stephen Canfield, Tennessee Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 05/31/2014
* USD 50,000.00

The proposed innovation is for a robust, low-cost positioning and localization
system that is suitable for use in non-factory manufacturing environments. The
system combines focused-beam sonar sensor information with kinematic/dynamic
model estimates of the local platform to provide simultaneous localization and
mapping (SLAM) information. This system is well suited for manufacturing in
which GPS is not available, and addresses many of the limitations in current
mobile robot positioning systems based on Lidar (Laser Interferometry Detection
and Ranging) scanning or vision. Acoustic-based systems are much more robust in
non-factory manufacturing environments but are not commonly used in mobile robot
positioning systems because of the wide scan field associated with a single
sensor. The proposed innovation will provide local processing capability
dedicated to each sensor to collect feature information that can then be
incorporated into the overall localization strategy. The proposed device will
enhance the mechanization platforms that currently exist with basic positioning
capability allowing improved performance by the operator and will open up new
capabilities for machine control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this
technology can have a significant impact on improving the productivity of
workers in non-factory manufacturing environments. Historically, this industry
has seen little application of technology that has revolutionized many other
industries (factory automation, etc.). Field maintenance, fabrication and
assembly has not seen the productivity gains of their factory based cousins.
Field workers are less productive, subject to more injuries and have shorter
careers. This effort will provide innovations to directly address enhanced
productivity tools for these workers. Further, it enhances the productivity of
many related developments in robotics intelligent machines for these industries.
These tools make non-factory manufacturing safer, more productive, require
greater skills, and promote the profession of manufacturing in the US.