* 1359810
* Transient Intermediates in Proton and Electron Transfer
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2018
* Frantisek Turecek, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 08/31/2018
* USD 514,685.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamic & Mechanism B Program
of the Chemistry Division, Professor Frantisek Turecek of the Department of
Chemistry at University of Washington, Seattle, will develop new methods for
improved protein sequencing by mass spectrometry. The goal of this research is
first to gain deep understanding of peptide backbone dissociations that provide
information on the peptide amino acid sequence which is then spliced to complete
the sequence of the parent protein. Protein sequencing is the critical step in
determining mutations, post-translational modifications, and damage that cause
many diseases and degenerative processes. Cancer, Parkinson and Alzheimer
diseases and aging all include protein changes as one of the major causes
disrupting cellular processes and their regulation. This research group is also
well-positioned to provide the highest level of education and training for
students of different cultural backgrounds including those underrepresented in
physical and life sciences.

Mass spectrometry is the method of choice for protein and peptide analysis. In
the so-called bottom-up approach, the protein or a mixture thereof is
enzymatically cleaved to a mixture of peptides that are separated on-line and
analyzed. Mass spectrometry analysis provides valuable information on the
peptide mass and amino acid sequence and composition. The information can be
evaluated by matching against a data base to find the generic protein for which
there is a known gene. However, proteins from organisms lacking genome data, or
modified proteins due to disease or damage must be analyzed by the so-called de
novo sequencing, implying complete sequence readout from the mass spectrometry
data alone. In this project, new methods are investigated and developed to
improve de novo protein sequencing. The project has several goals: (1) A new
method of peptide capture and chemical modification on solid phase support is
being developed to simplify peptide mixtures and increase the level of sequence
readout. (2) Fundamental studies of peptide ion dissociations following electron
transfer will be carried out to determine the effects of ion 3D structure and
energy deposition. (3) A new UV photodissociation method is introduced to
provide a different means of activation, causing efficient dissociation of gas-
phase peptide ions. Results from these studies will be used to refine the
current theoretical model of peptide ion activation and dissociation and utilize
it for prediction of ion behavior.