* 1359425
* REU site: Complexity Across Disciplines (CAD)
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2018
* Liljana Babinkostova, Boise State University
* Continuing Grant
* Nandini Kannan
* 04/30/2018
* USD 287,976.00

This grant funds the REU site "Complexity Across Disciplines" at Boise State
University, hosted in the Department of Mathematics. This site seeks to produce
cohorts of young researchers whose work and vision transcend current boundaries
between STEM disciplines. The research mentors will each engage a team of
nationally recruited undergraduate students in a research project with strong
interdisciplinary scope and based on finitary mathematical structures. The
mathematical foundations for these projects include algebraic structures,
combinatorial structures and game theory. Each of the cohorts of ten REU
researchers will be thoroughly engaged in contemporary research problems with
applications to cryptology, biology and several other fields of inquiry. The
projects have deep connections with important open problems in mathematics, and
could lead to discoveries of importance to the security of currently
commercially used cryptosystems. The idea to examine certain genomic
rearrangement processes from a game-theoretic point of view is new to the field,
has inherent value as a mathematical exploration, and has the potential to
clarify observed phenomena in natural rearrangement processes. The study of
splitting systems could give new insights into mathematical tools for medical,
chemical and electrical testing as well as error correction.

The nature of computing and complexity has expanded from the academic to the
practical arena through great strides in scientific understanding of basic
processes of life, the biggest transformation in information processing in
history through invention of the internet, and automation of all basic tasks in
our daily lives. The need to understand fundamental limitations on computing,
thus on basic processes of life, daily living and information processing, has
never been greater. The research projects featured at this site ultimately
relate to the question of limitations on computing. The motivations for the
offered projects arise from the quest for efficient search or sorting algorithms
and for efficient information security tools. The research direction of this REU
program and its projects are guided by experienced mentors that include an early
career investigator, a female researcher and a senior scientist. Through its
recruitment process this program brings undergraduate research experiences to
students from institutions across the nation where such opportunities are
limited. By involving the REU students in intellectual outreach activities
targeting K-12 students through the REU site's partnership with the NASA funded
Idaho Science and Aerospace Scholars, students from rural communities with
limited opportunities have one-on-one exposure to highly motivated STEM students
from across the nation. This outreach activity has the potential to transform
the vision of the K-12 students about their own careers in a STEM field. The
site offers, in collaboration with several other summer undergraduate research
programs at Boise State University, a rich array of professional and
interdisciplinary development events.