* 1359769
* Thermochemistry of Metal-Ligand Bonds (Singly and Multiply Charged) and Protonated Peptides
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Peter Armentrout, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 07/31/2017
* USD 700,330.00

In this award, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms A
(CSDM-A) Program of the Division of Chemistry Professor Peter Armentrout of the
Department of Chemistry of the University of Utah and graduate student
researchers are studying the reactivity of electrically-charged species (ions)
with neutral molecules in extraordinarily well-defined systems. From these
experiments, they obtain information about the energetics of reactions
(thermochemistry) as well as information about the speed with which these
reactions take place (kinetics). Students educated in the Armentrout laboratory
will be trained for a wide variety of technical careers. Besides his scientific
work, Prof. Armentrout reaches large numbers of members of the public through
his Christmas Faraday Lectures at the University of
Utah.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prof. Armentrout and his graduate students will be
carrying out a series of experiments, exploring the reactivity of transition
metal cations with neutral reaction partners, using the Armentrout group's
guided ion beam mass spectrometer (GIBMS) instruments. Studies will include: (1)
state-specific measurements of transition metal cation reactivity, with an
emphasis on quantitative evaluation of spin-orbit effects on chemical
reactivity; (2) measurement of solvation energies of multiply charged metal
ions, including explicit quantification of the potential energy surface for
charge separation channels, emphasizing environmentally and biologically
important examples; (3) continued studies of binding of biologically-relevant
molecules to metal cations and protonated systems; and (4) theoretical work to
complement all of the experimental studies in (1) - (3). Students receiving
training in Prof. Armentrout's laboratory have gone on to positions in academia
and industry.