* 1359548
* Sparse Solutions to Classes of Quadratic Programming Problems: Theoretical Fundamentals, Solving Strategies and Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/16/2013,08/31/2015
* Jiming Peng, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Donald Hearn
* 08/31/2015
* USD 132,655.00

The research objective of this award is to characterize sparse solutions to
optimization problems arising from applications such as image processing and
portfolio selection. The primary goal is to develop a new theoretical framework
that will establish the existence of sparse optimal or approximate solutions to
classes of intractable and non-convex quadratic optimization problems and derive
precise probabilistic characterization of the sparsity of the sparsest optimal
or approximate solutions to the underlying optimization problem. These
theoretical results will be validated via comprehensive numerical experiments.
The exploited sparsity at the optimal solution will be used to design provably-
good efficient algorithms for certain classes of quadratic optimization
problems. The new algorithms developed in the project will be tested and
compared with existing conventional approaches in the literature.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the project will not only transform
understanding of sparse solutions and help solve several long-standing open
problems in portfolio theory and optimization, but also provide effective tools
for solving classes of non-convex quadratic optimization problems that are at
present computationally intractable. The tools developed through the project
will have practical benefit in lowering investment risk via novel
diversification techniques and in extracting meaningful patterns from different
data sources.