* 1359004
* REU Site: Research Experience for Undergraduates in Nanoscale Science &amp; Engineering
* ENG,EEC
* 03/01/2014,02/28/2017
* Emily Weiss, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 02/28/2017
* USD 315,242.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;There is a critical need for the creation of a
strong workforce of world-class scientists, engineers, and educators with
competencies in interdisciplinary nanotechnology. Researchers at Northwestern
University (NU) have made substantial contributions to this field and the
university has gained a reputation for its rigorous nanotechnology research
programs. The REU Site in Nanoscale Science and Engineering at NU will actively
engage undergraduate students from institutions across the country in research
projects that enable them to make substantive contributions in a field that
holds vast promise for the future. The inherent interdisciplinarity of nanoscale
science and engineering make it an ideal field of study for undergraduates from
various engineering and science backgrounds. Additionally, advances in
nanotechnology have the potential to significantly impact fields as diverse as
medicine, energy, the environment, and security, which makes this program
particularly attractive to a diverse group of students. This REU Site will
benefit from an extensive pool of over 190 potential faculty mentors working in
nanoscale science and engineering, and representing 28 different departments
from mechanical engineering to medicine. Over the past ten years, they have
successfully developed research projects for and mentored over 330
undergraduates in summer research programs, leading to 131 publications with
undergraduate co-authors. This REU Site in Nanoscale Science and Engineering at
Northwestern University (EEC-1359004) is made possible through the generous
support from the Division of Engineering Education and Centers (EEC) of the
National Science Foundation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;The REU Site in Nanoscale Science and Engineering at
Northwestern University (NU) provides undergraduate students from institutions
across the country with hands-on, interdisciplinary research experiences and
access to world-class instrumentation. During the nine-week summer program, each
participant conducts a nanoscale science and/or engineering research project
under the guidance of a faculty advisor, and graduate student or postdoctoral
mentor. The inherent interdisciplinarity of nanoscale science and engineering
make it an ideal field of study for undergraduates from diverse engineering and
science backgrounds. In addition to research, the program includes a public
speaking workshop, writing workshops, an ethics seminar, and field trip to
Argonne National Laboratory. Participants are required to present their final
project results at a formal Closing Symposium, and final papers are submitted
for potential publication in a peer-reviewed journal, Nanoscape: The Journal of
Undergraduate Research in Nanotechnology and other professional publications.
This REU Site provides training in skills needed not only to conduct first-class
research, but to effectively disseminate research results.