* 1359801
* Tree-Ring Reconstruction of Flood Dynamics on the Mississippi River and Its Principal Tributaries
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2018
* Matthew Therrell, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 12/31/2018
* USD 296,876.00

This research project will develop high-resolution, multi-century
reconstructions of major flooding in the Mississippi River Basin based on
analyses of tree rings and to use these reconstructions to help determine the
true natural variability of large magnitude flooding prior to the modern period
of direct flood measurements. These reconstructions will provide a long-term
context for analyses of extreme flood events that have occurred in the modern
period and allow the examination of the role played in destructive flooding by
regional and large-scale climate variability and other natural and human-related
factors. Results of the research project will greatly increase basic
understanding of long-term flood variability in the region and help develop and
refine techniques useful for the study of flood history in large-river systems
in North America and elsewhere. Beyond meeting specific research objectives, the
project will provide education and training opportunities for undergraduate and
graduate students and will provide for improved teaching of undergraduate
students and others based on project findings that demonstrate the relevance of
atmospheric science as well as the importance of societal resilience to natural
hazards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Destructive flooding long has long plagued many
communities along major rivers, including the Mississippi River and its
principal tributaries. For more than a century, scientists and engineers have
attempted to determine the frequency and magnitude of flooding in this river
system. Scientists also have sought to understand not only the links between
flooding and natural climate variability but also how potential climate change
and direct human modification of the hydrology of the river may affect future
flood patterns. This project will address several methodological and theoretical
issues. The principal methodological questions concern whether it is possible to
quantitatively reconstruct and model extreme flooding prior to the instrumental
period and to determine how well the observational record represents the
envelope of natural variability. Answers to both of these questions are
necessary to determine broader questions concerning the link between extreme
flooding and climate variability, including the questions of whether and how
changes in climate and other natural and human systems may affect flood behavior
and the risk to those who reside in river basin. This project will answer these
questions using both tree-ring records of flooding and hydrological models to
estimate the occurrence, magnitude, and discharge of major pre-instrumental
floods. This approach has rarely been used in the past, and it should provide
the necessary long-term context for extreme events observed in the modern period
and reveal relevant links to climate forcing that will help answer questions
regarding the potential impact of climate and other changes on this river
system. This approach holds great promise for being applied in other river
basins and for use to address other natural-hazard questions.