* 1359668
* Mechanistic Insights into the Structure Sensitivity of Hydrocarbon Conversions Catalyzed by Metal Surfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Francisco Zaera, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 07/31/2017
* USD 495,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Catalysis program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Francisco Zaera of the University of California, Riverside
is investigating the molecular processes by which hydrocarbons are converted
from one compound to another on the surface of a metal, also termed catalysis.
The catalysis of hydrocarbon conversion reactions is central to many industrial
processes, including oil refining, fine chemical synthesis, and food processing.
One of the major challenges in catalysis is to achieve high selectivity for one
product over all other potential products, which would avoid wasting feedstocks
and would minimize the production of polluting byproducts. It has been shown
that, in some catalysis on metal surfaces, selectivity may be controlled through
variations in the atomic level structure of the surface, and this control offers
new avenues for the design of highly desirable industrial processes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, Professor Zaera focuses on testing
specific examples where hydrocarbon conversion may be controlled by using metal
nanoparticles with specific shapes. Three complementary experimental approaches
are being used: a high-flux molecular beam to obtain accurate kinetic parameters
for model metal samples with different structures under controlled environments,
an operando arrangement for the in-situ characterization of corresponding
adsorbed species by infrared (IR) spectroscopy, and a reactor for the kinetic
and IR characterization of more realistic catalysts made out of metal
nanoparticles with specific shapes dispersed on high-surface-area supports. This
project involves the training of graduate students, with an emphasis in
recruiting students from groups underrepresented in science research fields by
taking advantage of the several international outreach activities. The broader
impacts of this project also include the potential development of cleaner
catalytic processes for energy and other applications.