* 1359262
* REU Site: Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Model-based Reasoning in STEM Education at the Rochester Institute of Technology
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2018
* Dina Newman, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 09/30/2018
* USD 339,825.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) project recognizes the
national priority to support research that addresses the fact that students tend
to lack the ability to understand scientific phenomena that are not directly
observable. The research team at Rochester Institute of Technology involves
undergraduate collaborators in the investigation of how students learn from the
tools we use to explain scientific concepts; models (bridges between ideas and
empirical observations) and representations (descriptions of models). Ancillary
activities include cohort-wide research methods workshops, research group
meetings, communication workshops, and social events. The work takes place
within the Science and Mathematics Education Research Collaborative (SMERC), a
group of ten faculty members interested in exploring questions related to
Discipline-Based Educational Research in biology, chemistry, and physics. In
order to broaden participation students who are from underrepresented groups in
STEM, including Native American, African American, Latino, and Deaf and Hard-of-
Hearing populations, are actively recruited.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This two-part
REU project consists of a virtual, pre-summer training session followed by and
intensive 9-week summer research experience. In the virtual course, January
Jump-Start, students are introduced to the research projects, professional
ethics, and research methodologies. Students also perform literature reviews and
initiate the Institution Review Board (IRB) process as part of this course.
During the summer, students participate a research experience within the
following clusters: (a) use of models and representation in experimental
laboratory work, (b) conceptual meaning underlying mathematical representations
of physics, (c) conceptual meaning underlying visual representations of
biochemistry and molecular biology, and (d) developing and evaluating curricula
emphasizing modeling and representation. Data generated through entrance and
exit surveys, weekly meetings, and assessment of research artifacts and
workshops reflects the student's satisfaction with the experience, attitudes
about research, and preparation to apply for research careers in Discipline-
based Education Research (DBER). After graduation, the students are tracked and
interviewed about the project's impact. Dissemination of the project results
should provide a model for cross-disciplinary DBER research. The project team
presents their work through at a variety of disciplinary national meetings
including, the Society for the Advancement of Biology Education Conference, the
Annual Meeting of the American Chemical Society, the American Association of
Physics Teachers/Physics Education Research Conference, and the Conference on
Transforming Research in Undergraduate STEM Education. Project deliverables
include results of summative evaluation and the course materials developed for
the January Jump Start.