* 1359243
* REU Site:  Genes & the Environment:  Research Experiences for Undergraduates from Rural & Tribal Colleges
* BIO,DBI
* 04/15/2014,03/31/2020
* Van Doze, University of North Dakota Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 03/31/2020
* USD 812,878.00

This REU Site award to the University of North Dakota (UND), located in Grand
Forks, ND, will support the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during the
summers of 2014-18. The scientific focus of the REU program is on environmental
influences on gene expression. Research will be conducted under the mentorship
of faculty at UND, Cankdeska Cikana Community College (Fort Totten, ND) and
Turtle Mountain Community College (Belcourt, ND). Mentors will work closely with
students to develop an independent research project. Some example projects
include investigation into how environmentally determined changes in gene
expression influence learning in fish, sex-determination in turtles, stress
tolerance in nematodes, and wing patterning in butterflies and moths. Students
will receive training in molecular biology, genomics, bioinformatics, and
others. In addition to the hands-on research experience, students will attend
weekly seminars and workshops in which they will learn about science writing,
ethical and responsible research conduct, and the graduate school application
process. One of the goals of the program is to foster a sense of community
amongst student participants and UND faculty. Therefore, although each student
will be matched with a specific mentor, they will also have the opportunity to
work and socialize with the other students and UND faculty. At the end of the
program, students will present their findings at a symposium that is open to the
public. The program will be assessed using pre- and post-surveys, as well as the
REU common assessment tool. Students are provided a stipend, housing, meal
allowance, and funds for travel to and from UND. Subsidized child care and
family living accommodations are provided to students with dependents, using
other funding sources. The program seeks students with a genuine interest in
pursuing a career in science research and/or teaching. Students from groups that
are historically underrepresented in the sciences, such as those from rural and
tribal colleges with limited research opportunities, are especially encouraged
to apply. Selection criteria include academic performance, as well as
educational and career goals.

The primary mission of the program is to encourage students, particularly those
from historically under-represented groups, to pursue graduate degrees in the
sciences and enter careers that help strengthen science education, research, and
literacy.

Students are required to be tracked after the program and must respond to an
automatic email sent via the NSF reporting system. More information can be found
by visiting http://www.dozelab.com/reu, or by contacting the PI (Dr. Van Doze at
van.doze@med.und.edu) or the tribal college program coordinator (Dr. Lane Azure
at lane.azure@littlehoop.edu).