* 1359271
* REU Site: Biology and Biotechnology Undergraduate Research Experience (BITURE)
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2018
* Christine Richardson, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 09/30/2018
* USD 323,955.00

This REU Site award to the University of North Carolina Charlotte, located in
Charlotte, NC, will support the training of 10 students in a 10-week program
during the summers of 2015-2017. The REU program is open to all undergraduate
students who are citizens, nationals or permanent residents of the United
States. Students trained in the program will gain skills in lab research,
develop their critical thinking and problem-solving skills, understand the
process of science, and be able to communicate their research results to their
peers and the general public. Students will have an opportunity to present their
results at a national conference. The REU program provides an experience to
students that is typically not available to them at their home institutions.
Students from schools with limited opportunities for research and from
underrepresented groups are encouraged to apply.

This REU Site program will focus on research in biology and biotechnology in a
traditional research experience while conveying how basic biotechnology research
leads to business creation and industrial development. Example projects include
bioinformatics and whole genome analyses to understand drought resistance of
potato crops, generation and study of transgenic soybeans for agricultural use,
study of microbial populations for biofuel development or water treatment, use
of nanoparticles in bioavailability or environmental impact studies. During the
10-week program, students will participate in activities including workshops on
Research Ethics, Applying to Graduate School, Career Opportunities,
Biotechnology Innovation and Start-Ups, and a program at NC Research Campus and
David Murdock Research Institute featuring research and employment
opportunities. At the end of the program, students will present their research
in a poster and/or oral presentation at the UNC Charlotte Summer Research
Symposium.

A common web-based assessment tool used by all REU programs funded by the
Division of Biological Infrastructure (Directorate for Biological Sciences) will
be used to determine the effectiveness of the training program. Students are
required to be tracked after the program and must respond to an automatic email
sent via the NSF reporting system. More information is available by contacting
the PI (Dr. Christine Richardson at C.Richardson@uncc.edu) or co-PI (Dr. Sharon
Bullock at sbulloc8@uncc.edu).