* 1359137
* REU Site: Automotive and Energy Research and Industrial Mentorship (AERIM) Program at Oakland University
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2018
* Qian Zou, Oakland University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 04/30/2018
* USD 359,826.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;The Automotive and Energy Research and Industrial
Mentorship (AERIM) REU site at Oakland University, supported by the NSF Division
of Engineering Education and Centers, will engage 30 undergraduate students,
particularly women and under-represented minorities, in 10-week research
experiences during the summers of 2014-2016. The program is designed to excite
and motivate the students to pursue graduate studies and careers in science and
engineering. Working with industrial and academic mentors, student teams will
work on timely, automotive and energy-related research topics in mechanical
engineering with a special emphasis on automotive materials and tribology,
alternative propulsion systems and technologies that aim to improve efficiencies
at the vehicle-level. The specific topics of scuffing, piston heat transfer, and
alternative propulsion systems such as fuel cells and batteries, are of
particular importance to the automotive industry and will be appropriate for
undergraduates. Students will be introduced to current problems, modern
analytical, experimental and numerical methods, and will contribute to timely
on-going research programs in academic and industrial research settings. Key
features of this program include: a three-tier mentorship program that involves
faculty, industrial mentors and graduate students; an ongoing commitment from
several automotive manufacturers (e.g., GM, Chrysler, Ford) that includes
mentorship by individuals with extensive industrial experience and access to
laboratory and industrial facilities; outreach to K-12 students; and learning,
networking and peer support opportunities through coordinated professional
activities inside and outside the university.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the Automotive and Energy Research and Industrial
Mentorship (AERIM) REU site at Oakland University, supported by the NSF Division
of Engineering Education and Centers, is to contribute to the development of a
diverse, internationally competitive, and globally-engaged science and
engineering workforce, an NSF priority. This program will support the NSF
mission by engaging a total of 30 students during the summers of 2014-2016 in
10-week research and industrial mentorship experiences that will excite and
motivate them to pursue graduate studies and careers in science and engineering
by engaging them in automotive and energy-related research projects and
providing opportunities for them to interact with professionals from several
automotive manufacturers. The program will focus on attracting women, under-
represented minorities and students from institutions with limited research
activity in STEM, to encourage and support under-represented groups to pursue
STEM careers. The REU students will also benefit themselves and will benefit
others from participation in organized STEM outreach activities to local K-12
students. Further, research and programmatic results will be disseminated in
conferences and through peer-reviewed articles.