* 1359229
* REU Site: CollaborativE Multidisciplinary Investigations Through Undergraduate Research Experiences (CEMITURE)
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Ria Ramoutar, Georgia Southern University Research and Service Foundation, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 08/31/2018
* USD 270,000.00

This award from the Division of Chemistry (CHE) supports a Research Experience
for Undergraduates (REU) Site at Georgia Southern University entitled
CollaborativE Multidisciplinary Investigations Through Undergraduate Research
Experiences (CEMITURE) that is led by Professors Karelle Aiken and Evans
Afriyie-Gyawuwill. They will engage student participants in intensive research
and professional development activities, which will allow for sustained growth
as scientists. CEMITURE student participants will work directly with faculty
mentors on their respective research projects in an environment where they
develop the necessary skills and gain experiences that solidify their self-
identities as scientists. The CEMITURE experience will be augmented by the
active involvement of participants in educational, social and professional
development activities, which will include training in scientific communication
and workshops on career preparation, leadership, and ethics. The program is
designed so that participants will build a community of scholars with their
peers and GSU faculty; enhance their preparation for future success in graduate
programs; endeavor to use their knowledge and expertise in science to make
significant contributions to their own communities and the wider society; and
gain a global perspective of STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For ten weeks,
the program, hosted by the Georgia Southern University (GSU) Chemistry
Department, will engage undergraduate students in collaborative and
multidisciplinary projects using analytical, material, organic, and bio-
chemistry. Emphasis will be placed on recruiting students from institutions with
limited research opportunities, particularly women, minorities, and students
from rural and underserved areas of the southeastern United States. Projects
will entail the design of new organic synthetic methodology for bioactive
molecules; the development of materials with enhanced mechanical, thermal, and
electrochemical properties; the design and probing of materials for their
potential in the treatment of cancer and traumatic brain injury; the synthesis
and investigation of novel organic molecules for detection of heavy transition
metal cations; and the development of techniques for identification and
quantification of organic and inorganic food contaminants.