* 1359136
* REU Site: Materials Connection (MaCReu R'Side)
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2014,01/31/2018
* Ludwig Bartels, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 01/31/2018
* USD 379,000.00

ID: 1359136 PI: Bartels, Ludwig ORG: University of California-
Riverside&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: REU Site: Materials Connection (MaCReu
R'Side)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;The Materials
Connection Research Experience for Undergraduate Students (MacReu) site at the
University of California-Riverside (UCR) will provide 10 students with
experience in a broad spectrum of preparative methods for composite and thin
film (including 2D) growth through active participation in ongoing research
efforts. Thin films and 2D materials play crucial roles in a wide spectrum of
technologies, from activating catalysts for crude oil refining to automotive
emission control to the next generation of microchip transistors. The MacReu
students will join research groups from Chemistry, Physics, Electrical
Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, and Chemical Engineering, reflecting the
broad impact of thin film materials. All participating faculty and research labs
are affiliated with the UCR interdepartmental Materials Science and Engineering
program, so undergraduates from a wide range of fields will be exposed to a
highly interdisciplinary environment. Specific research efforts will include
growth of MoS2 and related transition metal dichalcogenides for electronic
applications, preparation of materials for photo-/electro-catalytic water
splitting, and development of novel atomic-layer and chemical-vapor based growth
methodologies. The students will jointly be instructed in hands-on practical
materials characterization including electron microscopy, Raman,
photoluminescence, and Infrared spectroscopy. Co-directed by a chemist and a
professor of political science, this project will also generate quantitative
measures of the success of the MacReu program as well as actionable and unbiased
evaluation of the educational concept and effectiveness.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;The Materials Connection
Research Experience for Undergraduate Students (MacReu) Site at the University
of California-Riverside (UCR) will provide 10 students per year with experience
in working in research labs that target the preparation of an array of composite
and thin-film materials, including 2-D materials, that will form the basis for
the next generation of chemical catalysts and advanced electronic devices. These
materials play crucial roles in a wide spectrum of technologies, ranging from
oil refining to emission control to data and signal processing. The MacReu
students will join research groups from Chemistry, Physics, Electrical
Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, and Chemical Engineering, reflecting the
broad impact of thin film materials. All participating faculty and research labs
are affiliated with the UCR interdepartmental Materials Science and Engineering
program, so undergraduates from a wide range of fields will be exposed to a
highly interdisciplinary environment. The students will gain hands-on experience
in a number of essential techniques for making and analyzing advanced materials.
The REU site will actively recruit from 2-year and 4-year institutions,
particularly Hispanic Serving Institutions, in Southern California. Besides
providing the MacReu students with exciting research experience, this project
seeks to form them into an outreach team that is effective in promoting STEM
education to their peers at Southern California 2-year colleges and high-schools
serving a population of 12 million within about 50 miles of UCR. At this same
time, such activity will impart leadership and presentation skills in the MacReu
participants in support of their future careers.