* 1359242
* REU Site:   Coastal Research in Environmental Science and Technology (CREST) at UMass Boston
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2014,06/30/2017
* Robyn Hannigan, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 06/30/2017
* USD 368,096.00

Award 1359242 provides renewed funding for a Research Experience for
Undergraduates (REU) program at the University of Massachusetts Boston (UMass
Boston)and will support a total of thirty students during a summer research
internship. The program is called the Coastal Research in Environmental Science
and Technology (CREST) REU site and is planned as a 10-week research/educational
program designed to expose 10 undergraduates per year to cutting edge,
integrative, coastal environmental science research. The research or educational
niche filled by CREST deals with the transdisciplinarity of coastal research,
which closely parallels the strengths of the School for the Environment at UMass
Boston. Each CREST scholar will work with a research mentor to develop and
conduct a research project in an area of coastal environmental science or
technology appropriate to each scholar's background and interests. Students will
gain hands-on experience with cutting-edge instrumentation, field experiences,
and training in coastal marine data collection and will participate in
professional development activities that will develop skills in data
interpretation and scientific writing, teamwork and leadership skills, and
scientific ethics. Because of the trans-disciplinary approaches of the mentors
and the inherent diversity of disciplines represented in the coastal
environmental sciences, scholars will gain necessary skills in working across
disciplines. The primary broader impacts of CREST are the recruitment and
training of future researchers and educators in the coastal environmental
sciences.