* 1359891
* Enhancement of Participation at the Spatial Accuracy 2014 Conference, July 2014, East Lansing, Michigan
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2015
* Ashton Shortridge, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 06/30/2015
* USD 31,652.00

This award will provide support to facilitate the involvement of scholars from a
broad range of research communities and nations to participate in the Spatial
Accuracy 2014 conference, which will be held in July 2014 in East Lansing,
Michigan. Spatial Accuracy 2014 will be the 11th in a series of international
symposia that have focused on topics of uncertainty in environmental data and
model. Theoretical, methodological, software, and instructional advancements
shared at Spatial Accuracy 2014 will allow current and future practitioners to
draw valid inference about large and complex systems through a number of
different lines of inquiry, including assimilating disparate sources and types
of data; accommodating spatial and temporal dependence to satisfy statistical
model assumptions and improve predictive inference; partitioning and propagating
sources of uncertainty through fine spatial scale predictions over large domains
and; scaling to effectively exploit information in massive datasets. The
exchange of knowledge at the conference will advance scientific practice and
interdisciplinary collaboration extending from geography and the spatial
sciences to many other fields in the natural and social sciences, engineering,
and the humanities. The conference will provide excellent education and
networking opportunities for students, post-doctoral scholars, and early-career
researchers, and international collaboration will be enhanced because of special
emphasis being placed on the involvement of scholars from developing nations.
Although the majority of conference participants will be from academic
organizations, methodological advances that deal more effectively with
uncertainty and error ultimately will lead to improved models used in a diverse
range of settings by public, private, and other groups.

This award will expand participation in the Spatial Accuracy 2014 conference by
providing partial support for travel to and lodging at the conference for up to
fifty scholars, including graduate students, early-career researchers, and
scholars from developing nations. Special efforts will be made to highlight a
number of exciting cutting-edge findings from this set of national and
international participants, and special activities will ensure their full
engagement in the conference. Because papers in the conference proceedings, all
of which will be peer-reviewed to ensure high quality, will be freely
disseminated via the Internet, the all participants and other scientists will be
able to benefit from the enhanced scientific and technological understanding
that will result.