* 1359140
* REU Site: Research Experiences for Underrepresented Minority Undergraduates in Basica and Genetic Research at Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center (LSUHSC)
* BIO,DBI
* 04/15/2014,03/31/2017
* Fern Tsien, Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 03/31/2017
* USD 332,675.00

This REU Site award to the Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center in
New Orleans, LA will support the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during the
summers of 2014-16. Training will focus on research fields including genetics,
microbiology, biochemistry, neurosciences, physiology, and pharmacology. Sample
projects include: the study of proteins involved in DNA repair, cell cycle, and
signal transduction; the regulation of transcription factors through
phosphorylation; and the analysis of the platelet-activating factor (PAF)
signaling in interneuronal rearrangements. The program will provide students
with one-on-one mentoring on hypothesis development, experimental design,
research methods, and scientific presentation skills. Students will learn how
research is conducted and many will present the results of their work at
scientific conferences. Interactive workshops will include topics such as resume
writing for graduate school applications, responsible conduct in research, and
discussions of career pathways with faculty members from the LSUHSC Basic
Sciences Departments and Centers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students will be selected
for participation based on academic record, research interest, and plans for a
career in scientific research. Students attending Historically Black Colleges
and Universities and from schools with limited research opportunities are
encouraged to apply. The program is targeting undergraduates from diverse social
and educational backgrounds, especially from the New Orleans area. REU program
alumni will be recruited to volunteer at partnering K-12 New Orleans schools
during the academic year where they will explain biology and genetics to science
classes and serve as role models to younger generations of potential scientists.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Assessment of the program is by qualitative and
quantitative participant surveys, mentor evaluations, and by the BIO/REU common
assessment tool. Students are required to be tracked after the program and must
respond to an automatic email sent via the NSF reporting system. More
information is available by visiting
http://www.medschool.lsuhsc.edu/genetics/reu.aspx or by contacting the PI (Dr.
Fern Tsien at fmille@lsuhsc.edu).