* 1359365
* REU Site: Integration of Biology and Materials in Chemical Engineering
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2017
* Esther Gomez, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 04/30/2017
* USD 338,886.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: This REU site focuses on the Integration of Biology and
Materials and is hosted by the Chemical Engineering Department at The
Pennsylvania State University. Undergraduate students will be involved in
academic research bridging materials development and the life sciences for ten
weeks in the summer. This research will enable a clearer understanding of
biological materials and processes and will allow for the development of novel
materials to meet critical national needs in medicine, energy, and environmental
protection. Recruitment efforts will target institutions where research
opportunities are limited and will focus on recruiting students from
underrepresented groups in engineering. In addition to the hands-on
collaborative research experience, technical and social activities will be
incorporated into the program to provide students with a solid foundation in
analytical, writing, and presentation skills and to enhance interactions between
REU students and faculty mentors. Assessment will be performed in collaboration
with the Leonhard Center for Enhancement of Engineering Education and will
analyze the effect of the program on student outcomes. This REU site is
supported by the Division of Engineering Education and Centers of the National
Science Foundation.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: The Research Experience for Undergraduates Site in
Chemical Engineering at Penn State seeks to provide an impactful summer research
experience to undergraduates on active projects integrating the life sciences
and materials. This interdisciplinary area provides fascinating paradigms such
as the self-cleaning lotus leaf that could capture the interest of undergraduate
students and encourage them to adopt a scientific career outlook. The research,
educational, and career mentorship provided by the program is intended to
inspire the students to look at their academic work in a new light and to
provide a spark for possible careers in academic research or industrial
innovation. Social activities as well as the use of pairing of students to work
on aspects of joint projects will promote collaboration and teamwork amongst the
students. Diversity in the program will be encouraged by recruiting widely from
targeted universities and underrepresented groups. The success of the program
will be monitored in collaboration with engineering education experts at Penn
State by onsite surveys and exit interviews as well as by frequent (6 month, 1
year and 2 year) surveys and by the use of social media tools.