* 1359199
* REU Site: Undergraduate Research Experience in Multimedia Data Analytics
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2018
* Shou-Hsuan Huang, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 04/30/2018
* USD 360,001.00

The REU site in the Department of Computer Science at the University of Houston
(UH) introduces undergraduate students to Computational Data Analytics, an area
of increasing national importance. Student research projects include
Bioinformatics, Face Recognition, Computer Vision, Computational Physiology,
Computational Cytometry, and Information Extraction for Financial Data. Ten
students are selected in each of the three years of the program. The student
recruitment plan actively encourages students from colleges and universities
that offer limited research opportunities, such as historically black colleges
and universities. Emphasis is on attracting female students and underrepresented
minorities. The University of Houston is a comprehensive research university, a
Hispanic Serving Institution (HSI), and one of the most ethnically diverse in
the nation. The REU Site program strives to attract non-traditional students
into research, reinforce their interest in computer science, retain these
students in their academic programs, and prepare them for graduate school.
Results of the research conducted at the REU Site program will be disseminated
through discipline-appropriate publications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The REU Site
program has four main objectives:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(1) Students will develop
competency in scientific research, presentation, and writing
skills.&lt;br/&gt;(2) Participants will produce meaningful research results
during their summer program. These results will be written up in a format that
is acceptable for publication in an appropriate conference or
journal.&lt;br/&gt;(3) Participants will sustain and increase their interest in
research careers after their on-campus summer through continuing contacts and
research participation, and delivery of a presentation on their
research.&lt;br/&gt;(4) Participants will learn to present and disseminate their
research results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The activities aimed at achieving the
main objectives are integrated with student cohort activities, including site
visits to cutting-edge research laboratories, seminars on career development,
ethics in computer science, methods of literature search, and practical advice
on questions related to graduate school. The goal is to make a lasting impact
beyond the 10 weeks the students spend at the REU Site. The success of the
program will be continuously evaluated through student and faculty
questionnaires, and by an education professor, and this feedback will be used to
improve the program in operation. The program maintains a
website&lt;br/&gt;(http://www.cs.uh.edu/reu/) that supports the application and
evaluation process and informs future, current, and past participants about
deadlines and decisions, events, and achievements of the people involved in it.