* 1359241
* REU Site: Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Integrative and Evolutionary Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2017
* Rachel Skvirsky, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Continuing Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 04/30/2017
* USD 325,000.00

This REU Site award to the University of Massachusetts, Boston, will support the
training of 10 students for 10 weeks during the summers of 2014-2016. Students
will conduct intensive research in genetics, cell biology, evolution, and
ecology with the overall theme of integrative and evolutionary biology. Research
projects span biological problems at various scales from molecular to
population-level. Modern tools of genomics and informatics are used to
investigate biological problems dealing with cell signaling, control of cellular
organization, microbial ecology, genome organization, evolution in the deep
seas, and ecosystem function. Students are paired with Biology Department
faculty based on mutual scientific interests. The research experiences are
complemented by enrichment activities that promote a sense of community, enhance
communication skills, and address broader issues concerning the practice of
science. These include weekly workshops focusing on the ethical conduct of
research, scientific communication, and preparation for graduate school.
Educational field trips including to the Nantucket Island Field Station are
planned. Students are selected based on their ability to gain from the
experience, motivation, research potential, and maturity. Students from
underrepresented groups and students from primarily undergraduate institutions
are especially encouraged to apply.

Students will learn how research is conducted, and many will present the results
of their work at scientific conferences. By providing a full-immersion research
experience, close mentoring, and a supportive scientific community, the program
helps prepare students for advanced study in biology and increase the diversity
of the research workforce. The program will be assessed with the BIO REU common
assessment tool.

Students are required to be tracked after the program and must respond to an
automatic email sent via the NSF reporting system. More information is available
by visiting http://www.reu.umb.edu, or by contacting the PI (Dr. Rachel Skvirsky
at rachel.skvirsky@umb.edu) or the Program Assistant (Ms Anshika Hansen-Verma at
anshika.verma@umb.edu).