* 1359787
* Experimental Studies of the Standard Model and Beyond at High Energy Colliders
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Robert McCarthy, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Saul Gonzalez
* 06/30/2018
* USD 1,895,002.00

Overview: A goal of experiments at the Large Hadron Collider (the LHC) at CERN,
Geneva, Switzerland is to understand the nature of the Higgs Boson, recently
discovered there in 2012, and to discover new physics beyond the Standard Model
of Elementary Particle Physics. These goals are relevant to the understanding of
the Universe at its most fundamental level in the fleeting fraction of a second
just after the Big Bang, and to why we see the Universe as we do now. To meet
the challenges of this quest, new theories are advanced, new detectors and
accelerators are developed and built, and new computing and analytical
methodologies are created, all of which have significant broader impact for the
training of young scientists in the near term and the advancement of
technological benefits to society over the longer term.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The next three years represent a transition of the LHC
physics program from a collision energy of 8 TeV data-taking and operation, to
extended operations and data taking at nearly double the energy, 13-14 TeV. Over
a thousand scientists from the United States are involved with this scientific
program on several major experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
The research to be conducted under this award to the Particle Physics group at
the State University of New York at Stonybrook is aimed to address deep
questions about the nature of the Universe from data collected with the ATLAS
experiment, one of the major multipurpose detectors at the LHC. Scientific
questions addressed include: Is the newly discovered Higgs particle the one
predicted by the Standard Model of particle physics or is it a part of a larger
theoretical picture that includes new particles that could be discovered at the
new higher collision energy? Why is the observed mass of the Higgs boson so low,
found to be 126 billion electron volts, or roughly 135 times the mass of the
proton? In fact this low mass value is one of the most profound conundrums in
all of science and is currently driving much of the scientific discourse in the
field of particle physics. What are the detailed properties of the force
carriers of the electroweak interaction, the W and Z bosons, at high energy?
These questions are critical to our understanding of the full context of the
Standard Model of particle physics and to new physics that lies beyond the
Standard Model. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technically, the group will provide
instrumentation and software calibration tools for the ATLAS calorimeters that
will enable the group to commission and calibrate these important components of
the experiment. The group is also a key leader in the Phase I Upgrade of the
ATLAS detector. It is called the Phase I upgrade, because it represents the
first major improvement in instrumentation for the experiment. This is essential
for the effective operation of the experiment as the number of beam interactions
(the luminosity) is increased by factor of ten over current levels, and will
improve the potential for new scientific discoveries through the end of this
decade.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The leadership role of the
Stonybrook group in managing the ATLAS Phase I Upgrade serves to broaden the
participation and contributions of a number of university groups in the US,
through support of technical personnel and education and training of young
scientific researchers in the development and deployment of new, state-of-the-
art instrumentation for high energy, high luminosity experimentation.