* 1359413
* REU Site: Networking Basic Research for Biological Discovery
* BIO,DBI
* 04/15/2014,03/31/2018
* Matthew Kohn, Health Research Incorporated/New York State Department of Health
* Continuing Grant
* Ann Sakai
* 03/31/2018
* USD 268,963.00

This REU Site Award to the Wadsworth Center, New York State Department of
Health, located in Albany, NY, will support the training of 10 students for 10
weeks during the summers of 2014-2016. The primary objective of this program is
to provide cutting-edge research experiences by networking undergraduate
students with each other and with their mentors to gain insight into how modern
scientific research is conducted. The Wadsworth Center provides outstanding
basic research and graduate education programs paralleling public health
activities. Mentors have diverse research interests in molecular genetics, cell
biology, structural and computational biology, and the environmental sciences.
Applicants will be recruited nationally and students from all majors are
eligible to apply. Students can join either a traditional, single-mentored
research project, or a collaborative project in which two students are networked
to tackle a common research problem. The research program will be supplemented
by weekly seminars given by visiting scientists and Wadsworth faculty. In
addition, the Wadsworth Site will provide students with a strong background in
the ethical conduct of research, career planning, the modern history of science,
and a unique perspective on how research is translated to public policy.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Candidates will be selected based on personal essay, two
letters of recommendation, research interests, and academic performance.
Students with limited research opportunities at their home institution and those
from underrepresented groups are encouraged to apply. All research activities
are pursued within a close-knit environment that will provide an uniquely
enriching research training opportunity. During the final week, students will
present their research at a symposium that will be video-cast throughout
Wadsworth and recorded to improve communication skills. Students will also be
encouraged to present the results of their work at scientific
conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Program evaluation will be facilitated by
using the Bio REU common assessment survey and the SURE survey. Students are
required to be tracked after the program and must respond to an automatic e-mail
sent via the NSF reporting system. More information is available by contacting
reu@health.ny.gov.