* 1359666
* The Dynamics of Controversial Practices: SEC Sunshine, Aspirational Pay, and the Evolution of Executive Compensation Networks
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2014,09/30/2018
* Thomas DiPrete, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia Chao
* 09/30/2018
* USD 296,721.00

Stimulated by 2006 Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) regulations that
required large firms to report their compensation peers, a set of recent papers
have concluded that many companies favor "aspirational" peers (i.e., larger
companies and with better paid CEOs than the focal company). Research on the use
by companies of aspirational peers has focused on the prevalence and average
overall level of bias, and has attempted to explain bias in terms of
organizational and CEO characteristics rather than in terms of the networked
environment. However, public corporations are tied to one another in networks
along various dimensions, including similarity in industry and size, board
interlocks, the sharing of compensation consultants, and the network of asserted
compensation peers used by companies in the setting of executive compensation.
The proposed research tests the theory that pressures for legitimacy and
rationalizations of practices of contested legitimacy occur through mechanisms
of local comparison, which involve both information transfer and the mimicry and
co-evolution of controversial practices. Using stochastic actor oriented network
analytic methods, the proposed research will estimate the effects of social
influence and social comparison on the evolution of compensation networks in the
post-2006 period, when the network is newly visible both to researchers and to
the corporations themselves as a consequence of the new SEC rules. These
questions are addressed through the analysis of a unique database that contains
information on compensation peers for the universe of companies that have
reported this information since the new regulations came into effect.

Intellectual Merit: The intellectual merit of this project is the new
understanding it promises about the dynamics of compensation peer networks of
publicly traded corporations and the illumination these dynamics offer on the
diffusion and modification of controversial organizational practices. A
longstanding literature on the diffusion of innovations and organizational
practices treated the practices in question as relatively fixed and studied the
rate and extent of diffusion through the population. More recently, scholars
have focused on the fact that many organizational practices are controversial,
and as a consequence they advance, evolve, and retreat in response to
environmental pressure and the conflicting interests of organizational actors
and stakeholders. This recent literature emphasizes characteristics of
organizations (e.g., the "fit" of the practice with the organization and
organizational actors along various dimensions) that potentially explain the
adoption, adaptation, or relinquishment of controversial practices. In contrast,
the impact of organizational networks on the spread and evolution of
controversial practices is relatively unexplored. The proposed research
contributes to the filling of this gap. In the process it may provide an
explanation for how the overall upward compensation bias in executive
compensation peer groups is maintained and whether it is likely to persist into
the future.

Broader Impacts: The broader impacts of the proposed research include the
training of undergraduate and graduate students and the potential value of the
proposed research for public policy. The project will also allow the continued
collection of longitudinal data on compensation peers on a scale that does not
elsewhere exist. After the project is concluded, these data will be made
available for other researchers and also accessible for a non-technical
audience. Using Javascript and HTML5 the query results can be visualized as a
network, and network descriptives will be presented in a table. Publishing the
data through such an infrastructure allows the data to be used for education
purposes, and it allows non-technical audiences to explore this rich data
source. The algorithm used to identify and extract peers from corporate annual
reports in the electronic archive of the SEC can easily be generalized to
extract systematic and previously unavailable data items in a wide variety of
contexts. Instructions will be provided to allow researchers to use the
algorithm for such purposes.