* 1359863
* Collaborative Research: Legacies of Ojibwe Land Use in the Fire Regimes and Vegetation Communities of the Boundary Waters Canoe Area Wilderness
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2014,01/31/2018
* Kurt Kipfmueller, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 01/31/2018
* USD 104,038.00

This collaborative research project will reconstruct fire histories across a
network of sites in the Boundary Waters Canoe Area Wilderness in northern
Minnesota in order to assess the potential impact of Native American land-use
activities on fire regimes and vegetation patterns of the region. The project
will advance basic knowledge about the extent and magnitude of human influence
on landscapes often considered pristine and address the inclusion of humans as
agents of change within ecological baselines of North American forests. The
findings of this project should contribute to innovative thinking about the
concept of wilderness as defined under the 1964 Wilderness Act. During the
conduct of this project, research, education, and mentoring activities will be
fully integrated to enhance undergraduate learning and prepare graduate students
for future scientific careers. The investigators and collaborations built
through the research will provide critical information to resource managers that
will aid their long-term planning and management of wilderness
landscapes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The suppression of fires over the 20th century
is one of the most visible and dramatic human impact on forest fires, leading
directly to increasing tree densities and subsequent fuel-driven fire events
that may be unprecedented over the last several centuries. The potential role of
Native American burning on landscape structure and composition prior to the
advent of effective fire suppression has received much less attention, however,
but burning by the Ojibwe who lived in the study area and other Native Americans
may have a substantial impact on present forest structure and composition. The
use of fire by Native American groups to manipulate their surroundings may have
augmented fire frequencies in many areas that are today considered relatively
natural. If Native Americans historically augmented fire frequencies beyond the
frequencies that would have occurred from lightning ignitions, vegetation
patterns in areas that today are managed as natural areas might be a legacy of
past human activity than previously had been realized. Understanding the
relative impact of Native American fire use therefore is critically important as
management agencies shift to active management strategies designed to mitigate
external pressures, such as invasive species and climate change, through the
application of disturbance processes like fire. To conduct this project, the
investigators have worked with USDA Forest Service archaeologists to identify
sites with known Ojibwe use alongside sites with little or no evidence of Ojibwe
use. The researchers will use tree-rings to reconstruct past fire and forest
demographic patterns at each site. They will compare the characteristics between
each set of sites in terms of fire regime characteristics (fire frequency, fire
synchrony, and fire-climate relationships) and vegetation patterns (forest age
structure, composition, and canopy structure). Systematic differences in the
fire history and vegetation patterns between the groups will provide
quantitative evidence of the legacies of Ojibwe land use in contemporary
forests, with direct implications for defining the concept and management of
wilderness. Past fire history patterns also will be compared with modern records
of fire and lightning to assess whether past fire history is similar to ignition
or lightning strike density observed within the modern landscape.