* 1359301
* REU Site: Next-Generation Bioinformatics for Genomics-enabled Research in the Life Sciences
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2014,03/31/2018
* Paul Anderson, College of Charleston
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 03/31/2018
* USD 334,662.00

This REU Site award to the College of Charleston, Charleston, SC, will support
the training of 10 students in a 10-week program during the summers of
2015-2017. The REU program is open to all undergraduate students who are
citizens, nationals or permanent residents of the United States. Students
trained in the program will gain skills in lab research, develop their critical
thinking and problem-solving skills, understand the process of science, and be
able to communicate their research results to their peers and the general
public. Students will have an opportunity to present their results at a national
conference. The REU program provides an experience to students that is typically
not available to them at their home institutions. Students from schools with
limited opportunities for research and from underrepresented groups are
encouraged to apply.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU Site program will focus on
integrative research that spans the areas of genomics, bioinformatics, data
mining, data science, molecular biology and evolution. Example interdisciplinary
projects include the application of next-generation DNA sequencing data to
understand and investigate genomes through the development and application of
computational tools and algorithms from fields such as data mining, machine
learning, and data science. Teams of both biologists and computer scientists
will employ novel and existing algorithms for integrating molecular and
organismal biology with studies of ecology, behavior, and evolution.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A common web-based assessment tool used by all REU
programs funded by the Division of Biological Infrastructure (Directorate for
Biological Sciences) will be used to determine the effectiveness of the training
program. Students are required to be tracked after the program and must respond
to an automatic email sent via the NSF reporting system. More information is
available by contacting the PI (Dr. Paul Anderson at andersonpe2@cofc.edu) or
co-PI (Dr. Andrew M. Shedlock at shedlockam@cofc.edu).