* 1359351
* REU Site: Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Site
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2014,01/31/2017
* Arjun Yodh, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 01/31/2017
* USD 246,000.00

ID: 1359351 PI: Yodh, Arjun ORG: University of
Pennsylvania&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: REU Site: Research Experience for
Undergraduates (REU) Site&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
DESCRIPTION&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the proposed REU Site program is to
provide a diverse group of 10 STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics) undergraduates with hands-on experience in materials research.
Student participants will be hosted by the Laboratory for Research on the
Structure of Matter (LRSM) at the University of Pennsylvania (Penn) for 10 weeks
during the summer. The intellectual focus of the program will be to introduce
students to materials research as a cohesive subject of study. This objective
will be achieved by incorporating the student participants into active research
groups of faculty affiliated with the LRSM, which has a tradition of excellence
in interdisciplinary materials research. The program will expose students to the
different areas of research that comprise the basic framework of a modern
materials program. Importantly, students also receive a series of lectures on
research ethics, laboratory safety, and the fundamentals of materials science.
Participants will be able to present their research findings both orally and in
a written report, sometimes leading to publication in the scientific literature.
The LRSM has 25 years of experience in organizing REU programs. These are
currently operated in conjunction with the REU component of an NSF Materials
Research Science and Engineering Center (MRSEC) that is hosted by the LRSM.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION&lt;br/&gt;Program recruitment
will target a diverse group of participants from a broad spectrum of colleges
throughout the nation, especially minority-serving and small colleges without
research capabilities. The breadth of materials topics covered in the LRSM
research portfolio permits students from different disciplines to interact and
appreciate applications of materials research in engineering, medicine,
industry, and commerce. Approximately 85% of the REU Site participants go on to
graduate STEM programs or to professional schools, with the remainder going to
industry and other sectors. The combined base of 20-25 students from the REU
Site and MRSEC REU provides for a comprehensive experience that enables clusters
of students working in similar areas to interact and support one another; it
also enables clusters of students in underrepresented groups to share
experiences and mutual support. Thus, the LRSM REU programs develop human
resources that enhance our nation's technology base and are critical for the
well-being of society at-large.