* 1359377
* REU Site: Research Experience for Undergraduates at the Interface of Computations and Experiments at the Department of Chemistry at North Carolina State University
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* Elon Ison, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 07/31/2018
* USD 228,884.00

This award, supported by the Division of Chemistry (CHE) at the National Science
Foundation supports a Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Site at North
Carolina State University (NCSU), led by Professors Elon A. Ison and Elena
Jakubikova. Professors Ison and Jakubikova will execute a series of recruiting
strategies to recruit students from underrepresented groups, women, and first
generation college students primarily from the Southeast and Middle Atlantic
region, and from the University of Puerto Rico system. These students will be
exposed to career opportunities in non-academic settings in the Research
Triangle Park (RTP) area, participate in social and professional activities
provided on campus to encourage student interactions with other undergraduate
and REU programs at NCSU. They will provide training for local middle and high
school teachers from the Lee County system in the basics of computational
chemistry so that they can develop curricula and implement computational methods
early in the academic training of students. Thus the combined impact of this
proposed REU site is the increased training and development of students in STEM
fields from middle school through college.

The focus of the NSF funded REU site at NCSU is to expose sophomore and junior
students from primarily undergraduate institutions (PUIs) and from Historically
Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) to one of many possible independent
research topics that combine experimental techniques and computational methods
in an academic setting. During their 10-week training, the students will learn
practical laboratory skills, and acquire the basics of computational
methodologies through a series of practical lectures in the recently upgraded
computational facilities. Major goals are to enable students to make informed
career and graduate or professional school choices and to allow the students to
be better prepared to achieve a high level of success in their chosen career
pathways. As such, on-site visits to leading chemical companies and government
laboratories in the Research Triangle Park (RTP) will be organized.