* 1359800
* Geospatial Thinking Framework
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2014,02/29/2020
* Amy Lobben, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Scott Freundschuh
* 02/29/2020
* USD 500,924.00

Geospatial thinking has become an important focus in understanding human spatial
behaviors, but meaningful definitions, theories, and models of geospatial
thinking are lacking. This interdisciplinary research project will address these
gaps in knowledge by examining the behavioral and neurological correlates of
geospatial thinking. Geospatial thinking is primarily a cognitive construct,
occurring in the human brain. This project aims to develop a robust model that
will have foundations in behavioral and cognitive neurogeography and will
represent a new way to conceptualize and investigate geospatial thinking. This
project will contribute new insights regarding neurogeography that are different
from more traditional investigations of spatial cognition in neuroscience by
placing emphasis on the ecological validity of geospatial tasks, issues, and
questions. In doing so, it will focus on the grounding of geospatial activities
in real-world activities and will consider the on-the-ground nature of the
questions that are under investigation. The project will provide special
research and training opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students.

The investigators will generate research questions for this project from a
synthesized Geospatial Thinking Framework, which includes three axes: space,
time, and attribute. Geospatial thinking skills will be organized based on
category (the axes) and complexity (position relative to origin). Two research
questions will be posed. What is the relationship between each geospatial
thinking skill and the geographic primitives as represented by the framework
axes? What is the relative complexity of each geospatial thinking skill as
represented by distance from axes origin? These research questions will be
investigated through a combined methodology of behavioral testing and
neuroimaging (functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging, fMRI). Behavioral testing
will include traditional and newly-developed measures of performance on
geospatial cognition tasks. All measurement instruments will be assessed for
reliability and validity (if not already available). The fMRI methods will
include both block and event-related designs. Analysis will focus on the blood-
oxygen-level dependent signal detection for both the whole brain as well as the
specific parts of the brain of most interest, which is especially relevant for
dorsal and ventral analyses.