* 1359902
* EAGER: Document Image Quality Estimation, Enhancement, Classification and Retrieval
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2015
* Larry Davis, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2015
* USD 234,225.00

Traditional approaches to document retrieval focus on conversion to electronic
text followed by indexing of the text content. Recently some work in the
community has focused on indexing document image content directly. Such
techniques break down when text content is limited or highly degraded. Work on
document quality estimation will be extended image quality to address structural
quality, a factor that is important for determining if traditional document
processing operations will succeed or not. Then,the team will explore the
effects of enhancement on classification and retrieval and extend existing work
to adapt to changes in quality. The research is motivated by the need for
analysts to deal with very large collections of image data. The traditional goal
of converting all documents on an electronic form and using traditional text
analysis methods fails when dealing with heterogeneous collections and very
noisy (possibly multilingual) content. The approach will allow document image
retrieval systems to scale to orders of magnitude beyond current capabilities,
and permit users to move beyond content features and use structural similarity
to explore large collections. This will permit the users to mine large
collections for clusters of similar content without knowing a priori
specifically what the collection contains through classification. The result
will be adaptive techniques that can learn from small numbers of samples without
knowledge of sources of degradation.