* 1359341
* REU Site: Research at the Intersection of Biology and Mathematics
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2018
* David Carroll, Florida Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 09/30/2018
* USD 319,233.00

This REU Site award to the Florida Institute of Technology, located in
Melbourne, FL will support the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during the
summers of 2015-2017. The REU program is open to all undergraduate students who
are citizens, nationals or permanent residents of the United States. Students
trained in the program will gain skills in lab research, develop their critical
thinking and problem-solving skills, understand the process of science, and be
able to communicate their research results to their peers and the general
public. Students will have an opportunity to present their results at a national
conference. The REU program provides an experience to students that is typically
not available to them at their home institutions. Students from schools with
limited opportunities for research and from underrepresented groups are
encouraged to apply.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU Site program will recruit
students interested in integrating biology and mathematics research. There is a
need to greatly improve the quantitative and computational skills of students in
biology as well as capture the interest of mathematicians and computer
scientists in addressing emerging problems in biology. There will be a strong
emphasis on problem solving and the direct application of modern mathematical
and computational methods to current problems in the biological sciences ranging
from cell and molecular biology to ecology. Students will work in teams on a
specific research problem with significant support from faculty.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A common web-based assessment tool used by all REU
programs funded by the Division of Biological Infrastructure (Directorate for
Biological Sciences) will be used to determine the effectiveness of the training
program. Students are required to be tracked after the program and must respond
to an automatic email sent via the NSF reporting system. More information is
available by visiting http://research.fit.edu/reu/biomath/biomath.php, or by
contacting the PI (Dr. David Carroll at dcarroll@fit.edu) or the co-PI (Dr.
Munevver Subasi at msubasi@fit.edu).