* 1359472
* REU Site at UC Berkeley: Integrative Biology from Molecules to Ecosystems
* BIO,DBI
* 04/15/2014,03/31/2018
* David Weisblat, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 03/31/2018
* USD 515,344.00

This REU Site award to the University of California Berkeley (UCB), located in
Berkeley, CA, will support the training of 12 students for ten weeks during the
summers of 2014 - 2018. The theme of the REU is "Integrative Biology: From
Molecules to Ecosystems." The program offers research training in molecular
biology, cell biology, physiology, and ecology, and includes 13 different
departments. Evolution and developmental biology are central themes and inherent
parts of all research programs included in the program. Students will be able to
conduct research in developmental biology that could include anything from gene
regulation and molecular mechanisms involved in developmental processes, to
cellular migration during development, to examining environmental factors that
alter developmental trajectories in whole animals, to studying evolution and
development in the field. In addition to the intensive research experience (with
students mentored by faculty members and doctoral students), the program offers
an intensive week of introductory courses, a weekly research seminar presented
by faculty members from across campus, writing exercises, ethics training, a
weekly professional development course, and a balanced social/recreational
program. Students will assess the program by using the NSF REU common assessment
tool. The UCB REU program primarily seeks students interested in pursuing
graduate school and research careers in the biological sciences. Student
applications are assessed by the PI and co-PI, and a panel of UCB faculty,
graduate students, and administrators committed to the REU.

It is anticipated that a total of 60 undergraduate students, primarily from
schools with limited research opportunities, will be trained in the REU program.
One of the program goals is to increase the number of women, first generation,
low income and underrepresented minorities who pursue graduate degrees in the
biological sciences. Students in the program will learn how research is
conducted, and enhance their skills and confidence to do science. Many will
present the results of their work at scientific conferences, improving their
chance to get into the most competitive graduate programs in the country.
Further, the UCB REU program will strengthen ties with colleges and universities
that serve the targeted student populations.

Students are required to be tracked after the program and must respond to an
automatic email sent via the NSF reporting system. More information is available
by visiting http://mcb.berkeley.edu/nsfreu/ , contacting coordinator Anne
Maclachlan (reuapplic@lists.berkeley.edu) or by contacting the PI (Dr. Tyrone B.
Hayes at tyrone@berkeley.edu), the co-PI (Dr. David Weisblatt at
weisblat@berkeley.edu).