* 1359648
* Collaborative Research: Plug and Play Photosynthesis for RuBisCO Independent Fuels
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2019
* Anne Jones, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 05/31/2019
* USD 465,247.00

Global human energy consumption is expected to increase by over 30% in the next
15 years. Although there is more than enough energy in sunlight to meet this
challenge, efficient means to concentrate this diffuse solar energy and store it
have not yet been developed. Photosynthesis is the biological process by which
green plants and some microorganisms capture and store solar energy; they use it
to convert carbon dioxide to metabolic fuels. However, photosynthesis is
inherently an inefficient process; it is limited not by the availability of
light from the sun but by the rate of the first step in the chemical reactions
by which carbon dioxide is converted into products that are rich in energy.
There is therefore unused capacity for the capture and use of solar energy by
natural photosynthesis. This program engages teams of researchers from the US
and the United Kingdom with the goal to re-invent photosynthesis with enhanced
efficiency thereby improving the capacity of photosynthetic organisms to make
renewable fuels and enhance food security. In the course of the scientific
research, this project will provide research training opportunities for more
than 14 people (including both women and underrepresented minorities) at the
post-doctoral, graduate and undergraduate levels. The international and
interdisciplinary nature of the project will build bridges between the US and UK
scientific communities in a range of important scientific areas including
synthetic biology, photosynthetic physiology, catalysis, and metabolic
regulation. The researchers will engage and inform both the public and other
investigators through activities that include peer-reviewed publications, public
science lectures, blogs, websites, and popular science articles.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To dramatically enhance the efficiency of photosynthesis,
this project will develop a range of mechanisms to electrically connect light-
activated electron flow from the photosynthetic reaction center (PSI) to
downstream fuel-production pathways. This will include increasing flux through
natural pathways, creating electrical connections between distinct microbial
cell types by construction of artificial biological nanowires, and employing a
soluble, chemical, redox shuttle to transfer reducing equivalents from a light
harvesting cell to different fuel-producing cells. These scientific goals will
be accomplished through four parallel specific aims. 1. Characterization of the
components of (and mechanism for controlling flux through) the natural
extracellular electron transfer pathway of the cyanobacterium Synechocystis. 2.
Construction of artificial systems to abstract reducing equivalents from PSI;
these will compete with natural electron acceptors only under highly reducing
conditions. 3. Development of artificial means to move reducing equivalents out
of the cytoplasm of Synechocystis. 4. Construction within microbes of artificial
fuel-production modules that require only reducing equivalents and carbon
dioxide as inputs. The project is highly interdisciplinary and will employ a
range of techniques including those from microbiology, molecular biology,
synthetic biology, biochemistry, electrochemistry, and protein and metabolic
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is supported jointly by the
Cellular Dynamics and Function Cluster in the Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences and by the Biotechnology, Biochemical and Biomass Engineering
Program in the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental and Transport
Systems.