* 1359359
* REU Site: Declarative Approaches to Knowledge Intensive Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 02/15/2014,01/31/2018
* Yuanlin Zhang, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 01/31/2018
* USD 359,837.00

This funding establishes a new Research Experience for Undergraduate (REU) site
at the Texas Tech University. The site's aim is to inspire and prepare a group
of undergraduate students for a career as a researcher or engineer in the broad
area of computing science. To this end, the site's focus is on utilizing modern
declarative problem solving techniques to tackle applications in areas such as
Cybersecurity, Energy, Healthcare and Space Exploration. The research is led by
an experienced team of faculty that will offer a balance of theoretical and
practical skills, as well as mentoring and professional development
opportunities for students. The site recruits a diverse pool of students
including women, Latino/a students, first generation students, and students from
a historically black college and university.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of the proposal lies with the leadership provided by an
experienced team of mentors with excellent expertise and experience in the
research areas. The site focuses on the use of declarative programming in
applications in the following research areas. The first project is in the design
of intelligent agents capable of acting rationally in a changing environment.
The second research project pertains to healthcare, where students develop a
mechanized system that provides treatment recommendations to doctors, using
clinical practice guidelines. The third research project is in the area of
cybersecurity, where students develop tools that guarantee that enterprise
applications and cloud transactions satisfy appropriate security and privacy
policies. The fourth research project is in the areas of energy-aware computing,
where students formulate power consumption requirements in software components
of mobile devices. The final project is in the domain of astronomical software.
In this project students investigate techniques on how to operate solar arrays
in the International Space Station in an effective manner, subject to safety
constraints and preferences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts center on
the opportunities provided to a diverse pool of undergraduates, with the aim to
inspire them to pursue graduate studies. The project activities permit students
to acquire valuable skills, gain a broader and deeper understanding of research,
and develop greater confidence in their abilities. The research projects are in
areas of national importance and the technical advances in these topics have the
potential to boost basic infrastructure leading to improvement of the quality of
life. The evaluation plan and the data management plan should contribute to
educational research on effective structures for involving undergraduate
students in research.