* 1359457
* REU Site: Program in Structural Biology at the University of Oklahoma
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2017
* Paul Sims, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Ann Sakai
* 09/30/2017
* USD 319,697.00

This REU Site award to the University of Oklahoma, located in Norman, OK, will
support the training of 10 students per summer in a 9-week program during the
summers of 2015-2017. The REU program is open to all undergraduate students who
are citizens, nationals or permanent residents of the United States. Students
trained in the program will gain skills in lab research, develop their critical
thinking and problem-solving skills, understand the process of science, and be
able to communicate their research results to their peers and the general
public. Students will have an opportunity to present their results at a national
conference. The REU program provides an experience to students that is typically
not available to them at their home institutions. Students from schools with
limited opportunities for research and from underrepresented groups are
encouraged to apply.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU Site program will focus on
research that involves a structural biology approach to answering biological
questions. Example projects include structure-function investigations of 1)
small, drug-like molecules and their cellular targets, 2) transcription
regulation in select methanogens, 3) ligand interactions in heme
metalloproteins, 4) the role of promoter-RNA (pRNA) in the bacteriophage
packaging motor, 5) the role of enzymes that act in plant cell-wall synthesis,
and 6) protein-protein interactions in a His-Asp phosphorelay signaling pathway
from yeast. During the 9-week program, students will learn about the application
process for graduate school, and they will learn about possible career
opportunities by going on field trips to different research facilities
throughout central Oklahoma. At the end of the program, students will present
their research in a poster and/or oral presentation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
common web-based assessment tool used by all REU programs funded by the Division
of Biological Infrastructure (Directorate for Biological Sciences) will be used
to determine the effectiveness of the training program. Students are required to
be tracked after the program and must respond to an automatic email sent via the
NSF reporting system. More information is available by contacting the PI (Dr.
Paul A. Sims; psims@ou.edu) or co-PI (Dr. Anthony W. G. Burgett;
anthony.burgett@ou.edu).