* 1359574
* Institutional Competing Logics: Local Context vs. National Identity in United Way Systems
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2013,07/31/2014
* Laurie Paarlberg, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* mo wang
* 07/31/2014
* USD 76,812.00

In this project the Principal Investigators will examine the local variation
that occurs as part of a top-down effort within a highly institutionalized
national system. Institutional theory suggests that local organizations will
adopt new national practices to remain legitimate in their larger field of
activity, leading to organizational homogeneity; however there is growing
interest in the role of local institutions in shaping alternative local
responses. As a result local organizations may remain only loosely coupled to
broader change efforts. The investigators will explore to what extent change has
occurred in local United Way systems over the last decade as part of the move to
Community Impact and how such change is associated with shifting community
logics and resource environments.

In terms of broader impacts, this research is particularly important during the
current sustained recession because in the face of severe economic challenges
organizations may face increased pressures to resolve the tensions between
national legitimacy and local resource demands. The results of the study will
potentially advance practical understanding about change in institutionalized
systems. Also, the research team will create a publicly available hierarchical
database that matches all local United Ways within the United Way system and the
community contexts in which they are embedded to the nonprofits that they fund.
This asset will be of value to other researchers.