* 1359587
* CAREER: Bio-Manufacturing Heterogeneous Multi-scale 3D Matrices for Engineering Living Tissue Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/30/2013,01/31/2015
* Binil Starly, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Zhijian Pei
* 01/31/2015
* USD 106,387.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award
is to investigate the process variables that will enable the assembly of multi-
scale patterned structures through the hybrid application of nozzle deposition
and near field electro-spinning manufacturing processes. These structures will
be used to advance our understanding on the influence of spatially patterned
structures containing both sub-micron to meso-scale dimensional features on the
behavior of living cells. The development of the proposed manufacturing platform
will enable the fabrication of complex tissue engineering constructs for
engineering living tissue systems. The approach to achieve this objective
includes biomaterial synthesis, rheological characterization, process modeling
and fabrication of spatially patterned heterogeneous structures for biological
testing. The educational objective of this award is to impart a vertical-
integration-of-design-and-manufacturing-education based theme at the high
school, undergraduate and graduate levels. In doing so, the plan aims to inspire
high school students to pursue engineering education, promote the active
participation of underrepresented minorities in engineering and to provide
graduate students with expertise in bio-manufacturing systems. The approach to
achieve these educational objectives includes active participation in the
Oklahoma STARBASE organization targeted for K-12 students, the formation of a
hovercraft club for freshman engineering students, and by facilitating graduate
student international laboratory participation in South
Korea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this research lies in the
capability to print heterogeneous structures at multiple length scales.
Specifically, this plan proposes the next generation of scalable bio-
manufacturing systems for the fabrication of polymeric medical implants and in-
vitro human tissue analog systems. The investigation into cell-environment
interaction will help engineers, biologists and clinicians to better understand
the role of engineered constructs for regenerative medicine. The proposed
educational activities will enhance design and manufacturing education for
undergraduate and graduate students at the University of Oklahoma. The
hovercraft club at the university will introduce the art of engineering through
a design and manufacturing perspective for students, and also serve as a focal
point for attracting high school students to the engineering discipline. This
CAREER plan will also help to setup state-of-the-art infrastructure in advanced
manufacturing and usher in new multi-disciplinary collaborative
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;