* 1359590
* TTP: Small: Automated Conformance Testing of Access Control and Obligation Policies
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Dianxiang Xu, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Anita  Nikolich
* 08/31/2017
* USD 515,371.00

Attributed-based obligatory access control is a new access control paradigm for
achieving fine-grained authorization and assured system accountability. However,
access control and obligation policies can be implemented incorrectly for
various reasons, such as programming errors and misunderstanding about the
policies. It is important to reveal discrepancy between the policy specification
and the actual system implementation. The objective of this ?Transition To
Practice? project is to develop an open source tool for model-based testing of
attribute-based access control and obligation policies. It can build test models
by integrating attribute-based access control and obligation rules with
functional test models, generate test cases from the test models to meet given
coverage criteria, and transform model-level test cases into executable code in
a target language and test execution environment. The test code can then be
executed with the system under test to exercise the access control and
obligation policies. The tool is applicable to a great variety of systems due to
the support for various programming languages and test execution environments.
It is independent of how access control and obligation policies are implemented
in the system under test. The broader impacts of this project include deployment
of the tool to various academic and industry projects and involvement of
students, particularly undergraduate students, in cutting-edge research.