* 1359170
* REU Site in Computer Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2014,02/28/2018
* Zachary Dodds, Harvey Mudd College
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 02/28/2018
* USD 358,068.00

This funding renews a Research Experience for Undergraduate (REU) site at Harvey
Mudd College. The site brings 10 undergraduates in order to engage them in
research and encourage graduate study in computer science. The intellectual
focus of the site is research in computer systems. The program provides a
microcosm of the graduate experience through four broadly-scoped systems
projects. Students have a chance to gain experience in all aspects of the
research process, including its social aspects. The site focuses on recruiting a
sufficiently diverse pool of students, including women and underrepresented
minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the proposal rests
with the leadership of an experienced team of mentors with excellent expertise
and experience in the research areas. The site focuses on four main projects.
The first project develops algorithms for estimating cophylogenetic trees based
on biological host/parasite data. Students' work is encapsulated in a software
package named Jane, currently in use by dozens of biology research groups. The
second effort investigates approaches for automatic synthesis of music scores,
furthering our understanding of computational music research. It leverages the
Impro-Visor software, which has many thousands of users. The third project
explores program analyses to support new, accessible domain-specific languages,
secure information flow in industry-standard languages such as Javascript, and
visualization tools for both sides of that programming spectrum. The fourth
project tests machine-learning and computer vision-based algorithms that improve
the state-of-the-art of performance of low-cost robots, such as sub-$300
quadcopters and laser-guided wheeled platforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impacts include the site's emphasis on the broad human and research impacts of
pursuing computer science at the graduate level -- especially for participants
who had not previously considered graduate work. Challenging research problems
prompt students' guided development of research skills: investigation,
presentation, and publication. One-on-one introductions by advisors transition
to student-led talks and culminate with publications and conference experiences
during or after the summer. The program's most important impact is its
cultivation of the next generation of creative and enthusiastic computer science
researchers. The evaluation plan and the student research artifact archiving
plan should contribute to educational research on effective structures for
involving undergraduate students in research.