* 1359469
* REU Site:  Leading Undergraduates in Challenges to Power Academic Development in Geosciences
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Aisha Morris, UNAVCO, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Lina Patino
* 08/31/2016
* USD 75,000.00

This award will support engaging lower-division students in a pilot program
called "Leading Undergraduates in Challenges to Power Academic Development in
Geosciences" at UNAVCO. The goal of this program is to provide research
experiences for less academically advanced students, who may not be ready for an
independent research experience. The program will engage 4 community college and
lower-division undergraduate students in an 8-week summer research and
professional development experience. It is expected that through this program
students will: become interested in geosciences and related careers, engage in
collaborative research projects, and have the support needed to pursue degrees
in geosciences and related fields. Students participating in this program will
develop research-ready, communication, mathematics, and computing skills, as
well as geoscience content knowledge. In addition, participants will have access
to information about the relevance of geoscience to be shared with the broader
intern's networks of family and friends, eventually reaching hundreds of
individuals in communities that typically do not have access to such
information. Students will be hosted by UNAVCO in Boulder, Colorado and work on
collaborative geodesy-focused research projects in the GAGE facility under the
mentorship of UNAVCO staff. The program will prepare students from diverse
backgrounds for academic and career opportunities in the geosciences through
national recruitment at universities and community colleges with limited
opportunities in STEM fields.