* 1359022
* CASE CHEMISTRY REU SITE
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* James Burgess, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 08/31/2017
* USD 212,519.00

This award from the Division of Chemistry (CHE) and the Division of Biological
Infrastructure (DBI) in the Biological Sciences Directorate supports a Research
Experience for Undergraduates (REU) site at Case Western Reserve University, led
by Professors James Burgess and Blanton S Tolbert. Student groups will focus on
Energy and Materials, and on Chemical Biology, the two main research thrusts in
the Department. The REU program focuses on areas such as recruitment of under-
represented students and women into chemical research, and addressing hurdles
experienced by students (including women and minorities) considering higher
positions along the scientific pipeline. The REU students should develop
confidence and become further motivated to pursue a career in chemical research.
Having accomplished meaningful research at Case Western Reserve University, the
REU students will be more qualified to enter the scientific workforce, become
educators, or enter graduate programs across the
country.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Chemistry REU site will strive to meet the
following objectives: 1) For each summer program, a cohort of six students will
be recruited that is approximately 50% female and 50% underrepresented
minorities. 2) The student's interest will be matched with appropriate research
projects and groups. 3) The REU site will develop and implement a mentor
training program. 4) The REU site aims to enhance the undergraduates' sense of
participation in the research community. 5) The REU site will be evaluated and
the program will track participants' post-program plans. Students having these
experiences will gain laboratory experiences in chemical research and will be
engaged in meaningful experiences, which contribute to each mentor's research
program. Student choice of research area is an important facet of this REU site.
It is anticipated that results of the experiences will lead to publications
having REU students as co-authors. Additionally, many of the REU students will
find the research experience to be multidisciplinary, involving collaborations
among groups across the University and elsewhere. This collaborative approach
will provide training in today's team oriented research environment. REU
students will become part of a larger community of young scholars on campus.