* 1359266
* REU Site: Research Experience for Undegraduate in Computational Methods in High Performace Computing with Applications to Computer Science
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2018
* Louis Petingi, CUNY College of Staten Island
* Standard Grant
* Sushil K Prasad
* 09/30/2018
* USD 356,134.00

The site is supported by the Department of Defense in partnership with the NSF
REU program. The award provides support for a three-year REU Site at the College
of Staten Island (City University of New York) with technical support from
CUNY's High Performance Computing Center, in an area of increasing national
importance: Computational Methods in High Performance Computing with
Applications in Computer Science. The REU Site recruits eight undergraduate
students, for a ten-week summer experience, who undertake challenging problems
with their mentors, in different research sub-fields of computer science (e.g.,
Graph Theory, Network Reliability, Cryptography, Network Security, Wireless Ad-
hoc, Sensor Networks, and Complex Systems Modeling and Simulation) that require
parallel processing programming techniques to be solved. Selected students
develop competency in scientific research, improve oral presentations and
writing skills. The program is aimed to help students produce significant
research results which are written up in a format acceptable for publication in
either a conference or journal.

Students are recruited from colleges and universities that offer limited or no
STEM research opportunities, such as historically minority colleges and
universities. Emphasis is placed on attracting minority and female students.
Research and technical activities are integrated with group activities which
include site visits to state-of-the art research facilities in the New York
metropolitan area, seminars conducted by faculty, and social activities to
enhance the diversity of the group. Seminars in career development, ethical
issues in computer science, literature search, technical writing, and graduate
school advisement, are integral parts of the program. The program is expected to
draw students into research and provide them with the intellectual and
motivational tools to engage them in graduate studies and pursue research
careers in computer science or related fields.