* 1359235
* REU Site: Retaining Engineers through Research Entrepreneurship and Advanced Materials Training
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2020
* Okenwa Okoli, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Amelia Greer
* 04/30/2020
* USD 380,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;With the vital support of the Division of
Engineering Education and Centers, the REU Site: Retaining Engineers through
Research Entrepreneurship and Advanced-Materials Training will encourage
undergraduate students to pursue graduate degrees in the STEM disciplines by
training students in advanced materials with an entrepreneurial twist to show
the potential rewards, both intellectually and financially, for pursuing STEM
degrees. Eight projects involved in processing and applications of
nanomaterials, and multiscale-multifunctional composite materials were selected
to equip the students with knowledge in the synthesis and characterization of
carbon nanotubes (CNTs) and their utilization in manufacturing
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Through lab experience and
targeted seminars, the students will gain more versatile, innovative and
independent thinking in both engineering and business. The seminars will provide
fundamental knowledge to assist in their research and include topics in Research
Methods and Ethics, Health &amp; Safety, Engineering Data Analysis, Experimental
Design and using statistical software packages. Entrepreneurial component
seminars on Technology Entrepreneurship and Commercialization, presented by the
FSU College of Business Jim Moran Institute, will provide an understanding of
the relevance of research innovations and graduate research degrees to the
business environment. This will culminate with the EngiPreneur Competition where
students will present their strategy for bringing their research to the
marketplace. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Over 10-weeks, the REU
program will bridge the gap between materials engineering innovations and their
market potential. The participants entering into the STEM fields and later the
U.S. workforce will be better educated with the practical experience to take
their innovations from the lab to the marketplace.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-
TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;With the vital support of the Division of
Engineering Education and Centers, researchers and business leaders from the
FAMU-FSU College of Engineering, the High-Performance Materials Institute and
the FSU College of Business Jim Moran Institute have established a 10-week
opportunity to encourage undergraduate students, especially women and
minorities, to pursue graduate degrees in the science, technology, engineering
or math disciplines by training students in advanced materials with an
entrepreneurial twist to show the potential rewards, both intellectually and
financially, for pursuing these technically demanding degrees. The REU Site:
Retaining Engineers through Research Entrepreneurship and Advanced-Materials
Training will bridge the gap between materials engineering innovations and their
market potential. Through the versatile training, lab experiences, interactions
with business leaders and researchers from government and industry, the
participants entering into the STEM fields and later the U.S. workforce will be
better educated with the practical experience to make new discoveries and take
their innovations from the lab to the marketplace.