* 1359324
* REU Site: Indigenous America to Indigenous Borneo-Adventures in Biology and Biodiversity
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2017
* Ruben Ceballos, University of Minnesota Morris
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 03/31/2017
* USD 266,770.00

This REU Site award to the University of Minnesota - Morris, located in Morris,
MN, will support the training of a minimum of 6 students for 10 weeks during the
summers of 2014- 2016. This project is supported by the Division of Biological
Infrastructure in the Directorate for Biological Sciences and the International
Science and Engineering section in the Office of International and Integrative
Affairs at NSF. Students with interest in biodiversity, biological systems, and
traditional ecological knowledge will conduct research on the island of Borneo
in Malaysia and at the University of Minnesota - Morris. Students can select
from a number of interdisciplinary projects under the mentorship of both U.S.
and Malaysian scientists. Research projects on plants, microorganisms, and other
systems used to produce natural products are available for students to
investigate. Students may also pursue projects in microbial biodiversity --
studying exotic terrestrial, freshwater, or marine microbes. Students will
interact with U.S. and Malaysian faculty and students, as well as tribal
"community scientists" from several Indigenous groups on the island of Borneo.
Students will learn biological and chemical analyses using modern scientific
methods, in the context of traditional ecological knowledge. All students will
receive training in laboratory/field safety, ethics and the responsible conduct
of research, Indigenous rights, intellectual property, and communicating their
work to other scientists and the public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students will
apply through the online application system at http://www.embrs-mn.com/training-
international-programs/ and will be selected based on letters of recommendation,
statement of intent/interest, prior academic performance, and an IP-based video
conference or in-person interview. Students from groups that have been
historically underrepresented in the sciences are strongly encouraged to
apply.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Success of the program will be assessed using the
REU common assessment tool available online. Students are required to be tracked
after the program and must respond to an automatic email sent via the NSF
reporting system. More information is available by visiting http://www.embrs-
mn.com/training-international-programs/, or by contacting the PI (Dr. Michael
Ceballos at rceballo@morris.umn.edu)