* 1359780
* Transformation of American Southern Commemorative Landscapes
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2014,07/31/2017
* David Butler, University of Southern Mississippi
* Continuing Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 07/31/2017
* USD 445,423.00

Commemorative landscapes both reflect cultural values and provide a context to
sustain and challenge those values. Landscapes can be constructed and used to
actively remember or forget certain identities, groups, and histories in order
to maintain or sometimes challenge those histories. Southern plantation tourism
plays an important role in developing basic understanding of race in the United
States by establishing a sense of place and meaning through the exploration of
commemorative landscapes. How southern commemorative landscapes provide symbolic
and substantive representations of what it means to be southern and how southern
culture is defined and debated form key questions in the scientific study of
social memory and commemorative landscapes. The objective of this research is to
contribute to theory centered on the transformation of racialized southern
commemorative landscapes within the United States. Specifically, the researchers
examine the processes and politics of incorporating slavery into plantation
landscapes as sites symbolic of contemporary struggles over the meanings and
uses of southern and American heritage. Incorporating critical discussions of
slavery at such sites not only enhances historical accuracy, but is also
necessary to understand contemporary race relations in the United States. This
research describes and explains the manner and extent to which southern tourist
plantations are moving toward an incorporation of the history of the enslaved
into the commemorative landscape of the region and nation. These issues are of
importance to contemporary American society as a whole, and of specific interest
to those who own, manage, or visit these tourist sites.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Traditionally, tourism plantations have given
authority to the idea of white privilege and the erasure of the enslaved from
southern plantation history, but these representations have begun to change.
This framework drives the following research questions: (1) To what extent and
how are owners/operators of plantations incorporating slavery into the built,
narrative, and performative landscapes at plantations? (2) What were/are the
impetuses for change, towards an inclusion of slavery into the built, narrative,
and performative landscapes of plantations? (3) What are the tourists'
expectations regarding slavery and reactions to the exclusion or inclusion of
slavery as part of the built, narrative, and performative landscapes of
plantations? (4) How is the incorporation of slavery into the built, narrative,
and performative landscapes perceived changing over time at plantations? (5) How
do docents embrace, resist and embody the inclusion of slavery into the built,
narrative, and performative landscapes of plantations? (6) What are the
tourists' pre- and post-conceptions of slavery as part of the built, narrative,
and performative landscapes at plantations? The project breaks new ground in the
literature by conducting fieldwork at multiple plantation sites and types, as
well as examining multiple stakeholders (e.g., owners/operators, docents, and
tourists). The study compares three prominent plantation regions through
multiple study sites in each region. At each site, the researchers apply a mixed
methods approach, including a quasi-experimental design, to interview plantation
owner/operators, participant observers of plantation tours, interview docents,
and surveys and interviews of tourists.