* 1359527
* Kansas City Research Data Center
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2019
* Donna Ginther, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2019
* USD 300,000.00

This award will establish a new Census Research Data Center in Kansas City. The
center will be used by faculty from the University of Kansas City Lawrence and
the University of Missouri Kansas City, as well as by researchers from the
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, the Ewing Marion Kauffman with a satellite
center on the campus of the University of Missouri Columbia. The center will
allow these researchers to use government data records for cutting edge research
in economics, sociology, management, demography, health, and related
disciplines. The center allows researchers access to the data while fully
maintaining the privacy and confidentiality of the data records. The center will
join an existing network of 18 Census Research Data Centers located round the
country. Since these other centers are primarily on the East and West coasts,
the center will be an important addition to the research capacity of Kansas and
Missouri.

This RDC will be used for projects on a wide range of topics. There is a
significant community of researchers in this part of the US who focus the
scientific study of entrepreneurship. Several of the researchers who will make
immediate use of the new center will use the restricted-access Census microdata
to test innovative new hypotheses about the effects of entrepreneurship and
small business on the US economy.