* 1359523
* Characterizing and Modifying Defects that Trap Excitons in Yttrium Aluminum Garnets Doped with Rare-Earth Elements
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2013,06/30/2014
* Farida Selim, Bowling Green State University
* Continuing Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 06/30/2014
* USD 34,620.00

Technical: This project aims for greater understanding of the interactions
between excitons and crystalline defects in rare earth doped yttrium aluminum
garnet (YAG) scintillator crystals. The approach toward more in-depth
understanding and control of exciton dynamics is through their interactions with
activating impurities and lattice defects. Lattice defects in the YAG structure
will be characterized using positron lifetime spectrometry through a
comprehensive study of their types, sizes and concentrations. Positron
parameters will be correlated with optical measurements of exciton behavior,
photon emission, and scintillation properties. The correlation between positron
parameters and optical properties will be monitored as a function of growth
conditions, choice of rare-earth dopant, doping levels, deviations from
stoichiometry and postgrowth treatments. The correlation will further be
examined following processing steps that include thermal annealing under
different atmospheres. Results of the characterizations will be used to modify
synthesis and growth conditions in order to improve optical properties.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical: The project addresses basic research issues
in a topical area of materials science with technological relevance in
electronics and photonics. Through greater understanding of the interactions of
excitons with defects this research is expected to lead to significant
improvements in scintillator performance. Scintillator materials convert various
types of radiation into photons, which can then be collected and analyzed. Two
important application areas are medical diagnostics, and gamma and neutron
radiation detection. The relationship between crystalline defects and
scintillator performance is an important topic and at the present time not well
understood. The results of these studies will help to understand how to improve
scintillator efficiency by leading to the design of improved scintillator
compositions and structure. The research will enhance understanding of defect
formation in ionic crystals and selection of improved methods of
synthesis/processing for superior optical properties. The project will integrate
research and education of undergraduate and graduate student participants.
Training will be in a multi-disciplinary environment of basic and applied
physics, materials science, electronics and photonics. In addition to providing
support and mentoring of graduate students, the PIs will motivate undergraduate
and high school students through a web site and make presentations to students
on and off campus. The PIs will create a diverse research group that includes
women and minority group members. Research results will be disseminated through
publications in premier journals and via presentations at conferences and in
seminars.