* 1359293
* REU Site:   The City University of New York / Goddard Institute for Space Studies Center for Global Climate Research Phase II
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2014,10/31/2017
* Leon Johnson, CUNY Medgar Evers College
* Standard Grant
* Edward L. Bensman
* 10/31/2017
* USD 385,512.00

The City University of New York (CUNY)/Goddard Institute for Space Studies
(GISS) Center for Global Climate Research (CGCR), is based on research related
to Geoscience, Atmospheric Science, Sun-Earth interaction and Global Climate
Impacts. CUNY/GISS CGCR-Phase II will continue to provide this unique
undergraduate student research experience for a second three-year period. Each
Summer, ten students will be recruited in the Research Experience for
Undergraduates (REU) Site and will be distributed among the research teams (five
at CUNY, five at GISS) under the mentorship of CUNY faculty and NASA scientists.
Students will receive a stipend for 10 weeks of research experience. In addition
to recruiting students from four-year colleges, the proposed activities will
continue to include an active recruitment of students at the community college
level. Student external to CUNY, in greater NYC Region, are also encouraged to
apply. The CUNY/GISS REU Site will continue to seek 60% under-represented
minorities and 40% female participation each year. The Objectives are to:
a)provide undergraduate summer research opportunities in Global Climate Change
and related areas at CUNY and GISS to a larger Greater NYC region constituency;
b)provide enrichment activities at GISS and CUNY which include basic technical
skills workshops and seminars; c)assist students in continuing their research
during the academic year, leveraging existing NASA, NSF and NOAA programs; and
d)increase the number of students in the STEM pathway to graduate school and to
the scientific workforce.

Intellectual Merit : Students will be involved in existing research projects
which are collaborations with NASA scientists and CUNY faculty funded by NASA
and/or NOAA. Students will be engaged in original research and contributing to
the general body of knowledge in Global Climate Change. The collaboration occurs
within a small urban geographical area, which enables faculty and students to
interact with scientists on daily basis. The faculty, students and scientists
have developed a unique relationship that has benefited both CUNY and NASA GISS.

Broader Impacts : This unique urban CUNY-GISS collaboration was expanded so that
more undergraduate students in CUNY and the Greater New York City Region could
experience the rich scientific research and the diversity of the melting pot
environment of CUNY/GISS. Students are involved in cutting edge research, access
to a NASA research center and have the opportunity of presenting their results
at national conferences and as co-authors in peered review publications. The
CUNY faculty and GISS scientists collaboration has a track record of working
with students that are under-represented in STEM areas and advancing student
through the STEM pathway to graduate study in areas in which fewer students are
selecting as careers and where the loss of retired scientists is significant.