* 1359606
* Understanding the Predictability of Initiation and Morphological Evolution of PECAN (Plains Elevated Convection at Night) Nocturnal Mesoscale Convective Systems
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* William Gallus, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Edward L. Bensman
* 08/31/2016
* USD 91,537.00

The Plains Elevated Convection at Night (PECAN) field campaign will occur the
Summer of 2015 in the central Great Plains. The scientific focus of PECAN is
nocturnal convection, with four separate research topics to be addressed: 1)
Nocturnal convection initiation and early evolution of mesoscale convective
clusters; 2) Bore and other wave-like disturbances; 3) Dynamics and microphysics
of nocturnal mesoscale convective systems; 4) Prediction of nocturnal convection
initiation and evolution. The observational campaign plan calls for three
research aircraft, seven mobile Doppler radars, and multiple sounding systems. A
main part of the experimental design is the inclusion of fixed and mobile PECAN
Integrated Sounding Array (PISA) units which consists of a variety of profiling
instruments. The broader societal impact of PECAN is to improve forecasts of
these nocturnal events for hydrology, energy, agriculture and public safety
purposes. The field campaign would include a large number of students, including
efforts to broaden participation and enhance diversity. Public outreach would
also be conducted.

Via this award, PI Gallus will serve as lead forecaster for PECAN. To facilitate
this role, we will run a real-time configuration of the Weather Research and
Forecasting (WRF) model using data assimilation.

Intellectual Merit : Elevated mesoscale convective systems (MCSs), particularly
those occurring at night, are a difficult challenge for forecasters. These
events are more difficult to accurately simulate, partly because of insufficient
observations above ground level, but also due to deficiencies in understanding
of their initiation and maintenance. Initiation of and morphological evolution
within MCSs is likely influenced by features such as bores, elevated boundaries,
and other elevated convergence zones that are not initialized well in the
models, and thus how these features modulate convection is not well-understood.
These features often coexist with low-level jets (LLJ) whose simulation is also
sensitive to errors in the simulated planetary boundary layer evolution. Tools
and knowledge gained by this award will provide a better understanding of MCSs.

Broader Impacts : This work will lead to both improved understanding of elevated
nocturnal MCSs that should lead to improved forecasting of these challenging
events, and enhanced education and training of students who will assist in
conducting the research and also the forecasting in the field. This work has the
potential to directly improve safety from this weather hazard.