* 1359430
* REU Site: Research Experience for Undergraduates in Materials and Modeling
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2018
* Karen King, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 04/30/2018
* USD 321,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This REU site, based in the Physics Department of
the University of Missouri, Columbia, will train 10 undergraduate student
interns per summer in the area of materials experiments and modeling, broadly
defined. The program will be targeted at junior and senior undergraduate
students with Physics Majors, with the aim of introducing them to cutting-edge
scientific research by engaging them in active and established research groups
and motivating them to pursue a career in the sciences. Student research topics
may be chosen from a broad area of materials physics (theoretical, experimental,
or computational). Some examples are: theory of electronic structure in solids,
spin-orbit interaction in oxide interfaces, simulation of RNA folding, tunable
single electron memory, study of membrane proteins with atomic force microscopy,
charge transport in transistors, neutron and x-ray scattering in solids, quantum
spin ice systems, graphene and beyond-graphene materials, etc. While each
student will work on a sharply focused area of research, they will gain a
broader perspective of materials research from weekly discussions and
presentations by their peers. In addition to their research, students will
participate in weekly group meetings, attend weekly lectures in popular science
as well as in general education topics such as scientific writing, ethics, and
career opportunities in science and technology. Other planned activities include
a visit to an industrial research and development facility. All students will be
required to present their results as oral presentations at the MU Undergraduate
Summer Research Day held each August and will be encouraged to participate in
journal publications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Students who complete this program will experience the reality
of cutting-edge research in materials physics and engineering. This will enable
them to understand their own level of aptitude and interest in a career in
science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM) and give them the tools
to prepare for the next stage in their education and career development. A
diverse population of students will be recruited from the community colleges and
undergraduate institutions in Missouri as well as nationally. The emphasis will
be on students who might otherwise have limited access to research work and who
in the absence of this experience might not pursue higher education or STEM
careers.