* 1359662
* Great Lakes Geometry Conference 2014
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2016
* Karsten Grove, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Shuguang Wang
* 03/31/2016
* USD 23,940.00

The Great Lakes Geometry Conference 2014 will be held at the University of Notre
Dame on April 26-27, 2014. The conference will feature a diverse range of topics
in geometry and topology, although a common theme is the study of geometric and
topological structures using partial differential equations. The conference will
feature seven speakers, who are experts on different topics, ranging from the
Ricci flow and Kahler-Einstein metrics, to gauge theoretic invariants of knots
and symplectic manifolds. The conference will expose graduate students and early
career researchers to new developments in these different areas.

The Great Lakes Geometry Conference has been held annually in the Great Lakes
region, and this conference will be the 13th in the series. The use of partial
differential equations in geometry and topology has produced many spectacular
advances, for instance the solution of the Poincare conjecture and understanding
the topology of four dimensional manifolds. The conference will draw together
seven well-known experts on a diverse range of topics in geometry and topology,
who use techniques either directly or indirectly related to partial differential
equations. We expect that a large number of graduate students and junior
mathematicians will attend from Midwestern universities and beyond, and we
encourage the participation of women and members of other under represented
groups. In addition to exposing early career mathematicians to recent advances
in geometry and topology we hope to foster interactions between different areas.

The website for the conference is: www.nd.edu/~gszekely/GreatLakes