* 1359779
* EAGER: Spatial and Spectral Beam Control of Angled-Cavity Distributed-Feedback Quantum Cascade Lasers
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/15/2014,07/31/2015
* Yanbo Bai, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Mahmoud Fallahi
* 07/31/2015
* USD 180,000.00

The objective of this research is to investigate the operation principle of a
new type of broad-area semiconductor lasers, termed beta-type distributed
feedback lasers. The approach involves numerical and experimental investigations
of the lateral mode selection mechanism through the angled cavity and the
longitudinal mode selection mechanism through the beta-type distributed feedback
grating.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the proposed research is
that a deeper understanding about the mode selection mechanism of beta-type
distributed feedback will be obtained. The lateral mode selection will be
investigated as functions of the cavity tilt angle, ridge width, cavity length,
and sidewall verticalness. The longitudinal mode selection will be studied by
changing the coupling strength. Finally, the optimal design will be applied to
the best quantum cascade gain medium to demonstrate the highest peak power in
room temperature single mode operation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts
of the proposed research stem from the potential that the beta-type distributed
feedback laser offers a cost effective approach for power scaling of all types
of semiconductor lasers while maintaining excellent beam quality with single
mode emission, which offers immense benefit to the society, given the current
proliferation of semiconductor lasers in the consumer market. The result of the
proposed research activity will be disseminated in peer reviewed journals,
professional conferences, and non-technical publications. Some results will also
be compiled into classroom materials for both graduate and undergraduate
courses.