* 1359175
* REU Site: Biological, Green, and Materials Chemistry Research at Texas A&M University
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2018
* James Batteas, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 06/30/2018
* USD 300,000.00

This award from the Division of Chemistry (CHE) and the Division of Biological
Infrastructure (DBI) in the Biological Sciences Directorate supports a Research
Experience for Undergraduates (REU) site at Texas A&M University, led by
Professors Holly Gaede and James Batteas. The research projects supported at
this Site are in areas of biological, green, and materials chemistry.
Undergraduates are recruited to this site primarily from institutions that lack
extensive infrastructure to support undergraduate research, and include students
from underrepresented groups. The diverse student cohort participating in
research at this site is well-prepared for graduate school, and eventual
employment as part of the country's technical workforce.

The Site supports ten students per summer in a ten week program. A sample of the
projects include: (1) the synthesis of bioactive natural products; (2) the
synthesis of biodegradable polymers from renewable resources; (3) the design of
metal-organic framework for the reversible adsorption of carbon dioxide; (4) the
tuning of surface interactions for the control of friction and wear; (5)
synthesis of conjugated ladder polymers for organic solar cells, and (6) the
computational design of transition metal free catalysts. Exposure to the modern
research methods and tools used in the research expands the undergraduate
participants' technical training. In addition, the students are exposed to areas
of science with important societal impacts in health, energy, environment, and
materials. In addition to conducting research during the summer, the students
participating in this program will participate in a number of professional
development activities, and will have expanded opportunities for presentation of
their research at national disciplinary meetings.