* 1359768
* The Economic Payoff of Immigrant Diversity in Cities: Evidence from Matched Employer-Employee Data
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2014,01/31/2018
* Thomas Kemeny, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 01/31/2018
* USD 115,000.00

Scientists have long been interested in the relationship between immigration and
economic welfare. At the same time, most of the discussion in and out of
academia focuses on immigrants as a whole, or in terms of skilled and unskilled
immigrants. Much less is known about the costs and benefits of immigrant-spawned
diversity: the growing mix of workers born in different countries. This project
fills this gap by analyzing the economic significance of immigrant diversity in
U.S. metropolitan areas. It will consider how diversity enables interactions
among different individuals, generating new, valuable ideas and raising
productivity; equally, it will explore whether the challenges of transacting in
a highly diverse urban environment can limit cooperation, thereby reducing
productivity. In debates over immigration and the culturally complex
environments it engenders, it is mostly assumed that foreign-born workers
displace natives. Rising diversity is thus cast as a zero-sum game. But this
project considers the possibility that workers born in different countries can
be complements, not substitutes, with their collective heterogeneity generating
economic benefits for all. Findings from this research will help to reframe this
issue and improve understanding within academic and policy communities regarding
the economic benefits that urban immigrant diversity may engender.

This project will build on existing work in geography and economics by examining
extremely rich confidential U.S. Census Bureau data that track a vast number of
U.S. workers and the establishments in which they work on a quarterly basis
between 1992 and 2008. By exploiting changes in worker, firm and city
characteristics over time, these data will allow results that are more accurate
and more widely generalizable than the current state of knowledge. Moreover, the
researchers will consider not just overall effects, but also how diversity may
differently affect workers at different skill levels, in different industries,
and in different social and policy contexts. This project will also disentangle
whether any observed diversity effects come from interactions within firms or in
the broader space of the city. In short, the investigators will produce the best
available information on the economic implications of immigrant diversity in
cities.