* 1359474
* Marine Technology Mentoring and Internship Program on Oceanographic Research Vessels
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2019
* Deidre Sullivan, Monterey Peninsula College
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 05/31/2019
* USD 316,562.00

The Marine Advanced Technology Education (MATE) Center will continue its marine
technical internship program, which represents a partnership with University
National Oceanographic Laboratory System (UNOLS) and the United States Coast
Guard (USCG). The program will provide 14 undergraduate students with two to
eight week internships and one student with a six-month internship each year for
the next three years (2014-2017). MATE interns work with marine technicians and
scientists onboard UNOLS and USCG research vessels, and these experiences
provide them with the opportunity to develop their technical, scientific,
seamanship, and interpersonal skills. MATE's at-sea technical internships help
undergraduate students gain the experience they need to be qualified for
technical jobs in marine-related academic and industry careers, and it provides
ocean-related employers with access to qualified technical professionals who can
fill their workforce needs. The MATE Center has 56 formal community college and
university partnerships from which the interns are actively recruited. The
program targets community college students enrolled in marine science and
technology programs and university students interested in marine technical
careers. The program's primary target audience is students enrolled in community
colleges as these students tend to be more diverse (age, socioeconomic and
ethnic) than four-year university students and are not typically provided with
research opportunities. Evaluation into the success of the internship's long-
term impact on student career trajectories is planned. Through this work, the
internship program continues to expand its reach and impact on undergraduate
marine technical education.