* 1359256
* REU Site:  Advancing Sustainable Systems and Environmental Technologies to Serve Humanity (ASSETs to Serve Humanity)
* ENG,EEC
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2018
* Michael Twiss, Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 03/31/2018
* USD 359,233.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;The REU Site Program at Clarkson University is
supported by the Division of Engineering Education and Centers, and has the
theme of "Advancing Sustainable Systems and Environmental Technologies to Serve
Humanity" (ASSETs to Serve Humanity). Program objectives include: (1) improve
educational pathways to advanced science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) careers, (2) serve traditionally underrepresented students
and students from colleges and universities lacking research opportunities in
STEM fields, (3) develop a STEM workforce of actionable leaders on environmental
sustainability, and (4) teach students to effectively communicate scientific
research to shape future policy. Environmental leadership is promoted through
engagement of ten or more undergraduate student participants in professional
development activities and transformative research in sustainable and resilient
energy and infrastructure; sensing, identifying, and mitigating emerging
pollutants and other risks; and transformation of social policy and behaviors
related to infrastructure, energy, and environment. Twenty faculty members of
nine departments in the sciences, engineering, social sciences, humanities, and
economics mentor participants on a self-contained portion of a larger research
project. Students are instructed on hypothesis-driven research, data analysis,
and effective dissemination of research results. Students participate in
research group meetings, present their work at a University-wide undergraduate
research symposium, write a final report, and are encouraged to publish their
work with their mentor in peer-reviewed publications. Professional development
includes graduate school preparation and workshops led by faculty mentors
related to sustainable energy, sustainable infrastructure, and sensors for
detecting and monitoring environmental hazards. Follow-on field trips to nearby
locations that tie thematically to the workshops demonstrate real-world
applications. Community-building activities foster cohesiveness among students.
Formative and summative assessment assures program goals are
accomplished.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;The REU Site
Program at Clarkson University is supported by the Division of Engineering
Education and Centers, and has the theme of "Advancing Sustainable Systems and
Environmental Technologies to Serve Humanity" (ASSETs to Serve Humanity).
Achieving environmental sustainability and resilience to changing global
conditions requires technological advancement produced by globally-competent
engineers and scientists capable of adapting to the challenges of environmental,
social, and cultural change. Twenty faculty members of nine departments in the
sciences, engineering, social sciences, humanities, and economics provide
integrated sustainability education, graduate training, and hands-on
interdisciplinary research opportunities that spark the imaginations of young
minds towards production of a STEM workforce of future engineers and actionable
leaders on environmental sustainability. The ASSETs to Serve Humanity REU Site
program has a proven record of full participation of women, persons with
disabilities, underrepresented minorities, and high-achieving faculty mentors
that understand the benefits of a diverse REU cohort. Recruitment and engagement
is designed to assure continued excellence. Similarly, ASSETs to Serve Humanity
REU participants have a proven record of scientific advancement reflected in
peer-reviewed publications, presentations at state, national, and international
conferences, research awards, and patent applications from their research at
Clarkson University. Through this high degree of research dissemination,
participants in the REU Site program at Clarkson University drive technological
innovation needed to maintain public well-being in a more crowded and resource-
limited world, and to improve the economic competitiveness of the United States.
Several research projects are driven by academic-industry partnerships with
goals of technological development and creation of economic opportunities and
new jobs in technological fields. The information gained is transferrable
towards new operations broadening the impact of these activities to society.