* 1359283
* REU Site: Summer Research Projects in Neuroscience
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2018
* David Schulz, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 03/31/2018
* USD 313,265.00

This REU Site award to University of Missouri (MU) located Columbia, MO, will
support the training of 12 students for 9 weeks during the summers of 2014-
2016. MU is the largest institution of higher learning in Missouri and the
flagship campus of the University of Missouri System. The program offers a wide
range of very exciting interdisciplinary projects in neuroscience, with both
wet-lab and computational components. The projects are drawn from all levels in
neuroscience (i.e., intracellular/cellular, systems and behavioral levels), with
participating faculty coming from the colleges of arts &amp; science,
engineering, and veterinary medicine. Students will attend a weekly class on
computational neuroscience, conduct lab research, and participate in various
seminars and professional development workshops on topics such as responsible
conduct in research, communication skills, career opportunities in industry and
academia, and the graduate school application process. Each student will have
the opportunity to write reports, give presentations and design and present a
scientific poster. They will also be part of a group of 100+ undergraduate
researchers from all over U.S. who participate each summer in a vibrant summer
research program (http://undergradresearch.missouri.edu/). All participants will
be recruited from outside MU, and selection will be based on academic record,
research performance, and potential for research in neuroscience. Participant
support during the REU experience will include a stipend, lodging, food, travel
to and from the university, and funding for the research
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Diversity strengthens the experience for all
students. Therefore, the program will emphasize recruitment from institutions
without advanced research programs, and from historically black and traditional
women's colleges. The team will follow-up with students to determine their
continued interest in the chosen academic area and their career paths.
Information about the program will be assessed by various means, including use
of a BIO/REU common assessment tool. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students are required
to be tracked after the program and must respond to an automatic email sent via
the NSF reporting system. More information is available by visiting
http://engineering.missouri.edu/neuroreu/, or by contacting the PI (Dr. Satish
S. Nair at nairs@missouri.edu) or co-PI (Dr. David J. Schulz at
schulzd@missouri.edu).