* 1359484
* REU Site: Applied Research in Modeling and Data-Enabled Science (ARCHIMEDES) Program
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2018
* Roummel Marcia, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Nandini Kannan
* 03/31/2018
* USD 276,000.00

This REU program couples data-enabled science with mathematical modeling. The
goal is to attract and retain students in STEM fields and to introduce them to
this novel and exciting area of mathematical research. The objectives of the
program are: to introduce students to scientific computing to strengthen
programming skills, to use mathematical models to solve real-world problems, to
apply computational tools to research-level problems, and to analyze results
using data and translate into a scientific context. In this way, this REU site
will not only expose students to an upcoming, data-intensive science, but will
also promote creation, development, and application of novel tools essential for
addressing the challenges of this emerging field. This REU program will provide
a rigorous and meaningful research experience in modeling and data-enabled
sciences for undergraduate students in a team environment, improve the
communication skills of future mathematical researchers, and recruit potential
researchers in data-enabled sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU project
will support eight undergraduate students for nine weeks each summer as they
learn and develop the mathematical and computational tools necessary for data-
driven applications, and as they gain professional-level research experiences in
preparation for careers in STEM fields. In the first week, students will
participate in a computational "bootcamp" designed to develop fundamental
computational skills, preparatory to doing research during the rest of their
summer program. The students will then work intensely for the remaining eight
weeks, in teams of four and with a faculty mentor, on projects with strong
computational and modeling components. Students will actively participate in
weekly workshops and presentations to practice and improve their communication
skills. They will also produce a technical report and a poster, and present at a
public research symposium at the end of the program. Recruitment efforts will
target groups that have been underrepresented in the STEM fields, including
women, African Americans, Hispanics, American Indians, Alaskan Natives, Pacific
Islanders and persons with disabilities.