* 1359483
* REU Site: Chemistry Connections for Community College Students at the University of California, San Diego
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2014,12/31/2018
* Haim Weizman, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Melissa Olson
* 12/31/2018
* USD 270,000.00

This National Science Foundation award from the Division of Chemistry (CHE)
supports a Research Experience for Undergraduate (REU) site led by Professors
Haim Weizman and Stacey Brydges both at the Department of Chemistry and
Biochemistry at the University of California, San Diego. The "4Cs @ UCSD"
program offers 10 first-year (or the equivalent) students attending the
extensive network of two-year colleges (2YCs) within commuting distance of UC
San Diego an intensive and integrated early undergraduate research experience in
the chemical sciences, at the frontiers of materials synthesis, human health and
disease, energy and environmental science. Apprenticeships span a year, with an
introduction to research methods in the Spring prior to full and active
immersion in a research laboratory during the 10-weeks of summer and
10-week(ends) of the Fall academic quarter, and are buttressed by enrichment
activities that include research seminars, industrial field trips, academic and
professional skills workshops, and final presentations at the Undergraduate
Research Symposium in Chemistry at UC San Diego in the subsequent Spring.
Formally trained mentorship teams comprising 2YC/UC San Diego faculty and
graduate student role models support REU fellows at all stages of this
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Overall, it is intended that this REU site will
serve to: (1) broaden the participation of underrepresented groups in
undergraduate research; (2) enable the successful transition of community
college students from associate degrees to baccalaureate and graduate programs
in the chemical sciences; (3) engage graduate students, postdoctoral fellows and
faculty in a mentoring process that leads to more effective and inclusive
research training and practices; and, (4) expand access to key academic
resources - people, facilities, and programs - and thus, opportunities for
authentic collaborations and curricular innovations linking research and
education at all institutions involved. Collectively, these initiatives will
contribute to the growth of the science pipeline, the progress of chemical
research and educational reform, and the achievement of national goals to
recruit and retain a more diverse scientific workforce.