* 1359163
* Integrated Optics for Undergraduate Native Americans (IOU-NA)
* ENG,EEC
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2018
* Robert Norwood, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 03/31/2018
* USD 290,889.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the committed support from the
Division of Engineering Education and Centers, CIAN's IOU-NA REU program will
provide research training for 8 Native American STEM undergraduate students, for
10 weeks during the summers of 2014-2016. CIAN's research addresses photonic
materials and devices for optical communication that will be the cornerstone of
future Internet technologies. Many leading companies that develop hardware for
Internet equipment such as Intel, Cisco, Oracle, Alcatel-Lucent, and Fujitsu are
CIAN industrial affiliates with a keen interest to recruit students with these
specialized skills. Over a fifteen year horizon, keeping the U.S. as a leader in
information technology will require developing dense, integrated optoelectronic
systems that extend the capabilities of the current fiber network core while
retaining the same cost as today's electronic access network. In addition,
entirely new applications for photonics with internet data centers and within
the infrastructure of cloud computing are already emerging. IOU-NA students will
join experienced CIAN research teams working on improved fiber optics, waveguide
materials, short-pulsed lasers, nanofabrication, silicon photonics, and
nonlinear photonics, as well as teams in the COS, specifically in the area of
Hydrology and Environmental Sciences. This interdisciplinary approach will
provide REU participants with a more rounded research experience. The research
projects selected for this program have the potential to advance the fields of
optical sciences and environmental sciences across the United States. The IOU-NA
program prepares students for the challenges of modern engineering by providing
a series of trainings and workshops that deliver information and strategies for
success in STEM careers and education, practice in communicating the application
and motivation of their research projects, and encouraging ambition to publish
and share research at conferences, encouraging them to share these developed
skill sets within their tribal and urban communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-
TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In 2012, NSF reported that of the nearly
3500 engineering doctorate degrees awarded to U.S. citizens in the United
States, fewer than .17 went to Native Americans. It has become increasingly
evident that there is an enormous need to support Native Americans pursuing STEM
fields, and is aligned with national endeavors to increase and improve STEM
education for underrepresented minorities. With only 42% of Native Americans
pursuing any form of higher education and only 13% of that number attaining a
bachelor's degree or higher, the need for programs to support Native Americans
in undergraduate STEM fields is immediate. CIAN's REU, IOU-NA program is an
essential step ensuring these students with unique obstacles gain the confidence
and tools needed to graduate with STEM bachelor's degrees and pursue graduate
degrees. CIAN's current REU program is a proven, multi-disciplinary, multi-
institutional program that provides research experiences to undergraduate
students, who, without this program, would have minimal alternatives for
undergraduate experiences. Adding a Native American focus to CIAN's REU by
mentoring 8 students who are either Native American by citizenship or
undergraduate students attending an American Indian serving college or
university is in line with the priorities of this nation. CIAN's IOU-NA program
will increase opportunities for underrepresented minorities to successfully
graduate with higher education STEM majors and pursue STEM careers and graduate
studies. In addition to participation in cutting-edge research, IOU-NA students
will participate in workshops and a STEM Native American speakers series This
IOU-NA is one of several education programs that CIAN has developed in an effort
to streamline the STEM pipeline for Native American youth.