* 1359107
* SUNFEST - Summer Undergraduate Research in Sensor Technologies
* ENG,EEC
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2017
* Jan Van der Spiegel, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 03/31/2017
* USD 390,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: The project offers research opportunities for a 10 week
period to ten undergraduate students in order enhance their educational
experiences and to provide them with the opportunity to advance frontiers of
knowledge in sensor technologies. The students are paired with a faculty member
and graduate student who will supervise and mentor the undergraduate researcher.
Each project is related to sensor technologies, which acts as a common
intellectual focus. The topics include sensor phenomena, materials, nano- and
micro-technology and sensors, bio-inspired sensing, sensor systems for robotics.
Students with various engineering backgrounds therefore have a choice of
projects and also opportunities for multidisciplinary teamwork, as applicable.

Students have the opportunity to select one of the following cutting-edge
projects: (1)The Nanoaquarium that consists of a thin liquid layer sandwiched
between two electron transparent silicon nitride membranes; (2) Colorimetric
Photonic Crystal Microsphere Sensors whose goals is the development of an
environmentally benign colorimetric sensor that can detect heavy metals and
pathogens; (3) Fabrication and characterization of responsive materials for
optical sensors; (4) Energy storage devices for distributed sensors; (5)
Hospital ICU-in-a-Bag whose aim is to develop a low-cost portable test-bed for
physiological control systems; (6) Wireless Sensor-Brain-Computer-Interface
(SBCI) that will allow monitoring and reconstruct somatosensory functions; (7)
Bio-sensors for mirco robots that will involve methods for interfacing synthetic
biological systems with non-living components, thereby creating microbiorobotic
sensors; (8) A non-tactile body contact sensor for legged robots; (9) Real-time
planning for robots using RGB-D sensors what will involve real-time motion
planning to allow humanoid robots to interact safely in complex environments;
(10) Ultralow energy computations for at-sensor processing; (11) Software-based
redundancy in sensor networks.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: The project will engage a group of ten undergraduate
students, who have little or no opportunities for STEM oriented research, with a
meaningful research project in the area of sensor technologies. Under the
careful mentorship of a faculty member, students will contribute to academically
based discovery that may lead to better sensors and systems for medical,
robotics, communications, environmental, energy and surveillance applications.
This experience will serve as a strong motivator for the students, who do not
traditionally do not go to graduate school, to consider going a graduate career
in science and engineering. This will significantly increase the pool of a
highly educated workforce in areas of strategic importance to the country. The
program will also form an intellectual hub for other student involvement such as
high school students from intercity high schools. The SUNFEST program will act
as a catalyst for a broader involvement and supportive environment for
underrepresented students.