* 1359661
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Local Mining in the Atacama Desert, Chile
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/2014,12/31/2014
* Marc Bermann, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2014
* USD 4,592.00

Prehistoric empires in common with multiple countries in the world today face
the problem of how to integrate "outlying" communities often of varying
ethnicity into a functioning effective social system. From the reverse
perspective "outlying" communities can function most successfully if they can
determine how best to take advantage of their incorporation into a broader
social system. Archaeological research has the potential to examine such
interactions over extended periods of time and such is the goal of this research
project. Under the guidance of Dr. Marc Bermann, Francisco Garrido will explore
two factors underlying the success of the ancient Inca empire: its imperial
infrastructure (the famous road system), and its impact at household and local
levels in subject territories. Taking a "bottom up" perspective on the effects
of Inca conquest on mining in the Atacama desert of Chile, the research will
investigate localized responses to articulation with the imperial system. This
research will address this topic through investigation of the relationship
between the Inca Road, and a recently discovered, non-Inca, mining camp,
isolated in the Atacama Desert. Preliminary research suggests that this camp
could not have existed without use of the nearby Inca road, leading to two,
inter-related, research objectives: (1) evaluating the extent to which the Inca
Road functioned as an unrecognized growth factor, stimulating local craft
industry; and (2) assessing whether the Inca Road served as a linear entrepot or
exchange nexus, rather than simply as a highway servicing Inca imperial needs. A
one-year project of survey, surface collection, and excavation will document:
the nature of mining at Chinchilla and the use of a nearby section of the Inca
Road. In the past, just as today, a major road can serve as an powerful economic
stimulus or magnet, making possible economic enterprises along it that were not
feasible previously. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By connecting local Atacama
populations to a much wider socioeconomic world, the research will be addressing
issues of "globalization," albeit, using this prehistoric case study. One area
of investigation is to document how people chose to use a new and foreign
infrastructure (even one that represented imperial hegemony) to their own ends.
Part-time, supplemental, or seasonal mining as a small scale kin-based activity
with low capital investment is still common in many parts of the world today,
including South America, and its organization and goals can be very similar to
prehispanic examples. A better understanding of the history and dynamics of
small scale mining in the Atacama remains relevant today, where there is still a
juxtaposition of large, profit-driven, multinational mining operations and
community based, risk minimizing, community-level mining. The theoretical issues
addressed in this research thus parallel contemporary issues discussed in Chile
today about mining and household and community autonomy, resource access and
utilization, and economic coping strategies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impacts of this research include documenting understudied components of the
archaeological heritage in the Atacama Desert - increasingly a tourist
destination. Chilean students from several universities will participate in the
fieldwork, and receive training in current survey and excavation techniques.
Collections will be stored at the Regional Museum of Atacama, and available,
with complete documentation, to other students and scholars. An important
component of the research will be working with existing museum collections and
with unpublished reports, bringing data from these hidden sources to public
light. The project will result in Mr. Garrido's dissertation, and the findings
will be disseminated through the Center for Comparative Archaeology electronic
data base, conference presentations and peer-reviewed publications.