* 1359230
* REU: Biological Discovery in Woods Hole
* BIO,DBI
* 04/15/2014,03/31/2017
* Robert Malchow, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 03/31/2017
* USD 357,711.00

This REU Site award to the Marine Biological Laboratory (MBL), located in Woods
Hole, MA, will support the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during the
summers of 2014- 2016. This award is supported by both the Directorates for
Biological Sciences (Division of Biological Infrastructure) and Geosciences
(Division of Ocean Sciences). The REU program will focus on the molecular and
cellular processes that give rise to, and regulate, complex physiological
systems that mediate organismal behavior. The program's goal is to recruit
highly motivated students, especially from underrepresented groups and/or from
schools with limited research opportunities, and immerse them in research
programs under the guidance of MBL summer investigators or year-round
scientists. Applicants apply electronically through the program's website, where
they will be reviewed by the admissions committee, with notification in early
spring. Each student will be assigned a mentor based on mutual interest, and be
fully integrated into their laboratory and research program. Augmenting the
research experience will be field trips and seminars that will explore a wide
range of topics to prepare students for a career in biological sciences.
Students will also attend lectures on ethics and responsible conduct in research
offered by the long running MBL course, Summer Program in Neuroscience Ethics
and Survival. The common assessment tool (http://www.salgsite.org) will be used
for student and program evaluation. The program will culminate in an
undergraduate research symposium and poster
presentation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal is to recruit a cohort of students
as diverse as the research environment. The research symposium will be broadly
disseminated via live streaming to the general public. Students will be
encouraged to publish their results in peer reviewed journals and to attend
scientific meetings. Program alumni have reported high success in graduate
school admission and academic or industrial
employment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students are required to be tracked after the
program and must respond to an automatic email sent via the NSF reporting
system. More information is available by visiting
http://hermes.mbl.edu/education/courses/other_programs/reu.html, or by
contacting the PI (Dr. Mensinger at amensing@d.umn.edu) or the co-PI (Dr.
Malchow at paulmalc@uic.edu).