* 1359304
* REU Site: Integrative Computational Education  and Research Traineeship
* CSE,OAC
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2017
* Rosalia Gomez, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Sushil K Prasad
* 05/31/2017
* USD 392,338.00

The Integrative Computational Education and Research Traineeship(ICERT) REU
objectives are to increase the number of STEM majors completing the
baccalaureate with a scientific computation emphasis and increase the number of
participants entering a graduate program with a scientific computation emphasis.
The ICERT attracts a diverse pool of students to careers in computational
science and engineering and prepares them to be able to turn discoveries into
innovations for societal good. The ICERT REU adopts training practices from the
successful NSF Integrated Graduate Education and Research Traineeship (IGERT) to
provide participants with the computational, problem-solving, creativity, and
communication skills needed to be future global leaders in transformational
science and engineering research. &lt;br/&gt;The project activities include an
introductory week-long summer institute on scientific computation, a research
project or assignment in an academic department research group, a mentor
institute for research group graduate students designated as mentor coaches,
applications seminars demonstrating current computational research enabled by
the Texas Advanced Computing Center (TACC) cyberinfrastructure, seminars on
communicating science, seminars on turning discoveries into innovations that
benefit society, mentoring in a triad of faculty/graduate mentor/undergraduate
proteìgeì, and a final presentation. &lt;br/&gt;The impact will be increased
numbers of students in multiple science and engineering domains prepared to
conduct computational research that will lead to discoveries and innovations
that stimulate economies and improve the quality of life. &lt;br/&gt;The ICERT
will broaden the participation of undergraduate underrepresented populations in
multiple computational science and engineering domains. Graduate students
participating in the mentoring triad will gain experience mentoring, teaching
and training students from underrepresented populations, preparing them for
careers as faculty who can involve underrepresented undergraduate and graduate
students in the integration of research and education.