* 1359437
* REU Site:  Physical Properties of Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2014,02/28/2017
* Giselle Thibaudeau, Mississippi State University
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 02/28/2017
* USD 295,319.00

TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION&lt;br/&gt;The Mississippi State University REU Site
"Physical Properties of Materials" will expose students to the interdisciplinary
nature of materials-related research and the intersection between the life
sciences and engineering. The goal is to involve undergraduates in
interdisciplinary materials research so that they are empowered to pursue
advanced degrees and careers in science and engineering. Existing MSU research
infrastructure and instrumentation will be utilized by participants with
guidance from a group of materials science and engineering research mentors. The
research experience will be complemented by trips to local industry to show how
materials science/engineering can be applied to aerospace, manufacturing, and
biomedical industries. The REU program boasts available research instrumentation
and expertise, strong and sustained faculty and administrative commitment, and
an independent assessment plan. Each student participant will be involved in an
independent research project under the guidance and mentorship of a faculty
member and involvement with a research team. Student projects address a diverse
range of contemporary challenges in materials science research (e.g.
biomaterials, nanoparticles, composites, and polymers) and will be part of
larger, ongoing research projects within the faculty research groups so that
participants can also gain an appreciation for the bigger science
picture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION&lt;br/&gt;REU
participants, faculty, and graduate student mentors will gain a greater
awareness of, and appreciation for, the contributions of diverse disciplines to
materials research. This project introduces participants to inquiry-
based/interdisciplinary research, informs students about careers, and empowers
students with the support and tools needed to pursue materials-related graduate
degrees or careers. The intention is to prepare students to become future
leaders and innovators in science and engineering. The educational objective is
to prepare undergraduate students to pursue a career in engineering and science.
The program has established 4 learning outcomes that students are expected to
attain by the end of the 10-week program in order to achieve the educational
objectives. These outcomes are: (a) Participants will demonstrate an ability to
conduct experiments, as well as to analyze and interpret data. (b) Participants
will have an understanding of professional and ethical responsibility. (c)
Participants will effectively communicate scientific information in written,
graphical and oral format. (d) Participants will demonstrate an ability to
conduct self-directed learning. The learning outcomes will be directly assessed
and the data will be systematically evaluated and used to continuously improve
the research experience in successive years.