* 1359222
* REU Site:   Scripps Undergraduate Research Fellowship (SURF)
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2014,02/28/2018
* Lisa Tauxe, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 02/28/2018
* USD 527,294.00

This award provides renewed funding for a Research Experience for Undergraduates
(REU) program at the University of California, Scripps Institute of Oceanography
in La Jolla, CA. The Scripps Undergraduate Research Fellowship (SURF)program is
a 10-week summer program that invites sixteen undergraduate students from across
the country to Scripps to participate in a high quality collaborative research
with Scripps faculty and researchers. Program components include a comprehensive
research project, research seminars, career workshops, graduate school
preparation, a GRE-prep course, participation in a research symposium, field
trips and social events. Research topics directly relate to many contemporary
environmental issues and underlie an understanding of earth systems, evolution,
climate, marine and ocean sciences and sustainability. All participants will
present the results of their summer research projects in the SURF Research
Symposium at Scripps and will be encouraged to present at a national conference
as well. This program will give REU participants access to research facilities
at Scripps and the opportunity to engage in high quality collaborative research
with accomplished faculty mentors, graduate students and researchers. The
breadth of ocean-related sciences at Scripps makes it accessible to students
from practically all science and engineering disciplines, including mathematics,
physics, chemistry, geology, ecology, physiology, molecular/biotechnology,
environmental sciences, technology/computer science and pharmaceutical sciences.
This program will provide a total of forty-eight students with an exceptional
research experience and career training.