* 1359906
* Engineering Metal-Organic Framework Catalysts using Advance Functionalization Techniques
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2014,05/31/2017
* Seth Cohen, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 05/31/2017
* USD 450,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Catalysis program of the Chemistry
Division, Prof. Seth Cohen of the University of California, San Diego seeks to
develop high value catalysts using metal-organic frameworks (MOFs), which are a
type of porous solid. By incorporating metals into the MOFs very robust
selective catalysts can be developed. (Catalysts are species that facilitate
chemical processes, thus saving energy and time.) Catalysis is needed for
activities ranging from pharmaceutical synthesis to advanced energy. The
development of new catalysts that can perform important transformations and be
readily separated from products, recovered, and recycled is of value for process
efficiency and greener chemistry. The MOF-based catalysis developed in this
project will help realize these goals. This proposal also includes teaching
activities involving a Science Policy Internship Program (SPIP). The SPIP
supports undergraduate STEM (science, technology, engineering, math) students at
the University of California Center in Washington D.C. This program educates
STEM students on the importance of science in pubic policy. This program has
recruited both underrepresented and women students, across the University of
California system, to help to create a generation of scientists that better
appreciate their role in society and government. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The MOF
materials targeted in this study are being developed to catalyze reactions where
the advantages of a heterogeneous (i.e. solid state) catalyst can be exploited.
In this study chiral substituents, organocatalytic groups, organometallics, and
oxidizing metal centers are introduced into several known MOFs to produce
single-site, catalytically active species. The project has three specific goals:
1. Modify the MOFs to generate organometallic active sites for transition metal
catalyzed transformations; 2. Prepare MOFs that contain redox-active
monocatecholato-metal sites that can perform oxidation reactions; and 3. Prepare
MOFs with strong hydrogen-bonding groups, including squaramides, that can
demonstrate significant organocatalytic behavior. These MOFs are attractive as
catalysts because they can easily be isolated and separated from homogenous
reaction mixtures by filtration, they contain well-ordered pores for potential
size and shape selective reactions, and that they can be used to generate
isolated active sites, reducing the chance of unfavorable interactions between
catalytic sites.