* 1359239
* SusChEM: REU Site: Polymer Innovation for a Sustainable Future
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2014,01/31/2018
* Daniel Savin, University of Southern Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 01/31/2018
* USD 350,000.00

ID: 1359239 PI: Savin, Daniel ORG: University of Southern
Mississippi&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: SusChEM: REU Site: Polymer Innovation
for a Sustainable Future&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL PART: The research
objective of the proposed REU site is to develop sustainable approaches to
polymer materials development to meet critical societal needs. Undergraduate
student researchers will be engaged in fundamental research projects that span
the complex, interdisciplinary facets of materials sustainability, including
polymer synthesis from renewable sources, materials with enhanced properties and
lifetime, materials to improve utilization of natural resources, reduced energy
polymer processes, and biodegradable materials, while gaining the tools to
assess the environmental impact of new material development. The research is
organized in four major thrusts: (1) Materials for the Preservation and
Extension of Natural Resources, (2) Materials Designed for Zero Waste Using
Biobased Raw Materials, (3) Materials Replacement for a Safer and more Secure
Future, and (4) Improved Materials during Operating Conditions. The program
includes a thorough training program for the graduate students who are selected
as primary mentors of the REU participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
PART: The program will recruit REU participants primarily from regional four-
year and community colleges where opportunities for undergraduate research are
scarce. Approximately 50% of the participants have been female during earlier
funding periods for this REU, and approximately 30% were underrepresented
minorities. Future recruiting will continue to promote broadening participation
in the STEM enterprises. Housing and meals will be provided on campus for the
participants, and funds have been allocated to support participants' travel to
the Site. An expert evaluator will evaluate the program using instruments known
to provide meaningful information about REU Site effectiveness, and the program
will conduct systematic follow-up with program participants. Based on data from
past REU experience, approximately 90% of participants subsequently enroll in
graduate or professional study.