* 1359369
* REU Site: SURFing the Interface between Chemistry and Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2014,09/30/2017
* Katrin Karbstein, The Scripps Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Ann Sakai
* 09/30/2017
* USD 332,557.00

This REU Site award to The Scripps Research Institute, located in Jupiter, FL,
will support the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during the summers of
2014-2016. This award is supported by both the Directorates for Biological
Sciences (Division of Biological Infrastructure) and Mathematical and Physical
Sciences (Division of Chemistry). The Scripps Research Institute in Florida has
a focus that integrates cutting edge bioscience research with the development of
chemical tools to probe basic biological questions. Students can join any of six
departments -- Cancer Biology, Chemistry, Infectious Diseases, Metabolism and
Aging, Molecular Therapeutics, and Neuroscience -- where they will find
themselves working at the interface between chemistry and biology. The REU
experience will provide a diverse group of students with mentored training in
scientific research at a top graduate program in the country, professional
development opportunities focused around graduate school, including ethics
training, and guided training in scientific presentation. These efforts will
culminate in a campus-wide poster session, where the participants will present
their findings and will be encouraged to present their results at a regional or
national scientific meeting. Participants will be selected for participation
based on their academic record, letters of reference and a statement of purpose.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The location of The Scripps Research Institute in South
Florida means it is well positioned to recruit students from several
underrepresented groups. Undergraduates with an interest in science will have
access to internationally renowned scientific research programs that will foster
their interest in science by immersing them in project design, data collection
and analysis, and presenting results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The effectiveness of
this program will be monitored by program evaluations including the BIO REU
Sites common assessment tool and students are required to be tracked after the
program and must respond to an automatic email sent via the NSF reporting
system. More information is available by visiting
http://education.scripps.edu/undergraduate/flreu/index.html, or by contacting
the PI (Dr. Karbstein at kkarbst@scripps.edu) or the program administrator (Mrs.
Leach-Scampavia at leach@scripps.edu).