* 1359384
* REU Site:  Atmospheric Science Experiences in Portland State University (PSU)'s Center for Climate and Aerosol Research
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2018
* Linda George, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 05/31/2018
* USD 408,229.00

This Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) site will create a ten-week
summer research experience for a diverse pool of non-traditional students to
work with faculty advisors from Portland State University's Center for Climate
and Aerosol Research. Students will be shown the linkages between components of
the Atmospheric system that are important in studies of climate, aerosols and
air quality. Students will have access to state-of-the-art instrumentation for
conducting field, laboratory and modeling research in the Atmospheric Sciences.
They will explore the need for high quality data that can be obtained from
measurements and which leads to reliable climate and air quality model
predications. This REU site will make extensive use of an online Learning
Management System (LMS) to foster collaboration before, during and after the
ten-week summer session. Within this dynamic research environment students will
conduct meaningful research projects which address issues in the Atmospheric
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The atmospheric system is
dynamic and complex. The study of the atmospheric system requires researchers to
develop state-of-the-art tools for observation and modeling; these activities
ensure the continued advancement of knowledge about the processes that force and
regulate the atmosphere's synoptic and planetary circulation, air quality,
weather and climate. It is therefore of the utmost importance to sustain the
pool of human resources required for excellence in synoptic and global
atmospheric dynamics, air quality and climate
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The specific goals of this REU
are to: (1) develop an innovative training program that will provide research
experiences on aspects of Climate and Aerosol Research, (2) develop a
collaborative asynchronous online mentoring program, and (3) provide
opportunities to enhance diversity in the STEM workforce. The REU experience is
intentionally designed by the project team to develop the following skills in
the undergraduate students: technical oral communication, technical writing,
research ethics, analytical analysis, numerical analysis, statistical analysis,
hardware development, and effective communication to a general audience. A
particular strength of the REU model is the use of an existing curriculum,
developed under previous NSF funding at PSU that provides a time-tested platform
for rapidly preparing students for research in atmospheric science. The REU
experience is also innovative in that it will contain graduate and professional-
level socialization experiences, specifically tailored to the recruited
populations, in the effort to familiarize students with the science culture and
facilitate positive identification with science. The combined internal and
external evaluation plans will allow this REU to contribute to the development
of improved REU models for mentoring rural and Native American students from
community colleges. The evaluation will contain elements not only in regard to
student characteristics and program effectiveness, but will also serve to inform
program hosts about the needs of the underrepresented groups we intend to serve.