* 1359595
* A Bioarchaeological Reconstruction of Demography and Social Class
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2014,09/30/2020
* Bethany Turner, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 09/30/2020
* USD 207,772.00

The fundamental goal of this research is to gain insight into how large
political entities such as empires and state level societies integrate large
numbers of individuals, often speaking different languages and of different
ethnicities into centralized functioning units and the effect that such
integration has on different groups of individuals. Through use of
archaeological data it is possible both to trace such processes over time and to
examine aspects of human biology which might be difficult to accomplish with
living populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With support from the National Science
Foundation, Dr. Bethany Turner will conduct a three-year project analyzing
archaeological human remains from the southern highlands of Peru. In
collaboration with her Peruvian colleagues and their students, as well as her
own students, Dr. Turner will reconstruct patterns of diet and migration in over
two hundred individuals recovered from three sites in the heartland of the Inca
Empire. In just under a century, the Inca took control of large areas of western
South America and subjugated an estimated twelve million people. As part of
their governing strategies, Inca administrators forcibly relocated individuals
and even entire communities throughout the empire - this strategy quashed
pockets of resistance, relocated communities of specialists to where their
skills were most needed, and provided an enormous labor pool for military
campaigns and building projects. It also translated to different patterns of
diet, disease exposure, violence, and other key factors influencing the health
and well-being of Inca subjects. Reconstructing the composition of populations
at different Inca sites is therefore critical to better understanding whether,
and if so, how the life histories of different Inca subjects were affected by
Inca imperialism: estimating who was moved, from where, to where, and why can
provide insights into not only their life histories, but those of in situ
populations by comparison.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To accomplish this goal, Turner
and her colleagues will produce a combination of multi-isotopic data from
collected samples of bone and tooth fragments from each individual, as well as
dental data that represent aspects of genetic ancestry. These data will be used
to create in-depth profiles of diet and residence at different points in the
lifespan and relate them to genetic variation within and between each site.
Moreover, these data will be analyzed along with published and unpublished data
on skeletal health and disease, using Turner's novel approach to better
understanding the causes of common skeletal pathological
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this study lies in
its use of multiple lines of data to reconstruct aspects of identity and life
history in a large sample of indigenous remains, and interpret them using a
theoretical perspective centered on social stratification, resource inequality,
and ancient statecraft. These data also provide new opportunities to tease apart
the different causes of stressors affecting the skeleton, an area of
longstanding debate in biological anthropology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study
has broader impacts for archaeology and historical studies, particularly of
complex and urbanized societies. The Inca Empire was like other states, past and
present, in that it stood on the shoulders of its people, most of whom passed
anonymously into history. This study's focus on analyzing the skeletal remains
of Inca subjects opens a new window into understanding the workings of this
ancient empire. This study also provides valuable research opportunities for
students in the United States and Peru. Importantly, the results of these
analyses will be disseminated to academic and non-academic audiences in the
United States and Peru, including to those indigenous descendants of the Inca
who are often marginalized in modern Peruvian culture.