* 1359458
* REU Site: Preservation Archaeology Field School in the Upper Gila Region, Southwest New Mexico
* SBE,SMA
* 02/01/2014,01/31/2016
* Jeffery Clark, Archaeology Southwest
* Standard Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 01/31/2016
* USD 128,740.00

Preservation Archaeology is both a philosophy and a strategy that integrates
big-picture research, cultural resource preservation, and education. Archaeology
Southwest has been developing this vision of Preservation Archaeology for 25
years and they believe that it has an important role to play in the future of
the discipline. Archaeology Southwest has expanded its Preservation Archaeology
Field School as an REU Site, building student diversity by targeting Native
American undergraduates and other under-served populations from institutions
across the U.S. The site offers students a transformative experience in a
beautiful, rural Southwestern setting that is rich in cultural and natural
resources.

Intellectual Merit : This REU site offers undergraduate students an intensive,
immersive experiential learning program. Through completion of several
complementary intellectual tasks and program components, students learn the
fundamentals of archaeological fieldwork, the basic tenets of Preservation
Archaeology, and how to develop and implement archaeological research designs.
They are expected to think critically about the values of archaeology and
history to different communities, and explore different ways to communicate the
results of scientific research to the public. In addition, students are active
participants in the collection of data that contribute to Archaeology
Southwest's long term research program focused on demographic reorganization,
migration, and community organization in the southern U.S. Southwest during the
late precontact period (ca. A.D. 1200-1500).

Broader Impacts : The Preservation Archaeology REU Site trains the next
generation of archaeologists - students who will one day pursue careers at
universities, private companies, tribal organizations, museums, and government
agencies. Discussions of current ethical issues facing archaeologists provide
them with a framework to face similar issues in their future endeavors. Even
those students who do not go on to careers in archaeology learn the value of
collaboration and collegiality, critical thinking, and the potential values
inherent in nonrenewable cultural resources.