* 1359051
* REU Site: Research Opportunities in Interdisciplinary Water Sciences and Engineering
* ENG,EEC
* 03/01/2014,01/31/2018
* Vinod Lohani, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 01/31/2018
* USD 382,296.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this 3-year NSF/REU Site is to train 10
REU Fellows each summer using 10-week long interdisciplinary research projects
in water sciences. These research projects are directed by experts representing
a diverse group of academic disciplines including engineering, geosciences,
biology, crop and soil environmental sciences, and industrial design at Virginia
Tech. The REU Fellows will have opportunities for professional development and
interdisciplinary cohort experiences through weekly seminars, field trips,
multiple oral presentations, weekly reflection papers, and an end-of-program
research paper. Examples of seminar topics include professional ethics, why
research and how to do research, panel discussion with graduate students, and
use of emerging technologies like nanotechnology in water research. In addition,
they will have opportunities for social interactions that will enhance personal
and professional bonding among themselves and with the faculty and graduate
student mentors. The Site organizers have already graduated 56 REU Fellows in
prior two cycles during 2007-09 and 2011-13 and all components of the program
have been thoroughly assessed by experts in academic assessment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;The Site organizers have
been successful in recruiting about 60% of REU Fellows from various
underrepresented groups including women in prior two cycles. This practice will
be continued in this cycle with additional focus on recruitment from groups
representing various ethnic minorities and from institutions with limited
research opportunities. Funds are allocated for students' stipend, housing,
travel, and meals for enabling their participation. Students from various
science and engineering disciplines will work collaboratively over a 10-week
period to learn about the interdisciplinary nature of water research. An
external expert who has been leading the assessment work in prior two cycles
will continue to assess the effectiveness of the REU program. The Site will
further expand the pool of future researchers in water sciences who will
contribute in addressing water related national and international challenges.
Results of survey of our graduates from prior two cycles indicate that 68% of
respondents plan to obtain a graduate degree (24% PhD and 44% Master?s) and 80%
respondents will pursue a research career in engineering and science in the
future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funding support provided by the EEC division of
the National Science Foundation is sincerely acknowledged.