* 1359167
* REU Site for Nanotechnology in Health, Energy and the Environment
* ENG,EEC
* 03/15/2014,02/28/2018
* Gary Halada, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Poats
* 02/28/2018
* USD 441,021.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Stony Brook University is continuing a
ten week multidisciplinary nanotechnology Research Experience for Undergraduates
site involving four engineering departments and administered by the University's
Center for Inclusive Education. The program integrates individual research
projects tailored to each student's interests under the guidance of a faculty
mentor with a coordinated group effort to address a specific scientific question
or gain maximum insight into the application of nanotechnology and nanomaterials
in health, energy and the environment. The laboratories involved provide
research experiences for REU interns in all aspects of nanotechnology and
nanomaterials development, including polymeric nanostructures for medical
applications, batteries, catalytic surfaces for energy and environmental
remediation, and development of nanosensors. The site approach integrates a
comprehensive graduate education preparation model that has proven to be
effective in successful transition of students into competitive graduate
programs, and includes development of communication skills, an electronic
portfolio created by each intern, and a symposium on the ethical and societal
implications of nanotechnology. The site coordinators actively recruit highly
qualified students from a diversity of academic backgrounds; promote recruitment
at small regional colleges with limited research opportunities; and recruit
students from underrepresented groups through contacts at minority serving
institutions and through regional conferences. To date, the site has supported
25 students directly over three years, augmented by 10 additional students
through supplemental support. Half the REU interns were female and nearly 30%
were members of underrepresented minority populations. The project will also
include research experiences for two high school teachers who will work side-by-
side with the REU interns, and who will translate their experiences into
curricula developments and education materials at the high school
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program gratefully acknowledges support from
the Division of Engineering Education and Centers of the National Science
Foundation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Conceptually, nanotechnology is a tool. It can
make remarkable things happen, but we are just beginning to understand its
capabilities, how it works, and its potential impact on our lives and our
society, for example in the revolutionary miniaturization of electronics and
corresponding expansion of computing power. But it is the new properties and
materials being discovered which promise the greatest transformation in areas
from medicine to energy to sustaining our environment and economies. While new
technologies are today being designed and built to enable us to understand
nanoscale phenomena and ultimately to control them, a key challenge is how to
inspire and prepare the next generation of scientists, engineers, entrepreneurs
and practitioners to make and leverage these discoveries, in a responsible and
ethical fashion, for the greater good of society. That is the motivation behind
development of the Research Experiences for Undergraduates site in
Nanotechnology for Health, Energy and the Environment at Stony Brook
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program provides a multidisciplinary
experience which fully integrates research and education, an approach shown to
enhance learning and motivation, as well as enhance recruitment and retention of
students from diverse backgrounds. Recruitment of students from underrepresented
groups and from a full range of education levels are hallmarks of the proposed
program, as they have been through the first three years of the REU site. The
project also provides opportunities for the professional development of young
faculty in mentorship and leadership, and aids in development of a paradigm for
the development of new learning and outreach tools and methods. The project has
led to growth in collaborative activity between a research intensive PhD-
granting institution and regional community colleges and smaller liberal arts
colleges, in turn providing the basis for the development of new programs in
research, development of teaching and assessment tools, and creation of new
opportunities to enhance education at two year colleges.