* 1359454
* REU Site: nano@illinois REU--Summer Nanotechnology Research Experience for Undergraduates
* ENG,EEC
* 03/01/2014,02/28/2017
* Catherine Murphy, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 02/28/2017
* USD 375,255.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: The purpose of this project is to establish an REU site in
the area of nanotechnology at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
with support from the NSF Division of Engineering Education and Centers.
Students participating in the program will be embedded in a rich environment
providing integrated research and educational experiences in a wide range of
nanotechnology areas, from nanoelectronics to nanophotonics, nanomaterials and
nanobiotechnology. The ultimate goal is to solidify the students' interest in
graduate research and education and contribute to the diversity of the national
workforce pipeline, through experiences designed not only to expose the
participants to cutting edge and interdisciplinary technical aspects of
nanotechnology but also to infuse critical thinking, leadership, communication,
team-building, and ethics training. Additionally, the assessment and evaluation
activities will be embedded throughout the program to determine the
effectiveness of the various training components and students will be tracked
longitudinally to determine the impact of the program on individuals,
institutions and the field as a whole. The REU program will engage ten domestic
undergraduate students (rising sophomores to rising seniors) in a ten week
summer curriculum on the University of Illinois campus each year, combining a
range of common activities (orientations, seminars and workshops) with
personalized experiences in the laboratories affiliated with this effort.
Students will spend at least 30 hours per week doing research with faculty and
graduate student mentors, and will be fully engaged in normal laboratory
activities attending group meeting performing literature reviews, running
experiments and simulations and keeping laboratory notebooks. Research topics
will be assigned matching the interest of the participants and representative
projects may include: design of plasmonic nanoparticles for live cell sensing;
DNA sequencing through solid state nanopores; design and fabrication of nano-
porous conformal films for photonic applications; simulation of charge transport
in nanosystems. Capstone of the experience will be participation, during the
tenth week of the program, in the campus-wide Illinois Summer Research Symposium
where students will present the results of their work.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: Nanotechnology is a broad interdisciplinary field which
holds the promise to address grand challenge problems, leading to the
improvement of quality of life and providing new opportunities for economic
growth. Progress in nanotechnology needs the availability of a qualified
workforce with technical knowledge and interdisciplinary skills. The purpose of
this project is to establish an REU site in the area of nanotechnology at the
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign with support from the NSF Division of
Engineering Education and Centers. The program will engage each summer a diverse
group of ten domestic undergraduate students recruited around the country for a
ten week summer curriculum which combines a range of common professional
development activities with personalized experiences in research laboratories.
The goal is to provide, through an early experience in exciting cutting-edge
areas of nanoscience and engineering, the motivation to choose a professional
path in research. Through hands-on activities embedded in leading nanotechnology
laboratories, students will have the opportunity to work next to faculty and
graduate student mentors, contributing to the development of new materials that
could enable further miniaturization of electronics chips or fabricating novel
sensors for diagnostics and therapeutics in personalized medicine.