* 1359128
* REU Site in Molecular Genetics &amp; Cell Biology at The University of Chicago
* BIO,DBI
* 04/15/2014,03/31/2017
* Aaron Turkewitz, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 03/31/2017
* USD 265,605.00

This REU Site award to the University of Chicago, located in Chicago, IL, will
support the training of 8 students for 10 weeks, during the summers of
2014-2016. The program offers research training to improve understanding of the
molecular mechanisms underlying the organization, development and mechanics of
all living organisms. The Department of Molecular Genetics and Cell Biology has
about 20 faculty members participating as mentors. The projects available in
their laboratories are wide-ranging but all are focused on cutting edge
research, using a variety of model organisms including viruses, bacteria, yeast,
protozoa, fruit flies, plants, and nematode worms, and involving both biological
manipulation and observation, and mathematical modeling. The 8 students each
summer will engage in full-time lab research as well as participate in seminars
and focused workshops on responsible conduct in research and scientific ethics,
on how to prepare for advanced training in biological sciences, and on
professional communication skills. REU students have access to the individual
mentor's facilities as well as many core facilities such as advanced light
microscopy, electron microscopy and tomography, next-generation DNA sequencing,
and flow cytometry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students will be recruited to the
program, particularly from disadvantaged groups, including through established
informal collaborative agreements with a variety of undergraduate colleges. The
program is focused on students attending institutions with limited research
opportunities. Students are selected on the basis of their academic record and
perceived potential for outstanding research, with preference given to those
between their junior and senior years. Faculty mentors remain in contact with
students after the program to determine their continued interest in their
academic field of study, their career paths, and the lasting influences of the
research experience. Information about the program will be assessed by various
means, including use of the BIO REU common assessment tool.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students are required to be tracked after the program and
must respond to an automatic email sent via the NSF reporting system. More
information is available by visiting http://mgcb.bsd.uchicago.edu/reu/, or by
contacting the PI (Dr. Aaron Turkewitz at apturkew@uchicago.edu) or the co-PI
(Dr. Lucia Rothman-Denes at lbrd@uchicago.edu).