* 1359148
* REU Site:Civil Conflict Management and Peace Science
* SBE,SMA
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Joseph Oppong, University of North Texas
* Continuing Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 06/30/2018
* USD 347,009.00

This project is a continuation of a program in Research Experiences for
Undergraduates (REU) Site at the University of North Texas (UNT). The Department
of Political Science at the UNT runs this unique program to provide 30
undergraduate students (recruited from across the country) the opportunity to
engage in graduate-level research in conflict management and peace science, in a
senior faculty-mentored, in-residence, eight- week, Summer Research Experience
that integrates training in civil conflict management with training in
Geographic Information Systems (GIS) and geospatial analysis. In this program,
student articipants develop theoretical propositions that are tested empirically
using geocoded data and report their findings in a national professional
political science conference. Activities include workshops on theory development
and research methodology, GIS, and the graduate school application process.
There are also activities designed to build a sense of research community among
students, faculty and graduate student mentors. Training in conflict management
that includes populations historically underrepresented in higher education (but
which are growing as a proportion of the undergraduate student population) is a
national imperative. This program seeks to address the need to develop further
expertise in conflict management and peace science by providing opportunities to
engage in advanced empirical research to students from such populations,
students who would not otherwise have such research opportunities. UNT is well
positioned, both institutionally and geographically, to provide such access. To
that end, the PI-team secured formal commitments from the Hispanic and Native
American Serving Institutions and from Historically Black Colleges/ Universities
(HBCU) in Texas and Oklahoma, and the Ronald E. McNair Program at UNT to assist
in broadening the pool of applicants to the program. The growing frequency of
civil conflicts in the world and the security concerns these conflicts pose for
the United States, the development of human capital that is equipped to deal
with these challenges is critical for the national security of the country.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual focus of the program is on civil conflict
management and the enhancement of peace. Indeed since 1945 civil conflicts-civil
war, revolution, secessionist war, and ethnic and sectarian violence-has
replaced interstate war as the most frequent and deadly form of armed conflict
in the world. The program seeks to focus on understanding the causes of civil
conflict occurrence (or reoccurrence) by examining sub-state data. In
particular, the goal is to train students in theory building and empirical
analytical skills, which will promote innovative thinking and problem solving
skills. Developing skills in geospatial analysis provides undergraduate program
participants with cutting edge tools to understand the causes of conflict, and
hence better prepare them to devise innovative solutions regarding civil
conflict management.