* 1359805
* Collaborative Research: The Emergence of Stakeholders and Ecosystems as Powerful Actors in Marine Spatial Planning
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2014,01/31/2018
* Kevin St. Martin, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 01/31/2018
* USD 166,421.00

Determining how to effectively and responsibly manage the oceans is a complex
task, engaging researchers, policymakers, and others for decades. In response to
past and existing forms of oceans management, Marine Spatial Planning (MSP) is
an emerging process of oceans governance that seeks to address current concerns
with how to organize and use the nation's marine resources. MSP is a central
component of the US federal government's National Ocean Policy, and is the key
avenue through which the government's commitment to ecosystem-based management
of the oceans will be realized. The marine environment is home to a growing
number of users and activities that MSP is working to frame within a new
comprehensive planning process. This research project will improve understanding
of the processes of ocean governance produced within the context of MSP, ones
critical to sustaining coastal communities and the marine resources many of them
depend on. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will focus on two key questions:
1) How are communities and environmental actors constituted by MSP practices?;
and 2) What are the roles of community and environmental actors in the
constitution of MSP itself? Through these, the research will examine how
national policy language for MSP is interpreted in regional MSP discourses and
practices, how the concerns of practitioners and human interest groups are
formulated and addressed, and how the widely varying marine environmental actors
both within and between regions - such as fish, marine mammals, or sea grasses -
are inscribed. Within these regions, there are specific sites, or 'centers of
calculation, that will be the focus of data collection. These include online
ocean science databases (both national and regional); regional MSP consortiums
in the Mid-Atlantic and Northeast; and research centers that have been
instrumental in the 'turn' toward MSP, ecosystems, and ecosystem services. The
project will collect written and audio records from regional government
agencies, non-government organizations, industry groups, and public forums;
collect source data and outputs from the various mapping projects associated
with MSP; and conduct short organizational ethnographies of the organizations
leading these projects. The project will analyze what types of human and marine
resource information are being incorporated into MSP (and what might be
missing), a critical need as researchers and policymakers move forward with
ever-larger data sets designed to visualize and organize US ocean uses.
Practically, the project aims to inform MSP practices as communities across the
country continue to engage with initiatives (e.g., aquaculture, catch shares,
wind energy) that define ocean space in different ways. More generally, there is
unprecedented worldwide interest in new forms of oceans governance, and although
this research will focus on the US, results will have significance for these
larger processes. The project will strengthen existing collaborations across
academic institutions and with government and community groups, and contributes
to post-doctoral training and mentoring. Results will be communicated to
academic, practitioners, and community audiences.