* 1359311
* REU Site: Fundamental Research Topics Related to Unmanned Systems
* ENG,EEC
* 03/15/2014,02/28/2017
* Farbod Fahimi, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 02/28/2017
* USD 297,792.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of Alabama in Huntsville
(UAH) Research Experience for Undergraduates program focuses on the missing
links of fundamental research in five related fields of science and engineering:
Dynamics &amp; Controls, Video Processing and Data Mining and Compression,
Human-Machine Interface, Physics of Sensors, Material Science. As an example,
one of the broader societal/economic impacts of these related fields is that
they help the proliferation of Unmanned Systems civilian applications that
affect humans quality of life. First, interaction-based learning controllers are
formulated, which are able to learn how to control a system only by interacting
with it, similar to the way humans learn how to control machines with minimum
instructions. Second, vision-based object 3D reconstruction and classification
will be researched. The goal is to formulate a method that only uses 2D videos
to generate a 3D model of an arbitrary object, and classify objects using 2D
video. In addition, the students will learn about data mining techniques for
classi&amp;#64257;cation of phases of protein crystal growth
classi&amp;#64257;cation of images based on presence of crystals. Third, new
ways of integration of data from heterogeneous sensors will be researched. The
goal is to be able to fuse data gathered from different sensor types to
reconstruct a 3D environment. Fourth, research will be focused on finding
optimum ways of real-time compression of video data. The goal is formulating a
method that optimizes the need for computational power, use of energy, weight,
and data bandwidth. Fifth, new ideas for human-machine interface will be
generated. The objective is to fill the gap in the inability of human-agent
interfaces to intuitively interpret the users intent. Sixth, fundamentals of
physics will be employed to invent new sensors for accurate real-time
measurement of high-frequency strain. Seventh, the specific catalytic activity
of the IPPase under different temperatures, pH and ionic concentration will be
determined.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
undergraduate students will be exposed to the state-of-the-art knowledge and
background related to the research project of their choice. They will be trained
in the required research techniques, methods of literature survey, generating
hypotheses, formulating tests to validate hypotheses, collecting data, and
communicating with colleagues via written materials and oral presentations at
professional and scientific meetings. Students will solve research problems with
the help of mentors, and will transform themselves into relatively independent
young researchers. The research experience and independence generates enthusiasm
and confidence for the students, and highly increases the their likelihood of
pursuing graduate studies and careers in STEM-related fields. The program
encourages diversity among US future scientific talent. Three two-year colleges
and seven undergraduate institutions in Alabama and Central Southern Tennessee
(EPSCoR states) are identified. The total student population of these ten
institutions consists of 51% women and 82% minorities. By focusing most of the
recruitment efforts on these institutions, the program aims for recruiting at
least 50% of the students from two-year colleges and at least 70% participation
by women and minorities. Students will prepare papers for presentation at
relevant conferences and for publication in related conference proceedings and
science/engineering journals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"This award is co-
funded by the Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EHR/EPSCoR)."