* 1359500
* REU Site:  Summer Undergraduate Research Fellowships in Earth and Environmental Sciences (SURFEES)
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2017
* Marianne Smith, Chapman University
* Continuing Grant
* Lina Patino
* 04/30/2017
* USD 347,330.00

This summer REU-Site program in the School of Earth and Environmental Sciences
at Chapman University (Orange, CA) will annually provide 10 students selected
exclusively from 2-year community colleges with the opportunity to engage in
research projects related to earth and environmental issues from the regional to
global scale. Through the program, they will provide an under-served student
population with hands-on, interdisciplinary research experiences and enhance the
recruitment and retention of under-represented students into STEM fields. They
will partner with multiple local community colleges that serve ethnically
diverse communities and lack scientific research facilities. Faculty mentors
include biologists, chemists, and geoscientists with active undergraduate
research labs at Chapman. Through participation in cutting-edge research with
faculty mentors working at the forefront of their respective disciplines,
students will engage in complex scientific studies on topics including the
sources, transport, and transformation pathways of pollutants, environmental
impacts on intertidal organisms, and carbon sequestration in wetlands. In
addition to research, students will participate in group activities including
pre-experience training workshops, seminars with local speakers on environmental
careers/issues, weekly group meetings/presentations within their research
groups, university life and academic success workshops, a research poster
presentation session, and a post-experience evaluation assessment.