* 1359310
* A Community College REU Site for Physics Applicati
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2022
* Tak David Cheung, CUNY Queensborough Community College
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 05/31/2022
* USD 369,405.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site at Queensborough
Community College will have a number of broader impacts with its focus on
providing research opportunities to undergraduates to help prepare them for
future science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) careers. The
site focuses on providing research opportunities to students from community
colleges who have had no prior research experience. The site has a strong plan
to recruit students from groups underrepresented in physics. The project is
guided by an evaluation that will assess how well the goals of the project are
being met. This site can be a model for other community colleges. It is
anticipated that the activities related to the REU site will encourage community
college faculty to maintain their involvement in or become involved in research
and to include their students in that research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The REU
site at Queensborough Community College provides opportunities to eight
undergraduate students each summer for ten weeks of research on topics in
physics education and physics, along with interdisciplinary projects in
astronomy, biology and the geosciences. Additionally, four students will be
selected to conduct research during the academic year. One of the goals of the
REU site is to prepare the students to be competitive for transfer to a four-
year college in a STEM discipline. In addition to participating in research with
an experienced mentor, the students will engage in activities to ensure not only
that their research stays on track but that they have an engaging collegial and
scholarly experience. By the end of the program, every student will present the
results of their work in a seminar talk.