* 1359299
* REU Site: Integrative Tropical Biology at the Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute in Panama
* BIO,DBI
* 04/15/2014,09/30/2017
* William McMillan, Smithsonian Institution
* Standard Grant
* Ann Sakai
* 09/30/2017
* USD 339,655.00

This Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Site award to the Smithsonian
Tropical Research Institute (STRI), located in the Republic of Panama (PA), will
provide an international experience for 10 students for 10 weeks during the
summers of 2014 - 2017. This REU program is supported by NSF's Office of
International and Integrative Activities and the Directorate for Biological
Sciences (Division of Biological Infrastructure). STRI's REU program in
Integrative Tropical Biology is built on three broad research themes in
environmental biology: (1) Adaptation and Resilience, (2) Species Interactions,
and (3) Drivers of Ecosystem Change. Each theme is driven by the common need to
understand how biological systems are integrated to answer questions about the
origins, maintenance, and preservation of biodiversity. The program specifically
focuses on developing the tools needed to work with the data types that are
transforming science across the three themes. During the summer, students will
conduct cutting edge research on projects that leverage genomic technologies to
make the connections between genotype, phenotype, and the environment. Students
can study how forests are changing using increasingly sophisticated spectral
data from satellites, fixed wing planes, and drones. Moreover, students will
participate in a series of workshops (including responsible conduct of research)
and professional development activities that will challenge them to critically
think about science and their future careers.

It is anticipated students from schools with limited research opportunities will
be trained in the program. Students will learn how research is conducted and
many will present the results of their work at scientific conferences. The
program recruitment will also reach across disciplines and target students in
traditional life science departments such as molecular biology, biology and
botany, as well as those interested in exploring the natural processes who are
enrolled in engineering, mathematics, and computer science disciplines.

Applicants must submit complete applications online and will be required to
provide a self-assessment of their experience using a customized version of the
REU common assessment tool. Students are required to be tracked after the
program and must respond to an automatic email sent via the NSF reporting
system. More information is available by visiting http://stri.si.edu/reu/, or by
contacting the PI (Dr. W. Owen McMillan at mcmillano@si.edu) or the co-PI (Dr.
Ana K. Spalding at spaldinga@si.edu).