* 1359709
* Collaborative Research:  Measurement and Analysis of Nocturnal Mesoscale Convective Systems and Their Stable Boundary Layer Environment During PECAN
* GEO,AGS
* 05/15/2014,04/30/2021
* Matthew Parker, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 04/30/2021
* USD 293,124.00

The Plains Elevated Convection At Night (PECAN) experiment will investigate the
evolution of nocturnal mesoscale convective systems (MCSs) and convection and
their interactions with the evolving nocturnal stable boundary layer (SBL)
environment. This proposal addresses two primary goals of PECAN: 1) To
characterize the transition from surface-based to elevated nocturnal MCS
structure and the interaction of cold pools generated by MCSs with the nocturnal
SBL, and 2) to determine how the organization and evolution of surface-based and
elevated MCSs are influenced by the stable boundary layer and the vertical
profile of wind and stability above the nocturnal low-level jet (NLLJ). To
rectify the present paucity of detailed, integrated observations of nocturnal
MCSs and their SBL environments, the project will observe nocturnal MCSs and
convection with mobile ground-based radars, mobile sounding systems, and mobile
mesonets in concert with other ground-based and airborne observing platforms
during PECAN. Multi-radar syntheses, data assimilation, and modeling will
provide the integrated analyses of these combined observations to evaluate the
detailed internal structure of nocturnal MCSs and the impact of static
stability, pre-existing boundaries, and wind shear on nocturnal MCS evolution
processes.

Intellectual Merit: This project emphasizes the tightly coordinated observation
of nocturnal MCSs and their SBL environments with an array of multiple mobile
Doppler and dual-polarimetric radars in conjunction with mobile soundings and
surface in situ observing systems. These observations will be integrated to
obtain 3-D airflow syntheses, precipitation fields, and thermal structure of
MCSs and newly initiated convection and their environments. Mobile radars are
essential as they can provide enhanced temporal and spatial resolution and low-
level observations over any area within the PECAN domain. C-band radars, with
their ability to both penetrate heavy precipitation and sense clear-air inflow,
are required. The mobile C- and X-band dual-polarimetric radars will provide
microphysical information beyond the typical operating ranges and below base-
scan altitudes of the polarimetric WSR-88D radars. The mobile sounding and
surface observations complement the radar wind measurements by providing unique
buoyancy and shear profiles both within and outside of precipitation, thus
resolving internal MCS dynamics and characterizing the SBL environment that
interacts with the MCSs. These data, in combination with other PECAN data from
fixed and mobile ground-based radar, profilers, mesonets, and aircraft, are
essential for interpreting nocturnal MCS evolution with respect to in situ
environmental conditions and for providing input and validation of cloud
dynamical-microphysical model simulations of MCSs. The scientific objectives of
this project are to: (i) document the internal structure and evolution of
nocturnal MCSs and convection; (ii) establish the environmental ingredients and
related physical mechanisms that control nocturnal MCS evolution; and (iii) test
hypotheses concerning MCS dynamical microphysical forcing and MCS-environment
interactions within detailed cloud-resolving models. The research conducted here
will advance fundamental knowledge of the internal MCS dynamics and interactions
with the SBL and will enable better representations of both within cloud-
resolving models.

Broader Impacts: Characterizing the morphology of nocturnal MCSs and the
vertical profiles of temperature, humidity and winds ahead of and near the
convective region in the cold pool are essential to helping improve the
specificity and accuracy of diagnoses and short-term predictions of the
geographical extent and duration of severe weather, heavy rainfall, flash
flooding, and aircraft icing conditions. Additionally, these PECAN field
observations will be essential for refining data assimilation systems and
improving future operational numerical predictions of nocturnal MCSs and their
SBL environments. The datasets collected here will also be used in university
classes through graduate level. Several undergraduate and graduate students will
be trained in the execution of a large atmospheric field campaign by being
integrated into the data collection and post-field phase analysis. Lastly, the
data collected here will be made available to other NSF and NOAA investigators
identified as part of the PECAN project.