* 1359063
* REU Site:Undergraduate Research Opportunities in Nanoscience and Nanotechnology
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Sarah Larsen, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 07/31/2018
* USD 275,000.00

This award from the Division of Chemistry at the national Science Foundation
supports a Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site at The University
of Iowa focused on providing undergraduate students with research opportunities
in nanoscience and nanotechnology. The REU program will support ten
undergraduate students for ten weeks during the summer and will be administered
through the Nanoscience and Nanotechnology Institute at the University of Iowa
(NNI@UI). Participants will be recruited from institutions with limited
undergraduate research opportunities and underrepresented minorities and women
will be recruited by coordinating with on-going diversity efforts at The
University of Iowa.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;REU participants will have the
opportunity to work on a cutting edge research project with faculty mentors from
the departments of Chemical and Biochemical Engineering, Civil and Environmental
Engineering, Chemistry, and Pharmacy. Given the increasing importance of
nanoscience and nanotechnology, it is imperative to provide undergraduates with
early exposure to research in this emerging, interdisciplinary field and to
enhance their interest in science and engineering for graduate studies and as a
career path. REU participants will take part in a technical communication
workshop, research ethics and laboratory safety seminars, research seminars,
graduate school and networking sessions and a university-wide undergraduate
research symposium.