* 1359173
* REU Site: Undergraduate Research in Mathematics and Theoretical Computer Science
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Glencora Borradaile, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Nandini Kannan
* 08/31/2018
* USD 289,238.00

This grant is to support the Oregon State University REU program in mathematics
and theoretical computer science. The program will provide an eight-week
intensive summer research experience to ten undergraduate students from around
the country in the summers of 2015, 2016, and 2017. The research projects will
be in mathematics and theoretical computer science, with a particular focus on
number theory, probability, cryptography, and the study of algorithms. Faculty
members from both the mathematics department and the school of electrical
engineering and computer science will be mentoring projects each summer. The
program is designed to provide a glimpse into the life of a research
mathematician, and to provide support and guidance for students interested in
careers in the mathematical sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students will work in
groups of two or three on a research project supervised by a faculty mentor in
mathematics or computer science. The projects are designed to be at the
forefront of modern research in their respective areas, but also at a level
which is reasonable to expect significant progress by undergraduates in eight
weeks. They are crafted to gently guide students from a position of learning
from their mentors, to a position of leadership in their projects. The students
will learn to formulate a question, research and read the literature, make
conjectures, get initial results, and modify the original problem to continue
getting results. Faculty mentors will direct this process and help deal with any
issues that may arise. The program will include presentations by participants, a
colloquium series by local faculty, panel discussions on topics such as
conducting research and applying to graduate school, and detailed publishing
planning sessions. At the end of the program, participants submit a written
report on their project and decide on a publishing plan with their mentors.
After the program, participants are offered support to travel to meetings for
the purpose of presenting their REU research.