* 1359771
* The Origin and Evolution of Waves and Bores within the Great Plains Nocturnal Boundary Layer and their Interaction with Mesoscale Convective Systems (MCSs)
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Kevin Knupp, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 07/31/2018
* USD 754,394.00

The general objective is to conduct hypothesis-driven research to improve
understanding of the physics of convergent boundary zones (CBZ) over the Great
Plains, focusing on the stable nocturnal boundary layer (NBL), within which the
evolution of CBZs, convective initiation (CI), and maintenance of mesoscale
convective systems (MCSs) is poorly understood. The significant societal
benefits of this research are improved forecasting of CI, lightning, severe
weather (tornadoes), and air quality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three primary and
closely related objectives include comprehensive investigations
of:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Characteristics of CBZs (e.g., gust fronts, bores,
solitary waves) within the stable NBL, including the sources and evolution of
bores and waves, and their impact on cloud formation, CI, and maintenance of
MCSs;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. CBZ kinematics, evolution, and CI during the
Afternoon to Evening Transition(AET);&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. Evaluation of the
accuracy of airflow derived from Doppler radars and profilers within the NBL.
This project is fully integrated with the multi-agency Plains Elevated
Convection at Night (PECAN) field campaign centered over the Kansas, to be
conducted between 1 June and 15 July 2015. The research team will be actively
involved in the field campaign by contributing three UAH facilities: the Mobile
Integrated Profiling System (MIPS), the Mobile Alabama X-band (MAX) dual
polarization radar (MAX), and a mobile mesonet. These facilities will be part of
a proposed mesoscale network of instrumentation including 8 mobile radars, 4
mobile profiling systems, and 6 fixed-site profiling systems over the PECAN
domain. Results of this project will be compared to those of the ABIDE project
(in a much different environment) in order to determine the relative importance
of the low level jet on nocturnal CBZs (bores and waves in particular), CI, and
MCS maintenance over the Great
Plains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit. This project will
contribute to advances in our understanding of the physics of CBZs and CI by
examining these phenomena in a parameter space (neutral to stable) that has not
previously been comprehensively explored over the Great Plains. The unique
feature of this project is its emphasis on the behavior of deep convection and
MCSs in the stable NBL, and involves a continuation of the ABIDE project that
has provided observations on many of the phenomena of importance to the PECAN
project. Thus we have gained appreciable insight on the phenomena of interest
(forcing and maintenance of deep convection in the NBL) that will contribute to
the success of the PECAN field campaign. The PI has been conducting research on
deep convection utilizing the MIPS instrumentation for much of his career. We
have gained considerable expertise in conducting mobile operations and analysis
of data from a diverse array of profiler and radar platforms, like those to be
employed in this study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts. Improved
forecasting of CI, lightning, severe weather (tornadoes), and BL transports (air
quality) represent significant societal benefits of this research. The central
Great Plains is noted for the nocturnal maximum in thunderstorm and MCS activity
that provides a significant fraction of rainfall to this region during the warm
season. The comprehensive nature of measurements (and the 24/7 capability of
many of the PECAN resources) increases probability of serendipitous discoveries,
which is an important component of advancing scientific discovery. The data
collected during the PECAN field campaign will be utilized extensively in (i)
two graduate level courses, Boundary Layer Meteorology and Ground-Based Remote
Sensing; and (ii) a book Ground-Based Remote Sensing. Two UAH graduate students
and one postdoctoral associate will be actively engaged in all aspects of the
field campaign and subsequent analysis activities. As in the past, the UAH
platforms will be made available to other UAH students who have research
interests in related topics. The project will support and utilize the MIPS and
MAX, the former of which has been operated in numerous scientific projects over
the past 15 years. The data sets will contribute to other disciplines, such as
mesoscale/microscale structure of fronts, gravity waves in the severe storms
environment, boundary layer processes (AET and NBL in particular), and
properties of biological flyers and their impact on accuracy of winds retrieved
from Doppler radars and radar wind profilers.