* 1359008
* REU Site: Undergraduate Research on Artificial Intelligence and Text Analysis
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2017
* Sharon Small, Siena College
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 04/30/2017
* USD 359,923.00

The Siena College Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site provides
unique opportunities for undergraduates to develop research expertise in the
field of Artificial Intelligence (AI). The Siena College REU Site environment
fosters learning through research by means of faculty advisors and peer mentors.
The students work in teams on real problems in information extraction in areas
such as information gathering for military and security needs to targeted
marketing of products. Especially due to the emerging area of Big Data, this REU
program is having an impact on applications that address national and global
societal problems, such as medical information retrieval systems that identify
people for clinical trials and systems to predict the focus of a groups with
adverse intentions from automated text analysis. Teams working in these areas
need to have diversity in skills, knowledge, and cultural perspectives, and the
Siena REU program is recruiting a wide range of students, including a focus on
women and other under-represented groups, so that the students can gain the
broad experience needed to address the big problems in today's society.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The REU students are involved in research teams with Siena
College faculty and student mentors working on projects that are conducted at
the Siena College Institute for Artificial Intelligence (SCIAI) in computational
linguistics (CL) for information extraction. The projects are improving the
state of the art in CL, as well as investigating interesting real-world
applications. Students are learning about the nature of scientific research and
how to communicate their work in student-authored publications and through
presentations at research conferences. The results of the students' work,
including transcripts of presentations and copies of posters, are disseminated
via the Siena College REU Site website (http://www.siena.edu/reu).