* 1359280
* REU Site: The Lehigh Smart Spaces Project
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2014,12/31/2017
* Mooi-Choo Chuah, Lehigh University
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 12/31/2017
* USD 340,000.00

The REU Site at Lehigh University focuses on engaging students in Smart Spaces
research. Student projects include the development of technologies for saving
energy in both residential and commercial spaces. Research will also support
home-centered approaches to assisted living and healthcare. This has the
potential to enable elderly and persons with disabilities to maintain their
independence longer. Independence brings not only improved quality of life, but
also significant positive financial implications due to the changing age
demographic in the United States. For the participants, students will be
recruited nationally from institutions where undergraduate STEM research
opportunities are limited, with an emphasis on regional Pennsylvania State
System of Higher Education (PASSHE) universities. Emphasis is made to recruit
from groups that are traditionally underrepresented in computer science, to
include low-income and first-generation college students, underrepresented
minorities, and women. Lastly, the project will reinforce Lehigh University's
own diversity initiatives - specifically, the Carl Greer Scholars program and
articulation agreements with local community colleges - to increase the number
of women and underrepresented minorities in engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Each year, ten undergraduate students participate in a
research experience investigating problems in the area of smart environments.
Integrating ubiquitous computing, sensing, and actuators in a networked
environment, students work directly with computer science faculty to improve the
efficiency and effectiveness of the space. The objectives are to foster both
undergraduate and intra-departmental research, to improve students' post-
graduation outcomes with a complementary professional development seminar
series, and to increase the number of students pursuing graduate education. The
intellectual merit of the project lies in both the interdisciplinary nature of
the research and the physical site itself. Students will directly interact with
eleven faculty members (including 6 NSF CAREER Award recipients) across a range
of research topics, to include: 3-D augmented reality, ambient intelligence,
data analytics for energy-aware spaces, computer vision, embedded devices,
mobile computing, networking and security, robotics, and user interface design.
The sheer size of the physical site at Lehigh's Mountaintop Campus also
contributes to its research potential. At 120,000 square feet, it supports
large-scale development in a real-world environment, rather than constraining
such problems to simulation. Another unique aspect of the physical site is the
potential for projects to be integrated into the building's infrastructure,
creating one of the largest smart spaces of its kind. More information can be
found at the project web site: http://www.cse.lehigh.edu/smartspaces.