* 1359131
* REU Site: Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Environmental Implications of Nanotechnology
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2018
* Mark Wiesner, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 04/30/2018
* USD 334,253.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: &lt;br/&gt;This REU is designed to inspire undergraduate
students towards future research and careers in science and engineering by
engaging students in an integrated approach to understanding principles
governing nanoparticle toxicity. It features a 10-week interdisciplinary team
approach to mentoring students on research projects across themes designed to
link fundamental physical and chemical properties of nanomaterials with their
observed biological and ecosystem effects. Research spans 6 themes: Exposure:
Transport &amp; Transformation; Cellular and Organismal Responses; Impacts on
Ecosystems; Manufactured Nanomaterials; Natural and Incidental Nanoparticles;
and Risk Assessment and Modeling. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific CEINT research
includes: 1) elucidating nanomaterial properties and physiological processes
that control the uptake of engineered and natural nanomaterials into organisms
(plants and invertebrates; 2) determining behaviors of selected nanomaterials in
complex environments, and the resulting "nanoparticle specific" effects at the
cellular, organismal, and ecosystem levels; and 3) developing models to predict
nanomaterial behavior in complex environments. Laboratory and mesocosm studies
are integrated and conducted at different scales and varying levels of
complexity, with models being developed that include specific nanomaterial
properties and interactions using measurable hueristics. Thus CEINT is uniquely
positioned to provide training for students in environmentally relevant research
design by incorporating feedback loops from studies conducted in CEINT's
mesocoms (32 large self-contained ecosystems) to inform strategically designed
laboratory studies to elucidate the mechanisms by which nanoparticles exert
their impacts in the more complex media of ecosystems. This REU will leverage
the well-developed international research and training activities across CEINT
to provide summer placements at core CEINT US partners Duke, Carnegie Mellon,
and Virginia Tech Universities and with French partner the European Center for
Research and Education in Geosciences and the Environment (CEREGE), Aix-en-
Provence, France. Students will learn how risk assessment provides feedback to
guide future research and about evolving parameters for international studies in
nanotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: &lt;br/&gt;This REU
program will support the critical demand for undergraduate research training in
the emerging field of nano-scale science and technology and expand research
opportunities for underrepresented minorities as well as provide
interdisciplinary research training in the sciences and engineering for students
early in their careers. Projects will engage students in an integrated, unique
interdisciplinary approach to understanding principles governing nanoparticle
toxicity and learning how risk assessment can provide feedback to guide future
research and policy. This research is particularly important in the area of
environmental nano-science since it includes self-contained ecosystems
(mesocosms) that provide environmentally relevant feedback loops- critical to
informing lab research- and thus providing students with research opportunities
of real-world importance. Broader impacts include solidifying training
opportunities for undergraduates across three U.S. universities and in France-
thus creating trans-university and international networks for undergraduates
that position students to readily transition to graduate school. By targeting
underrepresented groups, particularly females and minority students, and
recruiting students at early career junctures from institutions with limited
research opportunities, this REU program has potential to contribute to
environmental protection by advancing the training of a diverse group of
environmentally responsible nano-scientists and engineers. Through website and
media highlights as well as student publications and presentations, and by
involving REU students in K-12 outreach to engage younger students, a strong
foundation will be built to disseminate students' educational and research
experiences.