* 1359330
* REU Site: Research Experience for Undergraduates at Western Washington University
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Paul Spiegel, Western Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 07/31/2018
* USD 270,000.00

This renewal award from the Division of Chemistry (CHE) led by Professors James
Spiegel will supports a Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site in
the Department of Chemistry at Western Washington University for three summers.
This REU program supports eight undergraduate students for 10 weeks each summer
from community colleges and small four-year universities with limited student
research opportunities. The combination of externally funded research with the
central involvement of undergraduate students in research projects results in an
environment where REU participants are involved in meaningful summer research
experiences. REU participants are able to choose a research project from one of
three main areas of chemistry: biochemistry, synthetic chemistry and materials
chemistry. The broader impacts of this REU site are to provide undergraduate
students who have limited access to chemistry research with an authentic
research experience. Among the recruited participants, an emphasis is placed on
underrepresented minorities from community colleges and the University of Alaska
system, resulting in a diverse population of students in this program, which
contributes to increasing the diversity of the scientific workforce.
Furthermore, the incorporation of community college students into an REU program
has an additional impact by encouraging these students to consider graduate
school as an educational opportunity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The combination of
well-funded, cutting-edge research, and the involvement of undergraduate
students in research, results in an outstanding environment for external
undergraduate students to be involved in a summer research experience. REU
participants are able to choose a project from one of three main areas of
chemistry: biochemistry (protein structure, protein folding and design,
biophysics of DNA modification), synthetic chemistry (organic method
development, natural product synthesis, small molecule activation), and
materials chemistry (solar concentrators, heterogeneous catalysis, ionic
liquids, nanomaterials). In addition to numerous formal and informal activities
for the entire group of REU participants, these divisional groups provide
additional training that is specific to the research area, including workshops
and combined group meetings. The culmination of the summer program is a
symposium in which REU participants give poster presentations on their research
projects in addition to keynote speakers from each of the three research areas.