* 1359165
* REU Site: Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Mathematics at CSU Channel Islands
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Geoffrey Buhl, California State University Channel Islands
* Continuing Grant
* Stacey Levine
* 08/31/2018
* USD 279,987.00

The REU in Mathematics at California State University Channel Islands will
support 27 REU students conducting mathematical research in Summer 2015 and
Summer 2017. Unique features include a focus on targeting talented students who
might not otherwise have considered mathematics as a viable career choice,
particularly those from traditionally underrepresented groups, with a special
emphasis on native Spanish speakers and first-generation college students. The
group of faculty mentors includes several bilingual (Spanish-English) faculty.
The inclusion of one early-career mathematician from another campus each year
will spread the practice of effective undergraduate research mentoring. By
inviting native Spanish speakers and first-generation students to join more
traditional students, this project creates a model of a diverse, rigorous
research environment. Students will tackle original research problems in the
areas of algebra, data analysis, graph theory, operator theory, analysis, linear
algebra, applied mathematics, and their intersections that are of interest to
the mathematical research community yet accessible to students.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Students will spend the bulk of their time working on research in
groups of four per faculty mentor; faculty mentors will work with their students
an average of 3 - 5 hours per day. Workshops, distinguished visitors and
colloquia, and social outings are also included in the activities. The primary
goal is for student participants to conduct original mathematical research while
raising their levels of mathematical maturity and confidence and fostering an
enthusiasm for mathematics. Students will develop mathematical communication
skills in visual, oral, and written form. The project will incorporate students
into a heterogeneous group with shared intellectual goals. Students will leave
the program feeling excited and prepared to conduct graduate-level mathematics
in an academic or industrial setting. We expect the emphasis on native Spanish
speakers and students from underrepresented groups will broaden the pipeline
into graduate school and mathematical careers.