* 1359496
* Collaborative Research: Impact And Accommodation Through Cultural Contact
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Stuart Smith, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2019
* USD 194,185.00

The significance of this research rests on the fact that it documents the long
term effect of cultural interaction and provides insight into the mechanisms,
both social and biological, which guide this process as well as the resultant
outcomes. Archaeology can provide a valuable window to understanding how
different cultures interact since it can take a long range perspective and
follow such processes often over century long time scales. The presence of
biological data in the form of skeletal remains adds an additional dimension to
the study. Similar interactions are visible today in multiple regions of the
world.

With the support of the National Science Foundation, an international team, led
by Dr. Stuart Tyson Smith and Dr. Michele Buzon, along with other specialists,
students, and local community members will conduct a bioarchaeological research
project to investigate the impact of the Egypt's New Kingdom Empire (c.
1500-1050 BC) on the Nubian Kerma Culture at the Third Cataract of the Nile
River in Upper Nubia. This project builds on previous excavations at Tombos,
which have documented a multi-ethnic colonial community of immigrant Egyptians
and local Nubians. Excavation will include burials in the elite pyramid field of
the cemetery and the previously unexplored settlement. In addition, a settlement
(Hannek) and cemetery (Akkad) associated with the local Nubian Kerma culture
will be explored in order to allow for a comparison of Egyptian imperial impacts
on the health and identity before and after the conquest and colonization of the
area. Moving beyond traditional unidirectional models of colonial encounters,
this research considers the actions of both the local and foreign groups.

The intellectual merit of the project is the contribution to larger
archaeological and anthropological research questions regarding the process of
inter-cultural interactions, colonialism, and the cultural entanglements that
result. Older acculturation models based upon a notion of dominant core and
subordinate periphery have increasingly been replaced with more nuanced
interaction based models like the one proposed here. This project will add an
important case study from one of the world's earliest primary states that will
be of relevance to scholars studying similar dynamics in different places and
periods. The use of a multi-disciplinary bioarchaeological approach allows for a
holistic examination of these issues through use of various types of data
including material culture, social practices, biological relationships,
geographic origins, and indications of health and disease. Tombos' unique
historical context offers significant potential to shed light on the still
largely unknown local impacts of the Egyptian empire, providing important data
on the local people who played a role in the adoption, adaptation, and rejection
of different cultural traits, as well as the interpenetration of Nubian and
Egyptian features in both societies.

Further broader impacts of this project include the training of American and
Sudanese students and researchers as well as promotion of international research
collaboration. The excavation and curation of human skeletal remains from the
project will provide secure storage of important archaeological and
bioarchaeological data and collections as well as ensure the opportunity for
future research on the material. The data produced from the proposed research
will be widely disseminated in order to provide access for other researchers.
Finally, this project will assist the people of Sudan in documenting the rapidly
disappearing evidence of ancient Nubian life and culture resulting from
settlement and cultivation. The proposed construction of a dam only ten
kilometers downstream from Tombos would also heavily impact the sites and adds
additional urgency to this project.