* 1359395
* REU Site:   Summer of Applied Geophysical Experience (SAGE)
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2015
* Lawrence Braile, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Lina Patino
* 07/31/2015
* USD 50,004.00

This REU site will actively involve students in all phases of exciting, applied
geophysical research using modern field equipment and computer
processing/interpretation tools. The program will begin with learning some
advanced geophysical theory and applications through lectures, discussions and
demonstrations, and scientific research practices. These activities will be
followed by data collection in the field, data analysis/processing, and
modeling/interpretation. Students will work with faculty, teaching assistants,
and industry experts in geophysical surveys such as seismic reflection and
refraction, gravity, magnetics, temperature logging (geothermal studies), and
electromagnetics. Each student will also complete data processing,
interpretation and modeling of a selected geophysical data set and makes reports
(oral and written) on their research and results. Additional research experience
is included in a follow-up workshop in January. Typically, more than half of the
REU students will also supported, for professional development, to attend a
scientific to present their results in a poster or oral presentation. The REU
site will engage up to 12 rising seniors in a 4-week field research experience,
followed by a 1-week data modeling effort.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The geophysical
research for this year will include our basin-scale studies of the Rio Grande
rift (RGR) area and archaeological geophysics studies of the San Marcos Pueblo
site where we have been collecting and interpreting data for several years. The
basin-scale geophysical work in 2014 will extend an existing SAGE RGR transect
to the West into the deepest part of the Santo Domingo basin of the RGR. The
profile is just west of the Santo Domingo Pueblo. We will be working on Pueblo
land and will have some Santo Domingo Pueblo students (and most likely some
Cochiti Pueblo students - for a total of six Pueblo students) participating in
seven days of the REU program to provide them with and introduction to the
geology of the RGR and New Mexico and introduce them to geophysical and
geological field work and methods. The 2014 field area and geophysical research
will also target geothermal exploration through temperature logging and
analysis. Our profile is in an area of thick tertiary sediments that are likely
to have low thermal conductivity that could cause temperature anomalies. The
profile is also immediately adjacent to an area of young volcanic centers so we
will have some interesting geothermal data to interpret and compare with our
other geophysical results. This project is supported in collaboration with the
Department of Energy, Office of Geothermal Technologies Program.