* 1360755
* Collaborative Research: A multidisciplinary, field based study of the little-known Kinda baboon (Papio cynocephalus kindae)."
* SBE,BCS
* 07/31/2013,12/31/2014
* Robin Bernstein, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 12/31/2014
* USD 17,321.00

The physical, behavioral and ecological diversity of baboons (genus Papio) makes
them a fruitful source as analogies for understanding early human evolution.
This project investigates a widespread but little known species, the kinda
baboon (P. kindae), and probes the physiological and genetic bases of its
distinctive behaviors and physical features. Besides being unusually small and
juvenile in appearance, kinda baboons appear less sexually differentiated than
other baboons. Behaving like females of other species, adult male kindas
frequently initiate long grooming sessions, while females often give alarm
barks, which is normally a male baboon activity. Unexpectedly, kinda baboons
hybridize with neighboring chacma baboons (P. ursinus) which are almost twice
their size, and are behaviorally more typical. This research project traces the
causes of these species differences from the level of observable behavior and
anatomy, through the level of development and hormonal control, to the level of
the genome. Over 200 kinda, hybrid, and chacma baboons are trapped, sampled, and
released unharmed in Kafue National Park, Zambia. Basic biological data such as
weight and body measurements are collected along with blood samples. Specialist
labs investigate these blood samples for the hormones and other biologically
active components that influence growth, sexual differentiation, and behavior,
and produce a high-resolution map of the kinda genome. Physiological differences
that consistently distinguish kindas can then be tracked to the genetic level,
by comparing fast-evolving candidate regions in kindas with homologous regions
in other baboon species. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is innovative in
combining proven, comparatively low-tech field techniques with cutting edge
technology in genomics and hormonal physiology. Most immediately, it fills a
major gap in our knowledge of a key primate genus. In the long term, it provides
insights into behavioral variation and evolution in other species, including
humans. In the wider sphere, the project will train graduate students, further
scientific collaboration with Zambian Wildlife authorities, and promote the
status of baboons in wildlife tourism.