* 1360424
* WSC-Category 3 Collaborative: Impacts of Climate Change on the Phenology of Linked Agriculture-Water Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Ariel Ortiz-Bobea, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 08/31/2019
* USD 309,457.00

1360415 (Ball), 1360345 (Brady), 1360424 (Ortiz-Bobea), and 1360395 (Wainger).
This research will create an integrated trans-disciplinary system of data-driven
econometric and numerical simulation models to test scientific hypotheses on how
farmers adapt to climate change and how these altered practices are processed
through a watershed to affect downstream estuarine ecosystem health (e.g., water
quality, hypoxia). An overarching hypothesis is that climate-induced adaptive
changes in agricultural practices and ecosystem processes will cause large
indirect phenologic effects that propagate through watersheds to estuary. For
this work, the ecological concept of phenology is extended beyond its usual
meaning of seasonal life-cycle events (e.g., tree flowering) to seasonal events
in water system processes. The project approach involves simultaneous
collaborative and integrated activities by three research teams: Economics and
Policy, Watershed, and Estuary. The Economics and Policy Team includes
agricultural and environmental economists, whose empirical models feed and
constrain the simulation models that are to be developed and linked by the
Watershed and Estuary Teams. The Chesapeake Water System (CWS) is used as the
study site because of its rich and long-term record of data. Synthesis of these
data with models will enable comparative analyses to reveal broad relationships
between human and natural drivers and processes that extrapolate well to water
systems worldwide. This research will advance knowledge of: 1) how climate
changes influence the timing and type of agricultural practices; 2) how temporal
and spatial scales of watershed models influence simulated effects on nutrient
delivery; 3) how direct influences of climate change on ecosystems compare to
indirect influences that cascade through the watershed; and 4) how alternative
management policies - with different rules and incentives - affect farming
behavior and thus ecologic health. The effort will also advance understanding of
how best to link economic and policy modeling approaches and scales with those
of watershed and estuary simulation, as related to maintaining water system
sustainability under climate change. Agricultural models of farmer adaptation
will empirically demonstrate how spatial and temporal distributions of practices
are altered by climate change, allowing transformation of the modeling approach
and improving the observational grounding of the models. Further, this work will
advance ability to test policies aimed at managing nutrient emissions from
agriculture by characterizing conditions at scales relevant for understanding
adoption/compliance. The Watershed Team will use process understanding -
synthesized from data across multiple watersheds - to assess structural
uncertainties in conventional models that are typically ignored in policy
applications. The Estuary Team's data synthesis will search for climate-related
shifts in timing and amounts of nutrient loading and use numerical simulation
models to quantify effects on Bay health. The Economics and Policy Team will
apply a novel state-contingent pollution-control approach that incorporates
uncertainty. Through the development and linkage of these models, this project
will help transform climate-change impact assessment and response, tackle basic
knowledge gaps in the understanding of long-term sustainability of estuarine
water systems, and develop new tools and understanding that are applicable to
other water bodies influenced by agricultural land use. The areas of broader
impact for this project include: 1) workforce recruitment and training; 2)
transfer of tools and knowledge to environment management agencies; 3) enhanced
public understanding and K-16 science education. In the first regard, the
project will recruit, train and mentor 8-12 MS and PhD students toward careers
in ecology, economics, hydrology, oceanography and engineering with foci on
water quality, agricultural sustainability, environmental policy analysis, and
climate change. Secondly, the team will continue to work very closely with
investigators in USDA, USEPA, USGS, and other federal and state agencies working
with the Chesapeake Bay Program to develop better integrated modeling tools for
modeling support of environmental management. Interactions with the Bay
management community will include regular meetings with collaborators,
presentations of findings at CBP meetings and collaborative workshops. Thirdly,
K-16 education will be improved through integration of products into a highly
successful ongoing NSF COSEE program, including a new workshop for training 15
high school teachers.