* 1360042
* Identifying cross-disciplinary pathways to translational science
* SBE,SMA
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2018
* Griffin Weber, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Cassidy Sugimoto
* 04/30/2018
* USD 499,862.00

The National Institutes of Health Roadmap places special emphasis on
accelerating "bench-to-bedside" research, or the "translation" of basic science
research into practical clinical applications, which today typically takes more
than 20 years to occur. The nearly $500 million the NIH spends annually on its
Clinical and Translational Science Awards (CTSA) program is just one example of
the large investments being made to develop a national infrastructure to support
translational science. However, tracking the impact of these major policy
changes is challenging because although translational science has been described
in many different ways, including the frequently used qualitative T1-T4
classification, consensus on a precise definition has not yet been reached. For
this reason, it has also been difficult to identify translational science,
understand how it occurs, and determine which researchers are conducting it.

Intellectual Merit

This project addresses this problem by building on a recently developed
quantitative and visual approach for measuring translation called the Triangle
of Biomedicine, which maps biomedical journal articles to a triangle, whose
corners represent research related to animals, cells and molecules, and humans.
The position of an article on the graph is based on its topics, and translation
is defined as movement of a collection of articles, or the articles that cite
those articles, towards the human corner. This provides a way of determining the
degree to which an individual scientist, organization, funding agency, or
scientific field is producing results that have potential impact on human
health, and calculating the amount of time it takes. This project extends this
Triangle of Biomedicine to another dimension to form a Pyramid of Translation,
whose apex represents publications in fields outside of the life and health
sciences, including the physical sciences, social sciences, and arts and
humanities. This enables researchers to (1) identify citation pathways (one
article citing another) and individual researchers that cross in and out of
biomedicine, and (2) calculate the frequency that these intersect the shortest
paths leading to clinical investigation, giving unprecedented insight to the
mechanisms that lead to translation.

Broader Impacts

This project helps policy makers determine the extent to which research outside
of biomedicine impacts human health through cross-disciplinary diffusion of
knowledge. It gives them a tool not only to evaluate existing investments in
translational science, but also to identify non-traditional pathways towards
novel therapeutics. More generally, this project demonstrates a technique for
discovering where different research domains intersect and measuring the role of
cross-disciplinary teams on innovation. It does these using precise quantitative
analyses of millions of publications, yet it presents the results in simple data
visualizations, which can be understood by both scientists and the general
public.