* 1360566
* RI: Small: Unsupervised Object Class Discovery via Bottom-up Multiple Class Learning
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Zhuowen Tu, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Jie Yang
* 08/31/2016
* USD 420,029.00

This project develops an integrated framework to perform simultaneous object
discovery and detector training in an unsupervised setting. It takes advantages
of large amount (millions or even billions) of well-organized internet images to
automatically learn rich image representations for a wide range of objects. The
main activities in this project include the following. (1) The central component
of this project is a formulation to turn unsupervised data into weakly-
supervised "noisy input" through which commonalities are explored for rich
object representation using a new learning method. (2) A large dictionary of
mid-level image representations will be learned on a large scale number of
images retrieved using thousands of object words through the internet search
engine. (3) A new flexible object representation is developed to deal with
articulated/non-rigid objects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project advances
computer vision and machine learning fields by developing an unsupervised
paradigm to explore a large scale of internet images. The learned mid-level and
high-level representations from images retrieved using thousands of words can
significantly enhance the object representation power and benefit researchers in
the object recognition field. The formulations, algorithms, and methods resulted
from this project are also helpful to researchers in other fields such as
medical imaging and data mining. The project dissemination plan includes the
source code and learned mid-level and high-level representations.