* 1360707
* CNIC: U.S.-Norway Computer Science Project Development on Evolution of Software Product Families in Safety Critical Systems
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2016
* David Binkley, Loyola University Maryland, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Mangala Sharma
* 07/31/2016
* USD 32,097.00

Integrated Control and Safety Systems (ICSSs) are large software-intensive
systems that monitor and control safety-critical devices and processes in
domains such as process plants, oil and gas production, and maritime equipment.
To leverage commonality and accommodate variation, ICSSs are often produced as
component-based product families, an effective tactic for developing a portfolio
of software products based on shared assets. Principal Investigator, David
Binkley of Loyola University Maryland, will visit Norwegian counterparts at the
Simula Research Laboratory in Oslo to initiate a collaborative investigation of
techniques to improve the construction and maintenance of software product
families. If successful, future results should benefit those who construct
software and more broadly, those who rely on software. The envisioned research
is important to society because software, which is ever increasing in
complexity, is being given ever greater responsibility for complex safety-
critical systems in daily life, including airplane flight and power plant
operation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long term technical goal of this
U.S.-Norwegian project development effort is to conceive novel recommendation
technology that can support engineers through the evolution of families of
complex, safety-critical, software-intensive systems. In doing so, the project
aims to improve industrial practice through developing enhanced tools,
techniques, and best practices such as software production guidelines for large
safety-critical systems. The initial techniques considered by the team will
generalize existing techniques that are effective with programming-in-the-small.
For example, the dependences used to determine ripple effects in "small"
programs are often Boolean. However, Boolean precision comes at a cost, and
thus, the new collaboration intends to pursue replacement with a more continuous
notion that captures a more varied level of dependence. Through broad
dissemination, future results should benefit other researchers as well as the
industrial community, where improved tool support can help to reduce the time
and expense of software construction while improving its quality.