* 1360860
* I/UCRC:  Seedling Production and Forest Health in the Southeastern United States
* ENG,EEC
* 03/01/2014,02/28/2019
* Lori Eckhardt, Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 02/28/2019
* USD 300,000.00

The proposed new site of the I/UCRC for Advanced Forestry Systems (CAFS) at
Auburn University intends to expand CAFS efforts by providing additional and
specialized expertise and research in areas specifically within the forest
entomology and forest pathology research and the management of forest pests in
the southern US forest ecosystems. The Auburn University associated CAFS
projects will augment and complement current CAFS projects in the broad areas of
insect and disease management, through silviculture, disease and insect
resistance and invasive species research in forest plantations throughout the
southern US. Auburn University specifically proposes a number of collaborative
projects on developing disease and insect management and genotype screening
programs for enhancing southern US conifer planting stock
survival.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Auburn University CAFS site has the potential
to increase the breadth and reach of broader center impacts. These key impacts
include: increased competitiveness of forest products industries and forest
landowners, improved knowledge of members with respect to insect and disease
pests that affect stand productivity and enhanced technology transfer between
Center scientists and industrial members, expanded scientific knowledge through
peer reviewed publications and presentations, expanded training of graduate
students with unique interdisciplinary skill sets, recruitment of graduate
students from underrepresented groups, and undergraduate involvement that may
promote more graduate enrollment.&lt;br/&gt;