* 1360800
* Understanding spatial determiners, complex predicates, and case marking through traditional narratives in endangered languages
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2014,01/31/2018
* Lenore Grenoble, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Colleen M. Fitzgerald
* 01/31/2018
* USD 302,394.00

The primary goal of the Documenting Endangered Languages program is to create
thorough accessible audio-visual documentation and description of languages
dangerously close to extinction. It aims to capture, before the information is
permanently lost, the linguistic features of each language, opening a window
into the capabilities of the human mind, as well as the language's unique
cultural, geographic, and social setting. The current project contributes to
this goal by thoroughly documenting two neighboring related languages, Matngele
and MalakMalak, spoken in remote northern Australia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lenore
Grenoble and Dorothea Hoffman, experienced language documenters from the
University of Chicago, will create an annotated database which will include
indigenous historical and personal narratives, natural conversation, and data
from targeted elicitation. They will create a rich corpus useful in
investigating a range of grammatical features, especially spatial determiners,
complex predicate ordering, and morphological marking of grammatical agents and
patients. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Historical narratives from the indigenous
languages of Australia are deeply rooted in landscape and environmental
features. In these narratives, landscape features are inherent elements of the
grammar and are expressed in substantial uses of deictic and spatial
determiners, coverbs, and suffixes. The very structure of the narratives is
determined by spatial ordering and the use of motion descriptions at episode
boundaries. MalakMalak and Matngele narratives and other spontaneous speech
samples are also excellent sources of data for optional ergative/absolutive
case-marking syntactic structure that is governed by prosody, information
structure, and discourse environment. Similarly, one finds information on
complex predicates whose ordering is not fixed but also potentially determined
by information structure. There are also a small number of optional noun
classifiers whose usage is subject to discourse constraints.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Finally, the two tribes of MalakMalak and Matngele have
been in close cultural and linguistic contact for a long time. Unique
storytelling techniques and bilingualism in this setting offer exceptional
insight into language and literary contact in a highly diverse multilingual and
multicultural setting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By involving, speakers, local
schools, and adults no longer actively speaking the languages, the proposed
project may be able to encourage revitalization processes of both languages.
Documentary materials from this project will be accessible from the Endangered
Languages Archive at the University of London and at the Pacific and Regional
Archive for Digital Sources in Endangered Cultures.