* 1360823
* Africa's Endangered Languages: Documentary and Theoretical Approaches
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2015
* Harold Torrence, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Colleen M. Fitzgerald
* 12/31/2015
* USD 30,601.00

The state of language endangerment in sub-Saharan Africa is distinct from much
of the rest of the world, typified by threatened languages distributed across
several geographically distinct regions of the continent and internal pressures
rather than external factors driving endangerment. As such, African language
endangerment has great potential to provide fresh perspectives on and valuable
new insights into the questions of how and why languages erode. Furthermore,
Africa's endangered languages pose several unique challenges to documentation
efforts. Insufficient infrastructure, scarcity of resources, incomplete and/or
inaccurate information, and a general absence of public awareness (locally and
internationally), for example, provide serious hurdles for the documentation and
maintenance of threatened languages in most regions. However, because the threat
level of language endangerment in Africa has been characterized as low, research
on and funding opportunities for endangered African languages are often
perceived as less urgent. Consequently, a disproportionate amount of funding and
research is devoted to the study of endangered African languages than any other
linguistically threatened region in the world.

This grant supports a special conference workshop entitled "Africa's Endangered
Languages: Documentary and Theoretical Approaches," to be held at the University
of Kansas in conjunction with the 45th Annual Conference on African Linguistics.
The workshop seeks to stimulate and enhance the visibility of endangered African
language research in the hopes of reversing this trend and bringing the unique
insights and perspectives afforded by African language endangerment to bear on
the fields of language documentation and endangered language research. The
workshop will emphasize the synergistic relationship between documentation and
linguistic theory in endangered African language research. Thus, it will serve a
crucial role in catalyzing a deeper and more collaborative relationship between
documentary and theoretical linguists for the purpose of growing, maintaining,
and sustaining research efforts to document and preserve Africa's endangered
languages.