* 1360869
* Discovering Omaha Linguistic Structure through the Documentation of Fluent Omaha Elders' Voices
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2014,06/30/2018
* Michael Oltrogge, Nebraska Indian Community College
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 06/30/2018
* USD 115,568.00

Understanding how and why human languages package information in particular ways
can shed light on human cognitive processes. Humans overwhelmingly organize
information in order to facilitate maximum comprehension. In spoken and signed
language, salient information is most often presented to the conversant first.
This is then followed with a contextualizing comment or additional modification.
This organization of information is thought to facilitate comprehension. The
main meaning of a word, for example, often comes first, and then, may be
followed by suffixes that lend further modification, e.g. English 'like' and
'liked'. There are a small set of languages worldwide that place all or most
modifying information at the beginning of the word, that is, in prefixes rather
than in suffixes. These languages challenge theories of how speakers package
information so that hearers can best comprehend a message. Many such prefixing
languages are endangered so that the key to the cognitive processes that allow
for comprehension even in the face of unexpected information organization will
soon be lost.

The highly endangered Siouan Native American language Omaha is one such complex
prefixing language. This project will lead to valuable documentation of a
variety of genres of Omaha from the few remaining elders who speak the language
fluently. The data gathered will inform theories on the cognitive processing of
word structure where comment and modification precede the semantic core of the
word. In addition Omaha data will contribute to morphological theories on the
organization of affixes: most languages organize derivational morphology before
inflection but in Omaha inflectional and derivational morphology are
interdigitated.

Community members Micheal Oltrogge and Alice Saunsoci of the Omaha language
department of the Nebraska Indian Community College will work with the tribe's
Elders Language Advisory Council to create a database of conversational and
narrative discourse in Omaha from thirty fluent Elders. The team will use state-
of-the art language documentation protocol to collect, transcribe, and translate
the data. This work will be conducted in collaboration with linguist Ardis
Eschenberg who will also help the team produce a book on Omaha verbs.

Both the audio and video documentation and material on Omaha verbs will be
accessible from the Sam Noble museum. The project will broaden participation of
Native American language experts through the training in documentary linguistics
they will receive as a result of this project.