* 1360006
* GOALI: Development of Inorganic Phosphate Glass Matrix Nanocomposites Incorporating Nanoscale Polyhedral Oligomeric Silsesquioxanes with Improved Properties
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2019
* Joshua Otaigbe, University of Southern Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 06/30/2019
* USD 571,709.00

NON-TECHNICAL: This Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry
research project concerns the development of optically transparent glass matrix
nanocomposite, wherein special molecular silica is chemically incorporated into
ultra-low melting phosphate glass. The hypothesis of the proposed research is
that molecular-level combination during liquid-state processing of reinforcing
molecular silica and phosphate glass matrix at similar molecular-level length
scales has the potential to offer significantly improved optical and mechanical
properties for a number of applications. The ability to easily manufacture
intricate shapes of the nanocomposites by liquid-state processing in an extruder
at relatively low temperatures (250Â°C), to reinforce glass with molecular
silica, and to potential self-healing of glass via low-temperature annealing
offer distinctive transformative alternatives to conventional glass and ceramics
materials processing and design. This project plays an important role in the
Nation's current interest in developing micro- and nano-length scale materials
and processing technologies. The project provides useful training for two
graduate students and a number of research experiences for undergraduate
students in a vital area of research, making significant impact on the future
economic development of the U.S. in the area of nanostructured 'optically
transparent' inorganic glass matrix nanocomposites materials. Recruiting women
and other underrepresented minorities (e.g., ethnic, disabled, geographic) from
the University of Southern Mississippi's sizable minority student population is
an important objective of this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS:
This cooperative research effort between Southern Mississippi University and
industry (Hybrid Plastics, Inc.) investigates how incorporation of small amounts
of a well-defined nanostructured inorganic cluster or molecular silica can be
used to tune morphological, rheological and strength and fracture toughness of
'optically transparent' molecular silica/phosphate glass matrix nanocomposites
system. The discovery of new knowledge and phenomena are prerequisites to
inventing new applications. As well, the diversification of research approaches
coupled with cooperation is critical for the best progress. In particular, the
academic-industry liaison provides critical guidance and a clear focus for the
creation and refinement of highly relevance materials for a range of
applications. The special molecular silica which is manufactured by the
industrial partner of this project consists of an eight-corner, silica-based
cage bearing one or more prescribed functional groups to yield a new class of
innovative molecular silica/phosphate glass matrix nanocomposites that combines
transparency (optical clarity) and improved strength and fracture toughness for
special security uses. By using a variety of complementary methods, the project
explores the molecular origin of the structure, rheological properties and
thermo-mechanical behavior of well-characterized molecular silica/phosphate
glass matrix nanocomposites, making it possible to define mechanisms that
develop on nanometer length scales, influence the microscale, and impact the
macroscale. Because the nano-polyhedral oligomeric silsesquioxanes (POSS) merges
the properties of nanofillers with the precision of chemistry and the molecular
silica cage length scale (i.e., 1.5 nm) approaches the short-range structure of
phosphate glass, it is conjectured that unique interactions develop that give
rise to optimal control of the nanocomposite properties such as strength,
fracture toughness and light transmittance.