* 1360867
* EAGER: Enabling Direct Microbial Biotransformation of Methane and Derived Methanol to Valuable Biochemicals and Biofuels by Yarrowia Lipolytica
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2016
* Cong Trinh, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Rajakkannu Mutharasan
* 07/31/2016
* USD 197,046.00

1360867 Trinh, Cong T.

Methane is abundant and comes from natural gas, coal, petroleum, and biogas of
livestock; it is also one of the major and potent greenhouse gases. Methane is
primarily used as a fuel for generating heat and electricity, and to produce
methanol via the synthesis gas route, which is expensive to process as it is
very energy intensive. Methane generated as a byproduct in a chemical process or
as biogas of livestock is often either released or flared before being released
to the environment. Therefore, effectively capturing and using methane can
provide an abundant feedstock to produce valuable products and alleviate global
warming. This EAGER proposal seeks to explore the untapped microbial
biotransformation route to utilize methane and derived methanol for the
synthesis of valuable biobased products. The proposed research will be
transformative by achieving the direct microbial transformation of abundant
methane and derived methanol to valuable biobased products at room temperature
and ambient pressure with much less energy than conventional chemical
transformation, and by simultaneously capturing methane to abate global warming.
This project will also integrate the research into educational outreach
activities that have significant impact on a diverse group of undergraduate and
K-12 students at The University of Tennessee.

The goal of this EAGER proposal is to elucidate and activate the unique methane-
and methanol-utilizing pathways of oleaginous yeasts (such as Yarrowia
lipolytica) for biochemicals and biofuels synthesis. In this proposal, the PI
team will use systems biology tools to address the following fundamental
questions: 1) What genes are involved in the methanol-utilizing pathway of Y.
lipolytica? and 2) Can Y. lipolytica utilize any of its diverse set of CYP450
monooxygenases to convert methane to methanol and enable growth on methane?
Furthermore, the PI team will apply metabolic engineering and synthetic biology
tools to harness the unique metabolism of Y. lipolytica to synthesize valuable
biobased products from methane and methane-derived molecules. If successful,
this project will shed light on unique methane- and methanol-utilizing pathways
that are poorly understood in eukaryotes (e.g., Y. lipolytica) and pave the way
for discovering other non-conventional yeasts that have both oleaginous and
methanotrophic characteristics.