* 1360603
* CAREER: Biosensing in thermal space
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2013,04/30/2015
* Ming Su, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Rajakkannu Mutharasan
* 04/30/2015
* USD 250,224.00

1055599&lt;br/&gt;Su&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CAREER: Biosensing in thermal
space&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although numerous biomarkers with certain specificity
to cancers have been identified, it is clear that no single biomarker is ideal
to distinguish lethal cancers from indolent ones due to lack of tumor
specificity. Parallel to efforts of finding more specific biomarkers, a feasible
way of providing better predictive value is to detect multiple biomarkers.
However, existing techniques cannot be used to detect a large number of
biomarkers due to peak overlapping, lack of probe-specific property or
complexity of readout systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project will
study a new biosensing method, i.e., thermal biosensing, in which a series of
composition-encoded nanoparticles of solid-liquid phase change materials (metals
and eutectic alloys) that have sharp and discrete melting peaks will be
designed, produced, modified with a series of ligands, and used for in vitro
detection of multiple biomarkers. A one-to-one correspondence will be
established between one type of biomarker and one type of nanoparticles. The
presence and concentration of each biomarker will be derived from the melting
peak and fusion enthalpy of according nanoparticle. The multiple results will be
used to distinguish lethal cancers at early stages using pattern recognition
method. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Thermal biosensing uses a
well-known, but unexplored thermal phenomenon of solids: the temperature of a
solid will not rise above its melting point until the entire solid is molten,
and the fact that metal or eutectic alloy has composition-dependent melting
point and sharp melting peak during linear thermal scan. By uniquely combining
phase diagram knowledge gained in the past with size advantage of nanoparticles,
thermal biosensing has distinct features for biomarker detection. By filling
knowledge gap among biosensing, metallurgy and nanotechnology, thermal
biosensing using phase change nanoparticles represents a paradigm shift from
existing electric, electronic, magnetic, mechanical or photonic
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Thermal biosensing could lead to
technological breakthroughs in detection and treatment of lethal cancers. The
early detections of lethal cancers will enhance survivability of patients,
reduce costs of diagnosis and treatment, and improve quality of life by curing
cancer and reducing anxiety associated with cancer. Thermal biosensing can also
be extended to a variety of applications including biomedicine, food production
and processing, and rapid detections of multiple bacteria, viruses, and
biotoxins for bio-safety, bio-warfare defense and environmental applications.
The educational plan is targeted to attract students into Bio-Nano engineering,
and will generate lasting impacts on students by enlightening young minds, and
to society by maintaining high-quality workforces.