* 1360165
* Collaborative Research: The Globalization of R&amp;D: Evidence from U.S. Multinationals
* SBE,SMA
* 05/15/2014,04/30/2017
* J. Bradford Jensen, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Mark Fiegener
* 04/30/2017
* USD 308,657.00

The location of Research and Development (R&amp;D) activities carried out by
U.S.-based multinational firms has changed substantially in recent years Between
1999 and 2009, the R&amp;D expenditure of the foreign affiliates of U.S. firms
nearly doubled. Between 2004 and 2010, U.S. affiliate R&amp;D in China more than
doubled, and it increased in India by a factor of ten. These sudden changes
raise significant questions and concerns for economic theorists, policymakers,
and corporate managers. This project addresses these concerns by carefully
documenting and describing recent changes in the scale, geographic distribution,
and sectoral composition of overseas R&amp;D. In addition it examines the
evolving relationship between home R&amp;D operations and overseas R&amp;D, with
a special focus on the impact of rising R&amp;D investment in key emerging
markets on the scale and scope of R&amp;D activity at home. In addition it will
test the validity of recent concerns that international tax differences are
driving innovative activity offshore. Finally, it will measure the impact these
recent shifts have had on the measured productivity of total U.S. corporate
R&amp;D investment at home. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The rapid growth of innovative
activity in low-wage emerging markets like China and India is viewed by some as
a challenge to current theories of comparative advantage and international
trade, which suggest innovative activity will be concentrated in advanced
industrial economies. But is it? Prior research, based on analysis of the
international patents granted to inventors resident in China and India suggests
that a substantial fraction of the "innovation" emerging from these economies
draws on intellectual inputs from the advanced industrial world and is generated
through an emerging international division of R&amp;D labor managed by foreign
multinationals. However, analysis of patent data alone is insufficient to
determine the nature and extent of this international division of R&amp;D labor.
This project extends understanding of this important phenomenon by combining
patent data with high-quality, subsidiary-level data on the R&amp;D expenditures
of U.S. multinationals in key emerging economies, at home, and elsewhere in the
world. Together these data sources provide a much more definitive picture of the
interaction between rapidly growing R&amp;D in key emerging markets and the rest
of the U.S. corporate R&amp;D system. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Is American technological leadership threatened by
the growth of U.S. multinational R&amp;D activities outside the U.S? What are
the appropriate policy responses? Exploration of the changing distribution of
R&amp;D input and output within U.S. multinational firms may shed useful light
on these questions, which have been the focus of recent National Academy
reports, high-level commissions, and industry analysis. To the extent that
growth in invention in emerging economies has been heavily reliant on research
inputs from Western firms, it may pose less of a direct threat to the economic
welfare of advanced industrial countries than has been supposed. In fact, by
improving the efficiency of the R&amp;D process and allowing firms to explore
more technological opportunities with a given level of expenditure, the
expanding globalization of U.S. multinational firms' R&amp;D activities could
generate net positive effects on economic growth in the U.S. and end up
reinforcing American technological leadership rather than undermining it.