* 1360666
* Chief Scientist Training Cruise (Barbados-Bermuda, May 2014)
* GEO,OCE
* 02/15/2014,01/31/2015
* Maureen Conte, Bermuda Institute of Ocean Sciences (BIOS), Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rose Dufour
* 01/31/2015
* USD 69,257.00

Overview:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant will support a CST cruise on the R/V
Atlantic Explorer from Barbados to Bermuda&lt;br/&gt;in May and June 2014. Chief
Scientist Training (CST) cruises are part of an educational
initiative&lt;br/&gt;designed for young US oceanographers, from senior graduate
students to junior faculty, to&lt;br/&gt;increase their participation in
seagoing research by educating them about the capabilities&lt;br/&gt;and
opportunities provided by the UNOLS research fleet. In addition to providing
sampling&lt;br/&gt;opportunities for individual research, a CST cruise is
specifically organized to teach cruise&lt;br/&gt;participants how to
successfully plan and execute a research cruise, from proposal to post-
cruise&lt;br/&gt;reporting. Cruise participants will be selected based on the
feasibility of their proposed&lt;br/&gt;science objectives, with an additional
goal of maximizing scientific, societal and geographic&lt;br/&gt;diversity of
the participants.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit :&lt;br/&gt;The ship track covers
a oceanographically important transitional area in the western
subtropical&lt;br/&gt;Atlantic, and thus the participants will be able to obtain
scientifically valuable data in&lt;br/&gt;addition to gaining valuable skills
and training that will help them to plan and execute
successful&lt;br/&gt;cruises in their future careers.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts
:&lt;br/&gt;The CST cruise will help develop future expertise in the US
oceanographic community by reducing&lt;br/&gt;the barriers to participation of
young scientists in seagoing research, particularly those&lt;br/&gt;scientists
from non ship-operator institutions. The activities proposed will help to
disseminate&lt;br/&gt;information about the research opportunities that are
provided by NSF and the UNOLS research&lt;br/&gt;fleet. The training and
workshop activities are projected to increase the number and
breadth&lt;br/&gt;of future proposals requesting ship support as well as to
improve the quality of execution&lt;br/&gt;and success of funded cruises. The
CST cruise opportunity will also help to broaden the&lt;br/&gt;geographic
representation of the research community that is involved in ship-based
scientific&lt;br/&gt;studies as well as increase the diversity of this
community.