* 1360384
* Collaborative Research:  Planning And Land Management in Tropical Ecosystem: Complexities of land-use and hydrology coupling in the Panama Canal Watershed
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Fred Ogden, University of Wyoming
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 07/31/2018
* USD 997,987.00

The sustainability of the Panama Canal is intricately connected with land-use.
The Canal was created by damming the Chagres River, creating Lake Gatun. Each
ship passing through the Canal requires release of water from Lake Gatun, so
reliable operation of the Canal requires reliable runoff from the Panama Canal
watershed. This is particularly true during the extended dry season, when
rainfall essentially stops. Furthermore, floods during the wet season can cause
closure of the Canal. The Panama Canal is undergoing a significant expansion to
allow passage by larger ships. Canal operations are a vital US interest.
Approximately 20 percent of trade between the U.S. and Asia passes through the
Panama Canal representing five percent of global trade, and the Canal enables a
large number of US jobs. However, the Canal expansion will require more water
despite the new high efficiency locks. Land management in the Panama Canal
Watershed influences how much and when water drains into Lake Gatun and the
Canal. This project will map the flow of land use policy incentives from
authorities like Panama Canal Authority, through landholder response, to changes
in land use and cover, to the effects of flow into the Canal. This will help
predict human and hydrological responses to policy and identify the least cost
approach to providing hydrologic ecosystem services. This project includes
international components conducted in the country of Panama and is funded in
part with funds from NSF ISE funds.

This project will evaluate the hydrology of the Panama Canal region as a
response to land use policy incentives from authorities like Panama Canal
Authority, through landholder response, to changes in land use and cover, to the
effects of flow into the Canal. Preliminary results suggest that land management
decisions alter paths available for water to flow from the land into the Canal.
These "preferential flow paths" are created by soil cracking in the dry season,
and by biological factors such as plants, animals, and microbes. Conversion of
grazing lands to forest seems to increase the amount of water flowing through
the soil. This may increase groundwater recharge, an important source of dry
season river flows. Forest land cover may reduce flooding in the wet season. The
project will collect watershed-scale hydrologic data in different land uses and
covers, and analyze those data to quantify the roles of deforestation and
grazing on hydrologic behavior. Researchers will measure the factors affecting
participation in an existing land-use incentive system to implement land
management systems that may improve the flow regime to the Canal. The findings
from the physical and socio-economic studies will be merged into a hydro-socio-
economic model to predict future water resources availability in the Panama
Canal watershed, driven by different land-management and climate scenarios.