* 1360594
* Collaborative Research: Comprehensive Investigation of Midlatitude Ionospheric Irregularities
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2020
* Miguel Larsen, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Alan Liu
* 06/30/2020
* USD 196,572.00

This project will address fundamental science questions on how the midlatitude
ionosphere behaves as a system. The midlatitude ionosphere is as prone to
instability as the equatorial and auroral ionospheres despite the lack of
obvious sources of free energy, and there is no comprehensive theory to explain
this. There is a clear relationship between neutral winds, wind shear, and
turbulence and Es layer formation and structuring, but the causal links have yet
to be clearly articulated. Equally clear is that E region irregularities and F
region medium-scale traveling ionospheric disturbances (MSTIDs) and
irregularities are electrically coupled, but the roles of the regions (sources,
loads, coupled resonators) remain unspecified. &lt;br/&gt; This project will
investigate midlatitude sporadic E layers, MSTIDs, the associated plasma density
irregularities, their mutual coupling, their geomagnetic conjugacy, and coupling
to the thermospheric neutral motion. The investigation will have experimental,
theoretical, and modeling aspects. The experimental component of the research
will be conducted in the Caribbean and will center on the Arecibo incoherent
scatter radar. This radar will be supported by a coherent scatter radar imager
fielded so as to have common E- and F-region scattering volumes with Arecibo.
The project will also utilize the Arecibo lidars and all-sky imagers as well as
sounders and GPS Total Electron Content (TEC) data. The theoretical
investigation will focus on the turbulence properties of the neutral motions in
the mesosphere/lower thermosphere (MLT) region, which will be studied using a
multi-scale analysis, and on the consequences for ionospheric structuring.
Modeling work will incorporate a newly developed, fully three-dimensional plasma
dynamics model. &lt;br/&gt; Undergraduate and graduate students will participate
in this work, and public outreach activities will be carried out in the
Caribbean.