* 1360152
* The Impact of Seed Accelerators on Innovation and Entrepreneurial Decision-Making
* SBE,SMA
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2017
* Sheryl Winston Smith, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Feeney
* 05/31/2017
* USD 191,000.00

This research advances knowledge about critical shifts in the mechanisms of new
technology venture formation, growth, and performance and advances comparison to
other sources of early equity funding through an empirical study of the impacts
of entrepreneurial seed accelerators that combine small equity investments with
cohort based intensive mentoring experience. Innovation focused new ventures are
catalysts for economic growth and prosperity. However, the process and resources
required for starting technology based new ventures are steeped in risk and
uncertainty. In theory, accelerators such as Y Combinator and TechStars?improve
the process of learning how fast to proceed, where to focus resources, and when
to quit. By investing small sums of money in many startups, accelerators stand
to have substantial impact at an aggregate level. However, we know little about
the overall influence of such accelerators on performance outcomes of new
ventures, on entrepreneurial STEM career trajectories, and of the greater
economic impact.

Specifically, the emergence, growth, and spawning of entrepreneurial
accelerators raises new questions and demand a new set of hypotheses and data to
answer them precisely because they are distinct along several critical
dimensions: 1) the relatively small but non-negotiable financial stake that
defines the relationship between accelerator and founders; 2) the intentional
composition of cohorts of companies in a compressed period of time, leading to
graduated classes, alumni, etc. and other features typical of an educational
program; 3) the potential for broad inclusion of STEM graduates in
entrepreneurial career paths facilitated by programmatic elements of the
accelerator experience; and 4) the direct integration of two key components of
the entrepreneurial ecosystem"serial entrepreneurs and venture capitalists"in
the crucial elements of selection, mentoring, and "demonstrating" viability of
concepts and ideas, and extension of this model to a range of industries. The
research generates novel metrics to analyze this emerging model of accelerated
early stage entrepreneurship. The data includes metrics on cohort participation,
founder education and experience, and new venture characteristics. Performance
metrics include the spectrum of possible outcomes: continuation through follow-
on funding by venture capital investors, acquisition, and decision to quit.
Insights from this research provide a broader framework for evaluating the
impact of early financing through accelerators on traditional performance
measures and allow innovation policymakers to direct critical early resources in
a more informed fashion.

Broader Impact The results of this research inform decision-making at multiple
levels?societal, policy making, accelerator level, and entrepreneurs--with wide-
reaching impact on increased economic competitiveness of the United States
through an understanding of where and how to direct financial and human capital
resources in support of new technology ventures. This research provides
analytics for decision-makers about the potential to complement existing
programs designed to spur STEM entrepreneurship, including the NSF I-Corps, and
programs through SBA and NIH. The project has broader impacts for assessing the
role of academic-industry partnerships between academia and industry in
accelerating STEM entrepreneurship. As well, this project has broader impacts on
the diversity of participants in entrepreneurial STEM careers and broader STEM
participation in the workplace.