* 1360660
* EAGER:   Evaluating the efficacy of the DSV-2 Alvin in scientific operations via a scientific verification cruise (SVC)
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2015
* Peter Girguis, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Midson
* 08/31/2015
* USD 137,276.00

HOV Alvin has undergone a major overhaul and upgrade, and has been out of
service since December, 2010. The upgrades include: a larger personnel sphere
with two additional viewports, which will be capable of diving to 6500m water
depth; improved lighting and imaging capability; improved command and control
systems; and, an increased science payload capacity. The vehicle is undergoing
reinstatement of certification by the Navy, Naval Sea Systems Command (NAVSEA).
Following certification, it will be important for the science community to
understand what the changes to the vehicle mean in terms of science support
capability, especially bottom time, integration with external sensors and
equipment, speed over ground, agility of manipulators, video quality, etc. This
award provides funding for a Science Verification Cruise. A team of experience
Alvin users will validate the present capabilities of the vehicle in a 10-12
dive program, after which a report will be made available to future Alvin users.

Planned dive assessments include: * Direct observations of the deep ocean and
seafloor to depths of up to 4500 m; * HD still and video imaging/documentation
of observations; * Systematic mapping/surveys of seabed and overlying water
column (with appropriate sensors); * Collection of materials and biomass at the
seafloor and in the overlying water column (with appropriate samplers); *
Placement/recovery of instruments and landers at the seafloor; * Efficient
Transit time that is scientifically useful between work sites; * Systematic
exploration of regions/habitats/organisms.

Targets dives include: San Diego Trough; Del Mar Methane Seep; OMZ bottom; La
Jolla Canyon; Santa Monica Fossil seep; Santa Monica Mounds North; and, Putative
hydrothermal venting (Palos Verdes). Personnel transfers are planned during the
cruise in order to accommodate as many diverse participants as possible.