* 1360763
* Language Documentation, Field-work Training Models, and Computational Tools for Understanding Linguistic Stability and Change
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2014,11/30/2019
* Jan Chomicki, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Joan Maling
* 11/30/2019
* USD 436,817.00

Proficiency in a shared language is needed for carrying out basic trade and
commerce as well as other social functions. Nevertheless, one can observe
established regional varieties at village, city, state, and country levels.
Jeffery Good from the State University of New York at Buffalo, seeks to explain
factors such as ethnicity, social class, gender, prestige, and region which help
maintain linguistic differences across language or dialect varieties. It is
important to know which factors might destabilize the linguistic balance in a
region as these same factors might also lead to other social instability.

Analyzing natural un-prompted language over a three-year period and
systematically linking language use to social situations and communication
networks, Good will seek explanations for persistent language maintenance,
change, or shift in highly multilingual communities of Sub-Saharan Africa,
specifically various Bantoid languages of the Lower Fungom region of the
Cameroon. Each language and dialect under study will be documented by local
scholars under the supervision of Good and his team. A new computational tool
will be developed to support data management for the vast quantities of raw
audio, video, and transcription and translation data gathered by local scholars
who will take part in the research. This aspect of the work will produce both
computational models and software resources for other documentary projects that
seek to employ large teams in data collection.