* 1360041
* Collaborative Research: Optimization of Remote Sensing Networks for Time-sensitive Detection of Fine Scale Damage to Critical Infrastructure
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Christopher Lippitt, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Robin L. Dillon-Merrill
* 08/31/2017
* USD 172,233.00

The focus of this study is on assessing damage to infrastructure following major
hazard events such as earthquakes, floods, hurricanes and wildfires. The premise
is that some infrastructure (e.g., bridges and hospitals), particularly in
cities, is so critical to saving human lives and supporting emergency response
actions that near real-time information on the damage status of such
infrastructure is essential and yet may be difficult to ascertain with
conventional, ground observations and sensor networks that may not be
functioning following a disaster. A potential solution to this post-hazard
information access challenge is to design and implement flexible, ready-to-
deploy, time-sensitive aerial imaging systems based on a small manned or
unmanned aircraft and commercially available digital cameras. The key is to
determine which infrastructure types are truly "critical" and then design and
pre-plan low-cost systems that meet maximum time to delivery and minimum damage
information reliability requirements of emergency managers. Aerial imagery from
before and after a hazard event are precisely aligned and then compared to
enable infrastructural damages to be detected, mapped and disseminated to
emergency managers in such a short amount of time that emergency response
actions can be taken to minimize loss of lives and
inconveniences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research components of this study
involve interviews and inquiries into emergency management information
requirements pertaining to critical infrastructure following disaster events, as
well as technical studies pertaining to the aerial imaging work flow. Emergency
managers will be surveyed to prioritize critical infrastructural features and
determine what types of damages they may be subjected to and how soon
information about such damage is needed in order to be appropriately responsive.
While a seemingly obvious first step, most aerial imaging technology studies and
implementations fail to take this step and when they do, fail to deal with the
time sensitivity of information delivery. The technical design of rapid-response
systems based on aerial imaging technology will be informed by the synthesis of
survey responses. Such systems involve flight planning, image capture,
processing, and analysis, and damage information delivery to emergency managers.
Incorporating wireless transfer of imagery and map products may be part of
optimizing this information flow. All of these components and the end-to-end
system will be evaluated in terms of their utility to the surveyed emergency
managers. Procedures for optimizing the time to delivery of damage information
while meeting minimum detail and precision requirements will be developed. These
procedures and a prototype end-to-end system will be tested for simulated events
involving emergency managers in New Mexico and California.