* 1360663
* Experimental Pragmatics: Advancing Theory and Method  Special Session at the 27th Annual CUNY Conference on Human Sentence Processing
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2014,07/31/2015
* Shari Speer, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 07/31/2015
* USD 34,608.00

Understanding how humans employ pragmatic principles to facilitate communication
is an important element in understanding human interaction. Research in
experimental pragmatics has shown marked recent theoretical progress. Current
work successfully models not only contextual influences from linguistic
structure and visually available context, but also factors such as the
interlocutors involved, the world knowledge available to them as individuals and
as they interact, and their mutually sustained beliefs and intentions. Recent
progress in the field can be linked to researchers' ability to leverage novel
methods, such as mining multi-interlocutor text interactions in social media,
web-crawling language produced and understood via electronic means such as
texting, internet blogs and other web-based platforms, and collecting data via
Mechanical Turk. These approaches have expanded the available testable
hypotheses as well as the diversity and representativeness of the language data
under study. Pragmatics theorists have also been particularly open to
incorporating insights from experimentally-generated results into developing
theories of language interpretation. The 27th Annual CUNY Human Sentence
Processing Conference, to be held in March 2014 at The Ohio State University in
Columbus, Ohio, will include a Special Session on Experimental Pragmatics that
aims to take stock of recent progress in this burgeoning sub-field and help to
set the agenda for future research in this domain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The core
of the special session is a series of invited talks by six prominent
researchers, diverse with respect to gender and academic seniority, with
relevant expertise. Together, the speakers represent a wide range of theoretical
and methodological approaches (corpus linguistics as well as experimental
studies; language acquisition as well as adult processing; speech perception as
well as the processing of quantifiers and anaphora). The special session
promises to provide a fuller understanding of the operation of pragmatic
influences and their interaction with other aspects of linguistic competence and
performance that we believe will lead to a more realistic and representative
picture of how the human mind represents and processes language.