* 1360561
* SNM:  Scalable Manufacturing of Unique Hexaboride Nanomaterials for Advanced Energy Generation and Gas Storage Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2013,06/30/2018
* Olivia Graeve, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 06/30/2018
* USD 1,101,522.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: The goal of this project is to explore the scalable
manufacturing and fundamental behavior of unique nanoscale boride materials for
applications in several industrially-relevant and critical technologies, with a
special emphasis on energy generation and gas storage applications. This project
focuses on two novel and complementary processing techniques for the continuous
and scaled manufacturing of boride materials (solution combustion synthesis for
production of the boride powders and spark plasma sintering for consolidation of
the powders), as well as on fundamental studies that can eliminate critical
roadblocks during scale-up for the eventual manufacturability of these advanced
materials. The project involves the participation of community college students,
as well as collaborations with industrial
partners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: The purpose of this project is
the creation, rational design, optimization, and scaled manufacturing of boride
nanomaterials at a variety of length scales, from atomic level grain boundary
engineering to macroscopic physical behavior of these materials. It is an
integrated effort that will fuse theoretical and modeling approaches to recent
experimental developments in materials processing, including solution combustion
synthesis and spark plasma sintering. This project is the first study to (i)
scale the combustion synthesis process for the production of boride
nanomaterials, (ii) design and implement a process for the continuous
manufacturing of bulk specimens by spark plasma sintering, (iii) optimize the
diffusion behavior and gas storage capacity of a variety of hexaboride compounds
in electric fields, and (iv) combine experimental work with molecular modeling
techniques to study the diffusion of ions and gases in
hexaborides.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project on Scalable Nanomanufacturing
(SNM) is co-funded by the Mathematical and Physical Sciences (MPS) and
Engineering (ENG) Directorates.