* 1360446
* WSC-Category 3 Collaborative: America's Water - The Changing Landscape of Risk, Competing Demands and Climate
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Upmanu Lall, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 07/31/2019
* USD 2,489,186.00

Recent droughts in Texas, the Midwest and California have brought the increasing
competition for water between agriculture, energy production, industry, human
use and the environment into focus as a critical economic and sustainability
issue for America. This project will assess the sustainability of water in
America in the face of changing climate, new energy choices and technologies,
economic and agricultural trends. It will explore how water dependent sectors
affect and interact with the rest of the economy, and provide a conceptual
framework to inform public and private decision making on water allocation,
infrastructure development and regional investments in water intensive economic
activities. Mathematical and statistical models will be developed that highlight
water risks across the country, provide information on the trends of past and
future water withdrawals and availability, and help identify where particular
cropping patterns, energy development, and water infrastructure may result under
a specific climate, economic and water allocation scenario, and how this
configuration may perform during sustained periods of droughts and floods.

The project will first assess the state of water use and how the variations in
climate, energy development and economics over the last century have influenced
changes in water use and its valuation across the continental USA. This
assessment will look at changes in climate statistics, surface water
availability and quality, pricing structure, water rights and compacts, supply
augmentation and storage development, access to groundwater, energy costs,
economic factors, conservation initiatives, and environmental concerns in the
context of changes in water use patterns. The assessment will also measure of
water risk as it relates to the geographic distribution of water use and supply,
and the driving economic factors. The project will then develop an interactive
modeling environment for envisioning the future evolution of water use and
supply. This will consider the capacity expansion of water and energy
infrastructure, potential re-allocation of cropping patterns, relative to
climate, energy and economic scenarios, and prescribed water rights and
allocation mechanisms and ecological needs over a 50 year or longer horizon. The
project will evaluate possible market and policy-driven adaptation strategies
for water sustainability at a national scale to climate, economic, and energy
scenarios, while considering needs for investment in new infrastructure,
conservation, and potential shifts in crops and energy use that may be induced
by regional water supply constraints.