* 1360209
* Collaborative Research: The Private and Social Returns to R&D in the Age of Offshoring
* SBE,SMA
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2018
* Stephen Yeaple, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Cassidy Sugimoto
* 04/30/2018
* USD 306,359.00

As firms' supply chains have become highly complex and geographically fragmented
it has encouraged the offshoring of manufacturing activities previously carried
out within the United States. What are the implications of the recent surge in
offshoring for the rate to innovation? There are several reasons to expect that
offshoring might affect it negatively. If formal Research & Development (R&D)
efforts and informal knowledge generated through the use of technology are
complements in innovation, the geographic separation of R&D and production will
slow down innovation. Moreover, if knowledge spills over between physically
proximate plants, one firm's production location and R&D decisions will affect
the rate of innovation of other firms. Intellectual Merit: To assess the
magnitude of these effects, this project uses microdata from the last 15 years
collected in the Census of Manufactures and the Annual Survey of Manufacturing
to examine firm responses to the reduction in costs of offshoring caused by
China?s entry into the World Trade Organization (WTO). First, the impact of U.S.
offshoring on firms' returns on R&D is quantified by contrasting the innovation
trajectories of purely domestic U.S. firms with those that decided to offshore
after China's entry into the World Trade Organization. Second, the effect of
offshoring on the social return to innovation in the United States is analyzed.
Geography constrains the movement of labor, goods, and knowledge, a fact that
often leads to the clustering of production at particular locations. As a
consequence, if one firm suddenly withdraws production from U.S. factories it
could affect other U.S. firms; as these firms respond the effects may be
magnified to economy-wide proportions. By going beyond the narrow private
effects of offshoring, this work gets at the "offshoring multiplier", which
captures the total impact on U.S. productivity and innovation caused by
offshoring.

Broader Impact: This research puts hard numbers to the claim that offshoring has
weakened U.S. innovation by measuring directly the impact of offshoring on the
private return to R&D. The results are essential for the formation of
manufacturing and trade policies. In particular, if the impact of offshoring on
the social returns to R&D is large, as many have claimed, it suggests the need
to coordinate the incentives for R&D with incentives for local over foreign
production in order to maximize the feedback effects from knowledge spillovers.
The project will also contribute to scientific workforce development through the
training of graduate research assistants who will gain first hand knowledge of
underutilized data sources and techniques and will help to support newly
established Census Research Data Centers in State College, PA, and Boulder, CO.