* 1360207
* Collaborative Research: The Private and Social Returns to R&amp;D in the Age of Offshoring
* SBE,SMA
* 05/01/2014,09/30/2020
* Wolfgang Keller, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Joshua Trapani
* 09/30/2020
* USD 277,000.00

As firms' supply chains have become highly complex and geographically fragmented
it has encouraged the offshoring of manufacturing activities previously carried
out within the United States. What are the implications of the recent surge in
offshoring for the rate to innovation? There are several reasons to expect that
offshoring might affect it negatively. If formal Research &amp; Development
(R&amp;D) efforts and informal knowledge generated through the use of technology
are complements in innovation, the geographic separation of R&amp;D and
production will slow down innovation. Moreover, if knowledge spills over between
physically proximate plants, one firm's production location and R&amp;D
decisions will affect the rate of innovation of other firms.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;To assess the magnitude of these
effects, this project uses microdata from the last 15 years collected in the
Census of Manufactures and the Annual Survey of Manufacturing to examine firm
responses to the reduction in costs of offshoring caused by China?s entry into
the World Trade Organization (WTO). First, the impact of U.S. offshoring on
firms' returns on R&amp;D is quantified by contrasting the innovation
trajectories of purely domestic U.S. firms with those that decided to offshore
after China's entry into the World Trade Organization. Second, the effect of
offshoring on the social return to innovation in the United States is analyzed.
Geography constrains the movement of labor, goods, and knowledge, a fact that
often leads to the clustering of production at particular locations. As a
consequence, if one firm suddenly withdraws production from U.S. factories it
could affect other U.S. firms; as these firms respond the effects may be
magnified to economy-wide proportions. By going beyond the narrow private
effects of offshoring, this work gets at the "offshoring multiplier", which
captures the total impact on U.S. productivity and innovation caused by
offshoring. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: &lt;br/&gt;This research puts
hard numbers to the claim that offshoring has weakened U.S. innovation by
measuring directly the impact of offshoring on the private return to R&amp;D.
The results are essential for the formation of manufacturing and trade policies.
In particular, if the impact of offshoring on the social returns to R&amp;D is
large, as many have claimed, it suggests the need to coordinate the incentives
for R&amp;D with incentives for local over foreign production in order to
maximize the feedback effects from knowledge spillovers. The project will also
contribute to scientific workforce development through the training of graduate
research assistants who will gain first hand knowledge of underutilized data
sources and techniques and will help to support newly established Census
Research Data Centers in State College, PA, and Boulder, CO.