* 1360565
* SusChEM/EAGER: Novel Glass and Glass-Ceramics from Organic Waste
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Ivan Cornejo, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 05/31/2015
* USD 100,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: A recent discovery at the Colorado Center for
Advanced Ceramics in the Department of Metallurgical and Materials Engineering
has demonstrated that commercial and new multicomponent glass can be made
entirely from food or agricultural wastes with promising physical and chemical
properties. This represents one of the first demonstrations of making glasses
and glass-ceramics from unusual and sustainable mineral sources. The global
production of new glass (excluding recycled cullet (recycled broken or waste
glass)) is about 100 million tons, with flat glass accounting for approximately
55 million of these metric tons. Flat glass is typically ~70 wt.% silica, and so
using these figures, it can be calculated that 36.4 million metric tons of
silica is needed to satisfy the global demand. Concurrently one can consider the
worldwide production of the main three grains consumed by humans in 2011 was
2,173 million tons worldwide. These grains (of rice, wheat, and corn) produce
waste in the form of husks, stems, and cobs, and they are about one fifth of the
total production by weight. This figure amounts to about 435 million tons of
waste, which will on average be 15% silica. Therefore, using these figures, 65
million tons of silica could have been harvested from these three waste streams
alone. This project will explore the feasibility of using these organic waste
streams to make glass. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: The research
project addresses the following objectives: 1) understanding the physical and
chemical properties of these novel glasses, 2) examining the advantages, if any,
these glasses have over those produced with mined minerals, and 3) expanding
this approach to other material systems such as glass-ceramics and ceramics. A
post-doctoral associate is working closely with Dr. Cornejo in each of the
steps. Initially, they are creating a catalog of minerals suitable for glass
formation from food/agricultural waste. From suitable precursor materials,
glasses that are chemically identical to commercial glasses are being
synthesized. The resulting surface properties are being characterized using
techniques such as X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and atomic force
microscopy (AFM). Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) and confocal Raman microscopy
are being used to ascertain the structure and chemistry of both bulk and
surfaces. Finally, the optical, chemical, and mechanical properties of these
glasses are being compared to existing commercial glasses of the same chemical
composition to establish potential differences and similarities.