* 1360789
* Criticality and Order in Quantum Matter
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Subir Sachdev, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2017
* USD 420,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY This award supports fundamental theoretical research in
condensed matter physics with the aim to advance understanding of electronic
states of matter, the result of electrons in materials acting in concert to
organize themselves to exhibit for example forms of magnetism, and
superconductivity. The collective behavior of electrons in crystals is governed
by the same principles of quantum mechanics which also determine the orbits of a
single electron in a hydrogen atom. In a crystal, the quantum theory of many
electrons implies the appearance of novel ways electrons organize themselves.
The PI will investigate these novel types of order. Prominent among these is the
appearance of high temperature superconductivity, the ability of electrons to
conduct electricity without resistance even at temperatures above the boiling
point of liquid nitrogen. Experiments have revealed additional types of order,
some of which were predicted in the PI's early work, involving periodic
modulations in the density of the electrons. In this project, the PI will study
the interplay between multiple possible ways electrons can organize themselves.
Research will be done in close contact with experimental research groups around
the world. The existence of multiple kinds of order also opens up the
possibility of a "quantum phase transition" in which there is a collective
change in the quantum mechanical states of many electrons. The PI aims to relate
the properties of quantum phase transitions to temperature dependencies of
various properties observed in experiments. The theoretical research, in
combination with experimental observations, is expected to lead to a deeper
understanding of the structure of quantum matter. The understanding of new
states of matter contributes fundamental knowledge that can lead to new
technologies, for example new electronic devices and low loss power
transmission. The research will be coupled with public lectures, articles in
popular science journals, lectures at schools for advanced students. The
research will be conducted by a group of students and postdoctoral fellows drawn
from institutions around the world.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award supports fundamental theoretical research on competing order, quantum
phase transitions, and superconductivity. X-ray scattering experiments on the
cuprate high temperature superconductors have exposed a regime where
superconductivity competes with fluctuating 'charge' order, consistent with the
PIs predictions. The PI has since developed a more comprehensive model of such
behavior, and will investigate its consequences over wide regimes of
temperatures, electron densities, and non-equilibrium time scales. Another set
of experiments on the pnictide superconductors have clearly identified the
importance of a quantum phase transition involving the onset of
'antiferromagnetic' order. The PI and collaborators have developed new field-
theoretic and quantum Monte Carlo methods to investigate quantum phase
transitions, and will use them to understand and predict physical properties
near the critical point. The methods and analyses will also be applied to
similar experimentally relevant issues in bilayer graphene, optical lattices of
ultra-cold atoms, and to atomic systems strongly coupled to optical cavities.
The research will lead to deeper insights into the phase structures of quantum
systems with multiple possible ordering instabilities. New methods, analytic and
numeric, are being developed to understand strongly-coupled quantum critical
points, and these will help understand the regimes of quantum criticality found
in numerous quantum materials. A unified understanding is expected for many
classes of quantum materials, in close contact with many experimental studies.
The research will be coupled with public lectures, articles in popular science
journals, and lectures at schools for advanced students. The research will be
conducted by a group of students and postdoctoral fellows drawn from
institutions around the world.