* 1360205
* Impacts of Greater Public Accessibility to Federally Funded Research Publications: Evidence from the NIH Public Access Policy
* SBE,SMA
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2018
* Zhen Lei, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Cassidy Sugimoto
* 05/31/2018
* USD 619,768.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;With greater public access, scientific articles are
expected to reach a broader audience, generating a broader scope of creativity
and inspiration and likely leading to more and faster follow-on research. This
project empirically investigates the effects of greater public accessibility to
scientific publications resulting from federally funded research on knowledge
flow and diffusion in both academic and industrial research. The project focuses
on the National Institutes of Health (NIH) Public Access Policy, effective in
April 2008, that requires NIH awardees to make peer-reviewed publications
resulting from NIH-funded research publically available free of charge in PubMed
Central (PMC) within twelve months after the original publication. Employing
expertise in economics, computer sciences and the biosciences, this research
analyzes changes in (1) paper citation networks to uncover the impacts of the
NIH policy on knowledge diffusion in academic research, and (2) heterogeneous
paper and patent citation networks to understand the effects of the policy on
industrial research. The project proposes and verifies various measures of
degree, breadth and speed of knowledge flow on citation networks, and develops
novel citation network growth models that are useful for policy scenario
analyses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The White House Office
of Science and Technology Policy (OSTP) recently issued a memorandum to Federal
agencies with more than $100 million in research and development expenditure,
directing them to develop plans to increase public accessibility to results and
data of federally-funded research. Some other governments have implemented or
considered similar policies. This research sheds urgently-needed empirical
lights on whether such policies are likely to achieve the overarching goals
including accelerating the progress of science, spurring innovation and
stimulating economic growth. It provides empirical results and insights for
"evidence-based" policy making on this important science and innovation policy.
The analytical frameworks, methodologies and algorithms developed in this
project are valuable for evaluation of similar or related policy initiatives in
the future.