* 1360987
* Collaborative Research: Impacts of Prior Work Experience on Adult, Non-traditional, Engineering Students
* ENG,EEC
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2018
* Maria-Isabel Carnasciali, University of New Haven
* Standard Grant
* Julie Martin
* 05/31/2018
* USD 292,145.00

This project aims to create new pathways for non-traditional engineering
students by examining the role of prior work experiences, identity, and
expertise. By applying the theoretical framework of multiple identities, this
work collects and analyzes qualitative and quantitative data from traditional
and non-traditional engineering undergraduate students at three diverse
institutes of higher education: a large public university (U. C. Berkeley), a
small private university (University of New Haven), and a community college
(Ca√±ada College). The primary research question being addressed is: How does
prior engineering-related work experience impact engineering student identity
and approach to engineering study? This is investigated through a systematic
mixed-methods approach combining semi-structured interviews, think-aloud
protocols, surveys, and the collection of persistence data.

The study provides critical insights to enable engineering educators to be more
effective in their educational efforts, and makes substantial contributions to
our understanding of engineering identities and understanding of students'
abilities and thinking processes. By filling gaps in current understanding of
the identities, level of expertise, and experiences of these students, the study
aims to improve persistence outcomes for engineering students and increase the
number of qualified engineering graduates. The results help build and diversify
STEM education by reaching out to and increasing the retention of older students
which include females and underrepresented minorities. The partnership between
the small private university, the large state institution, and the community
college maximize opportunities for widespread integration and dissemination of
findings, and strengthen pathways for non-traditional students. This work
supports efforts to expose all engineering students to obtain work
experience/internships and help encourage the current workforce to pursue a
degree. The PIs plan to offer several regional workshops and webinars to broadly
disseminate the findings and make the data collected easily available to
academic advisors, especially at community colleges or those working with
transfer students; veterans' affairs groups, college admissions, enrollment
management, and recruiting officers; engineering faculty and administration; and
engineering student leaders.