* 1360635
* Self-assembling Quasi-crystals from DNA Tiles
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Hao Yan, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 08/31/2018
* USD 390,000.00

Non-technical: This award by the Biomaterials Program in the Division of
Materials Research to Arizona State University will use DNA nanostructures to
study how quasi-crystals form. Quasi-crystals are structures that exhibit long-
range order but are not periodic. In 2011 the Nobel Prize in chemistry was
awarded to a scientist who discovered a type of crystal so unique that it
completely changed the way that we view solid matter. That the discovery of
quasi-crystals has led to a paradigm shift in material science is an
understatement. Most crystals are precise three dimensional arrangements of
atoms that repeat infinitely in a very ordered way. However, quasi-crystals are
unlike other crystals; they have perfectly ordered infinite patterns that never
repeat. As a result of their unique arrangement, quasicrystalline materials have
special properties that have found use in everyday objects such as turbine
blades, non-stick frying pans, and surgical instruments and LED lights. This
grant supports research to construct self-assembled quasi-crystal materials from
DNA nanostructures. The PIs will use DNA nanostructures to study how
quasicrystals form, and how their structure leads to unique and useful
properties and behavior. This information will ultimately be used to create new
and useful biomaterials for a variety of applications. This research will have
societal implications beyond the obvious value to basic scientific discovery -
it will create opportunities to engage undergraduate, graduate, and
underrepresented minority students to participate in cutting edge research and
innovation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: This grant supports research to
construct self-assembling quasi-crystal materials using rationally designed DNA
nanostructures. Quasi-crystals are structures that exhibit long-range order but
are not periodic. Despite the unique and potentially useful properties that are
likely to emerge, after three decades of research very little is known about
synthetic and naturally occurring quasicrystals or the mechanism of their
formation. The creation of artificial DNA quasi-crystals will enable the
discovery of the quasi-crystal growth mechanisms, and provide a novel platform
to organize functional materials that display unique properties and collective
behavior. This platform will allow the PIs to reach a level of structural
complexity that does not exist in nature, thus creating unprecedented
opportunities for engineering novel biomaterials. This project will create new
cutting edge research opportunities for undergraduate, graduate, and
underrepresented minority students and present summer research opportunities for
local high school students and teachers through full-scale online mass-
mentorship in mathematics, science, engineering and technology.