* 1360013
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Science of Science and Innovation Policy: Understanding the Impact of Sources of Inspiration in Creative Design: The Role of Conceptual Distance
* SBE,SMA
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2016
* Christian Schunn, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Maryann Feldman
* 05/31/2016
* USD 15,261.00

Innovation fundamentally begins with a good idea. But where do good ideas come
from? Much research suggests that innovative breakthroughs are often inspired by
past experience: things and ideas that one has interacted with in the world.
However, the same experiences that can inspire innovation can also can constrain
or harm innovation through focus on previously unsuccessful solutions. This
project tests principles for guiding interactions with sources of inspiration to
maximize their benefits and minimize their pitfalls. In particular, it focuses
on the role of conceptual distance of sources. The following questions are the
focus of this work: 1) Are good ideas built mainly on sources that are closely
related to the problem (e.g., building on existing recycling efforts to address
the problem of people throwing away electronics), or are they most often
inspired by sources that are from distantly related domains (e.g., being
inspired by how burrs cling to a dog's fur when designing Velcro)? 2) When
considering multiple sources, should one try to ensure that the sources are
similar to each other (i.e., deeply exploring one direction), or should one
consider diverse sources? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;Innovation researchers and practitioners have formulated
recommendations for these questions, but the scientific evidence for these
recommendations is incomplete because it is based on small numbers of case
studies or involved toy problems solved much more quickly than real-world
problems. This project expands and improves the evidence base for understanding
the sources of innovation by analyzing thousands of solutions to complex
innovation challenges (e.g., increasing accessibility in elections, revitalizing
struggling urban areas) posted on an online crowd-sourced innovation platform
that required contributors to post sources of ideas. To analyze this evidence,
it combines computer algorithms for automatically processing the content of text
along with statistical algorithms for extracting meaning across thousands of
ideas. The quality of the ideas are coded by experts for quality and novelty,
and then the algorithms are used to statistically test the relationship between
both source distance and source variety on ideation success.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The results of this work will
have immediate implications for scientific theories of innovation, and are
relevant to the design of systems for creating new innovations (e.g., online
crowd-sourced innovation platforms, creativity support systems and methods).
Further, the novel methods employed in this work, as well as the data generated,
will be shared with other innovation researchers to facilitate more and better
investigations into the science of how innovation happens. Ultimately, this work
contributes to a solid scientific research base that can support innovators
(both existing and aspiring) and policy makers in their efforts to address the
most pressing and difficult problems facing the world today.