* 1360442
* WSC-Category 3 Collaborative:   Designing Robust and Adaptive Water Management Strategies in Regions Transitioning from Abundance to Scarcity
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Andrew Yates, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 07/31/2019
* USD 1,701,235.00

The Southeastern US faces a transition from water abundance to water scarcity
due to population growth, economic expansion, and limits on new water supply
development. Yet, the Southeast is not prepared for this transition because
existing management systems are poorly suited for coping scarcity. Climate
change will likely exacerbate this situation, especially if its effects are
amplified by urbanization and changing land use. Consequently, Southeast
communities must consider a wider range of supply and demand management
alternatives. Unfortunately, there is little guidance for how potential
solutions can be effectively coordinated. A portfolio approach to integrating a
diverse array of water supply assets and demand management measures offers
considerable promise, but this approach must consider not only the technical and
economic realities of water management, but also the behavior of decision
makers. Given that water-related investments have substantial environmental and
social implications, improving their effectiveness in the face of growth and
climatic uncertainty is a critically important task. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will be the first to comprehensively assess and improve methods by which
decision makers can design strategies to reconcile their multiple, and often
conflicting, objectives (e.g. more conservation vs. lower utility revenues). A
simulation-based framework will be used to design adaptive regional portfolios
with broad relevance to regions in transition. This framework will combine
physical models that analyze how climate change and land use trends impact
hydrology with engineering, financial, and behavioral models. This work will
also involve close interactions with decision makers, including assessments of
their attitudes toward supply and financial risk, how these attitudes impact
choices, and tools for mitigating risk. Additionally, the proposed research will
contribute a computational platform that can serve as a template for adaptive
water management, exposing regional tradeoffs, interdependencies and
vulnerabilities. This project will leverage existing relationships with
utilities and local governments to develop constructive learning feedbacks
between the research team and decision makers, an element that will lead to
strategies that are both practical and theoretically sound.