* 1360637
* Symposium on Indigenous Rights and Workshop on Collaboration and Comparative Research in the North Pacific
* OPP,ARC
* 12/15/2013,11/30/2015
* David Koester, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 11/30/2015
* USD 33,161.00

This award to supports the travel expenses for 11 US based Arctic scholars to
participate in a 3 day symposium/workshop that will take place from January
11-13th, 2014 at the National Museum of Ethnology, Senri Expo Park, Osaka,
Japan. The main goals of the workshop are 1) to present current research on the
status of indigenous rights in the North Pacific Region; 2) to facilitate
discussions on collaborations and comparative research in the region; 3) to open
a discussion on the creation of a North Pacific social science association that
could facilitate scientific exchanges and scholarship in the region. The meeting
strategy is to invite a set of scholars who cover a range of geographic,
cultural and theoretical research areas and who have strong research experience
working with indigenous communities; 4 of the scholars are indigenous people
themselves. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop is a unique opportunity for
building collaborations between the US and the Japanese social science community
that will support research on the Pacific Rim. The Pacific Rim region is of
great interest to arctic social science because of its long history of east/west
connections (dating back over 14,000 years) combined with its rapidly changing
social and cultural systems affected by pressures from globalizing economies to
climate change. Rarely have US and Japanese social scientists collaborated on
scholarship in what is a region of great mutual interest to each; this workshop
will provide that opportunity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;