* 1360188
* Collaborative Research: Models and Analyses of Industrial Laboratories: Returns, Risks, and Structural Efficiency, with Implications for Sustainability and Science Policy
* SBE,SMA
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2019
* Qiong Wang, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Cassidy Sugimoto
* 04/30/2019
* USD 261,968.00

During the past century, industrial laboratories, as exemplified by Bell Labs,
DuPont Research, IBM Research and Xerox PARC, have made lasting contributions to
scientific knowledge and technological innovations, which have benefited
society, our nation's economy and the lives of its citizens. Industrial
laboratories are integral to a feedback loop that couples them with engineering
and business practices, with the result that researchers in the laboratories
benefit from streams of new questions and challenges from the field in one
direction, while solutions, prototypes and products flow in the opposite
direction. This environment defines use-inspired research that complements ?open
science? research performed in academic institutions. While recent experience
may justifiably raise doubts on the survivability of industrial research
laboratories in the current highly-competitive market environment, there are
also encouraging signs: laboratories that experienced major declines are now
focusing on revitalizing themselves, while newer players have arrived and are
pioneering new models of industrial research. It is therefore timely to take a
deep and broad look at how science and innovation policies can foster an
environment in which industrial laboratories will continue to produce
discoveries and inventions with broad scientific value and transformative
technological impact.

Intellectual Merit

This project will develop our understanding of the operation of industrial
laboratories by taking an "engineering-oriented" approach that employs
analytical models and quantitative methods to systematically dissect and analyze
the essential features of operation, financing, and growth of industrial
laboratories and draw conclusions by carrying out logic experiments that vary
policy inputs and examine their impact. In particular, the research will
concentrate on three areas: 1) develop and solve an optimization problem to
determine the theoretical rate of return of the investment in industrial
research that can be used to identify principles for optimizing laboratory
management and make conditional assessments regarding the viability of the
laboratories; 2) analyze the investment risk of financing industrial
laboratories, study the interaction between investment and operational
decisions, and identify investment strategies that provide much-needed long-term
stability for laboratories to engage in fundamental research; and 3) determine
how laboratory management structure affects incentive, scale of operations, and
research outputs by conducting comparative studies between the traditional
integrated sequential structure and newly emerging structures of industrial
research management.

Broader Impacts The project will provide new insights that will help industrial
laboratories to improve and re-invent themselves by creating the tools
laboratory managers require to adopt better organizational structures, manage
the financial risk of investing in the laboratory, and maximize the rate of
return. The project will inform policymakers about the impact of Science policy,
and other types of policy, e.g., financial regulation, on laboratory investments
and operations. Finally, while the analysis is carried out at the level of
laboratories, the insights and results from comparisons between the traditional
vertically-integrated structure and newly emerging structures will carry-over
from industrial laboratories to the discussion on the national innovation
ecosystem, especially in relation to the trade-offs in coordination cost, focus
of incentives, ability to conduct fundamental research, and investment
mechanisms.