* 1360969
* Sum frequency studies of liquid interfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* Kenneth Eisenthal, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 07/31/2018
* USD 663,981.00

In this award, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms A
(CSDM-A) Program of the Division of Chemistry, Professor Kenneth Eisenthal of
Columbia University and his post-doctoral and graduate student colleagues are
investigating the interactions of biomolecules at interfaces. The ultimate goal
of the work by Professor Eisenthal and his group is to develop a better
understanding of the physics and chemistry of biomolecules interacting with
other molecules. Research like this could lead to better way of measuring the
strength of interactions between biomolecules and drugs and other biomolecules.
Young researchers working in Prof. Eisenthal's laboratory will be trained for
jobs in the technical workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prof. Eisenthal and his
group are carrying out experiments using non-linear spectroscopic methods to
investigate the behavior of biomolecules at microparticle interfaces including:
(1) measurement of binding constants for small molecules with DNA; (2) measuring
the relative orientation of small molecules bound to the same DNA; (3) studying
the deformation of DNA induced by netropsin binding; (4) studying the plasmonic
enhancement of secondharmonic generation for biomolecular studies. Prof.
Eisenthal educates and mentors the young scientists in his laboratory, who go on
to positions in academia, industry and the country's National Laboratories.