* 1360632
* Documenting the languages of Manipur: Clues to the prehistory of Sino-Tibetan languages
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2014,09/30/2020
* Scott DeLancey, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 09/30/2020
* USD 312,722.00

Understanding how linguistic systems develop over time provides important clues
to human cognition and history. Critical information on this topic must be
obtained from endangered languages before they are lost forever. Scott Delancey
and Linda Konnereth of the University of Oregon will document Monsang, one of 14
closely related languages each spoken by fewer than 10,000 speakers in the
Northeast Indian state of Manipur. The resulting audio and video documentation
will be analyzed to create a grammatical description of Monsang.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Comparing the Monsang data with other related languages in
the region will help to build an accurate picture of the development of Kuki-
Chin, the language subgroup to which they belong. It has recently been
discovered that these languages preserve ancient elements from the ancestral
Proto-Sino-Tibetan language which have been lost in all of the neighboring
languages. A better knowledge and understanding of these archaic features will
contribute greatly to our understanding of the prehistory and origins of the
Sino-Tibetan languages, which include Tibetan, Burmese, and Chinese. The work
will be done in collaboration with a local language preservation organization
which was formed last year to encourage the documentation and preservation of
languages spoken in southeast Manipur. Data will be archived and made freely
accessible from the Endangered Languages Archive.