* 1360659
* Symposium on Frontiers of Fluid Dynamics-A Legacy to be held in San Juan, Puerto Rico on November 1-3, 2013.
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2014
* Luciano Castillo, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Dimitrios Papavassiliou
* 09/30/2014
* USD 15,000.00

PI: Castillo, Luciano &lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1360659&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
Texas Tech University &lt;br/&gt;Title: Symposium on Frontiers of Fluid
Dynamics-A Legacy&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Symposium on Frontiers of Fluid
Dynamics-A Legacy will be held in San Juan, Puerto Rico during November 1 - 3,
2013 at the Ritz Carlton Hotel. This event will have the participation of world-
class experts in fluid dynamics with focus on applications related to medicine,
turbulence and energy. Sessions will begin on Friday morning, November 1st and
continue through noon on Sunday, November 3rd. The symposium will include short
talks (15 minutes talk, plus 5 minutes for questions) by world-class scientists,
and poster presentations. An informal format will be established for the
delivery of lectures to promote discussions that can eventually lead to
collaborations. It is expected that follow up meetings will continue during
subsequent years and joint-funded projects between USA institutions and other
participants (industry, academia and national labs) will lead to research
advances.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Symposium objectives include: (i) To promote
international collaborations between the United States, Europe and Australia;
(ii) Identify pressing questions on fluid dynamics related to medicine, energy
(particularly, wind energy) and turbulence; (iii) Promote technology transfer by
means of collaborations with industry (iv) To demonstrate the connection between
fundamental knowledge with applications in wind energy and medicine; (v) To
promote graduate studies for underrepresented students in the area of wind
energy and turbulence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;As the
world faces high prices for a finite fossil fuel supply and growing concerns
about climate change, alternate sources of energy are becoming more attractive.
The development of renewable energy technologies is threatened by an
insufficient number of students seeking graduate studies in multidisciplinary
science and engineering fields. In addition, completing their studies with the
knowledge and leadership skills needed in a global economy is also crucial. To
address these challenges, the team, composed of USA and international
institutions, will conduct a series of presentations/discussions related to
fluid dynamics in emerging critical areas on wind energy and medicine. This
activity will consist of lectures, informal group discussions, and poster
sessions. Furthermore, the symposium will aim to have more than 30% of
participants to be students from underrepresented groups.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;The quality of the lectures is
expected to be such that a permanent record and dissemination of the material
through archival publications can be created. This would be a valuable
contribution to the scientific community at large, since the conference
presenters will also focus on future research directions. The presentations and
the conference material will become available on the website of the symposium
(www.nwrcevents.com), and will also be documented through journal publications.
Knowledge gained from this symposium will improve the quality of the instruction
and research of institutions in Puerto Rico and will, indeed, provide
international opportunities to students and participants. The experience gained
from this event will have a positive impact in training scientists/engineers,
including underrepresented students.