* 1360645
* RAPID:   Complementary Organic Aerosol Measurements of Marine Aerosol on the R/V Knorr during the Western Atlantic Climate Study 2014 (WACS2)
* GEO,AGS
* 12/01/2013,11/30/2015
* Lynn Russell, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 11/30/2015
* USD 200,000.00

This project will test the following hypotheses as part of Western Atlantic
Climate Study 2014 (WACS2), a campaign sponsored by the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration (NOAA): (1) The composition of primary marine organic
aerosol closely tracks the source seawater, and (2) The seawater composition
varies with the biotic components of the surface waters, for which sea surface
temperature is a better proxy than chlorophyll. The purpose of this project is
to assess how ocean biogeochemistry impacts sea spray particles. The principal
investigator will measure in situ surface seawater parameters in both high and
low productivity waters. These measurements will be used to characterize freshly
emitted ocean-derived sea spray aerosol particles, ambient marine-region
aerosol, and surface ocean organic material for assessing their relationship to
ocean-derived sea spray aerosol particles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Innovative
measurement techniques to be used in project include a newly modified aerosol
impactor that can be directly compared to aerosol and CCN measurements being
made by other colleagues participating in the project. In addition, there will
be side-by-side deployment of a HR-ToF-AMS operated at high temperatures (for
measurements of refractory NaCl), and a high resolution Soot Particle Aerosol
Mass Spectrometer (for measuring black carbon). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will study the relationship of ambient marine-region aerosol and surface
ocean organic material to assess their relationship to ocean-derived sea spray
aerosol particles. Ocean-derived particles can impact the Earth's radiation
budget by altering cloud properties (such as albedo) and cloud lifetime and
extent. Characterization of the properties of these particles in their freshly
emitted state is needed for accurate model calculations of their impact on
climate.