* 1360361
* Decision-Centric Foundations for Modeling and Analysis of Complex Networked Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Daniel Delaurentis, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Rich Malak
* 08/31/2018
* USD 425,466.00

The research objective of this award is to establish foundational techniques for
modeling and analyzing the evolutionary dynamics of complex networked systems in
terms of node-level agents' decisions. The research objective will be achieved
through an integration of discrete-choice random-utility theory and network
science-based approaches to model the evolutionary characteristics of complex
networked systems. The research plan consists of three parts: a) inferring
agents' unobserved payoffs from network structure data, b) inferring agents'
unobserved payoffs in strategic interaction scenarios, and c) determining ways
to improve network performance by influencing node-level decisions. Specific
examples of complex networked systems, including air-transportation networks and
autonomous system level Internet, will be used for validation. The research will
result in novel approaches to model network evolution resulting from decisions
made by independent or competing entities, and to evaluate mechanisms for
steering the evolution towards higher performance, such as robustness to node
failure and targeted attacks.

The results of this research hold promise for accurate system performance
prediction, and for forecasting how the complex networked systems would evolve
in the future. The resulting approaches would enable the development of better
surrogate models of networks for efficient design of processes and protocols on
networked systems. The approaches will also enable policy and incentive design
to guide the restructuring of existing networks for improved performance. The
outcomes of the research will be integrated into graduate and undergraduate
courses. The results will be disseminated through industrial partners, policy
makers, open-source software tools, journal publications and conference
presentations.