* 1360863
* Crystal Growth of Lanthanide Intermetallics with Competing Magnetic Interactions
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Julia Chan, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 08/31/2017
* USD 275,000.00

Nontechnical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;With support from the Solid State and Materials
Chemistry program in the Division of Materials Research, the primary focus of
this proposal is to grow single crystals of lanthanide intermetallics with
unusual magnetic and electrical properties for energy applications. The growth
of single crystals is necessary to determine properties of novel magnetic
materials. This is motivated by understanding unusual magnetism thereby
decreasing our dependence on critical elements. The single crystal growth
aspects of this proposal will enable students involved in the project to
determine and characterize the structures of new materials and elucidate
intrinsic properties of the new compounds. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to discover and grow high quality
single crystals of intermetallics for magnetic, electrical, and transport
applications, in particular compounds with unusual ground states and competing
magnetic interactions. Several classes of materials containing lanthanide, mid-
transition metals, and Group 13-14 elements are proposed. The research team will
synthesize compounds adopting the CaCo2Al8 structure type and determine the
structural stability of LnMxGa3, Ln4MGa12 (Ln = Lanthanide, M = Cr, Mn, Fe), and
ScFeGa5 allowing for the creation of a delicate balance between dissimilar
ground states, especially in materials supporting strongly correlated or
quantum-mechanical interactions among the electrons. Furthermore, the growth of
complex stannides will enable the study of compounds exhibiting low lattice
thermal conductivities. Undergraduate and graduate students involved in this
project will have the opportunity to synthesize and characterize new compounds
and measure magnetic and electrical properties of the compounds they discovered
in the lab.