* 1360590
* Coupled Dynamics Between Flapping Wings and Vibrating Thorax During Insect Flight
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* I. Y. (Steve) Shen, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Atul Kelkar
* 07/31/2017
* USD 257,707.00

Insect flight has motivated many research studies in the biology and engineering
communities. For biologists, such studies provide critical insights into
sensory/motor coordination in animals. For engineers, such studies have
potential applications to autonomous micro-aerial vehicles. The objective of
this research is to develop a simulation model of insect flight that
incorporates the major contributing components of the insect anatomy, as well as
accommodating realistically large wing rotations. This significant advance in
the analysis and modeling of insect flight will be possible only through an
integrated interdisciplinary effort by engineers and biologists. Many attempts
have been made to understand the structural dynamics of insect flight, however
the results are far from complete. For example, most previous flight research
isolates the wing dynamics, and ignores the supporting anatomy that real insects
need to generate and transmit wing forces. Previous studies of insect muscle and
exoskeleton consider only very small movements. However it is almost certain
that extrapolation of very small movements is insufficient to capture the large
wing rotations and muscle and thorax contractions of a real flying insect. The
results of this project could enable future autonomous machines of great benefit
to society, such as micro-aerial vehicles for disaster relief.

This project will advance the state of the art in insect flight modeling by
three major research tasks. The first task is to model large 3-dimensional
rotations of the wings. This will be done using finite element analyses of a
static wing followed by a correction for 3-dimensional rotation effects, such as
Coriolis coupling. The second task is reduced-order modeling at the system
level, by conducting component-mode synthesis from the wing and thorax. The
third task is to validate the models by conducting calibrated experiments using
an artificial wing in a vacuum chamber. This research is transformative and
translational. It transforms the research area of insect flight/structural
dynamics by injecting novel ideas, such as system-level modeling, capability to
incorporate 3-dimensional finite rotation, and reduced-order modeling to
abstract sensori-motor coordination. It will also allow understanding of how
muscle activation affects flying conditions and strain receptors in the wing and
vice versa. The knowledge gained from insect flight/structural dynamics can be
transferred directly to micro-aerial vehicle applications.