* 1360228
* Beyond Patent Citations as Measures of Innovative Search and Success
* SBE,SMA
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2016
* Lee Fleming, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Maryann Feldman
* 06/30/2016
* USD 356,345.00

Hundreds, possibly thousands, of research papers have used patent citation data
to study innovative search and impact. Recent critiques, however, have raised
substantial questions about whether patent citation measures accurately capture
a patent's novelty and importance. Using big data techniques including LASSO
content labels, semantic distance measures with those labels, and computational
linguistics analysis of communication between patent applicants and their
examiners, this research will supplement (or possibly even replace) existing
approaches to measuring a patent's importance and its position relative to other
patented inventions. The new measure of patent importance is based on how many
future patent applications are "blocked" by a particular patent, and the
assumption to be validated is that "blocking patents" are valuable pieces of
technology space. To characterize patents in technology space, this research
will use computerized text analysis to identify the most differentiating words
for a given patent, relative to all other patents granted since 1975, and test
the hypothesis that similarly "tagged" patents are close to one another in
technology space, and thus represent local search. The techniques and public
data will open up research in the history of innovation, policy assessments of
social welfare and technology and science policy, inventor and assignee
disambiguation, prior art search, and matching of treated and control patents
for econometric estimation.

Broader impacts

The use of patent data to study innovation and its social and economic impact
has become increasingly common with the widespread availability of large
databases. The advantages of such approaches are easily calculated and
consistent measures across millions of documents and thousands of technologies.
The disadvantages are that the measures (prior art references by patents, for
example) provide poor and indirect correlations with actual phenomena (such as
novelty, economic impact, job creation, or potential for patent litigation).
Using computational social science, this research applies improved big data
techniques, combined with survey validation, that could ameliorate the
disadvantages, and made available to researchers, significantly improve research
in the innovation and technology strategy literatures. In addition to enabling
better research, this work provides wider societal benefit in helping inventors,
lawyers, examiners, and investors in prior art search, improved disambiguation
of the patent database, and faster identification of important patents.