* 1360868
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: A Case Study in Agricultural Practice and Domestication
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2014,03/31/2017
* Gayle Fritz, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 03/31/2017
* USD 19,076.00

During the "Neolithic Revolution" - the domestication of plants and animals - a
fundamental change occurred in the relationship between humans and the
environment in which they lived. A central goal of this research is to gain
insight into the forces which underlie this process.&lt;br/&gt;Under athe
direction of Dr. Gayle Fritz, Natalie Mueller will conduct doctoral dissertation
research. From c. 1000 BCE - 1400 CE, a suite of native seed crops known as the
Eastern Agricultural Complex (EAC) was cultivated in Eastern North America
(ENA). Previous studies have demonstrated that several of these crops were
domesticated based on morphological changes such as seed shape, size, seed or
fruit coat thickness, and texture. Two members of the EAC, sunflower (Helianthus
annuus var. macrocarpus) and acorn squash (Cucurbita pepo ssp. pepo var.
ovifera), are still familiar foods, but the other members of the crop complex
have not been cultivated for several hundred years. These lost crops include two
domesticated plants: Chenopodium berlandieri ssp. jonesianum, which is a native
relative of quinoa; and a species of marshelder (Iva annua var. macrocarpa). For
one important ancient crop, knotweed (Polygonum sp.), complex and variable seed
morphology has so far stymied efforts to establish criteria for domestication.
This case study will develop new morphometric methods to examine changes in the
morphology of knotweed and determine whether or not it was domesticated.
&lt;br/&gt;Morphological changes in domesticated plants are the result of human
selection and ecosystem engineering. Past agricultural practices can be inferred
from the modifications they caused in plants and animals. This study will use
multivariate and spatial techniques to uncover correlations between
morphological changes in knotweed and environmental, archaeological, and
temporal factors. These correlations will be used to reconstruct forgotten
agricultural practices. Recovering the details of agricultural economies in ENA
is particularly interesting because early farmers in this region, while
developing a highly productive agricultural system, did not follow the
archetypal Neolithic Revolution trajectory towards institutionalized social
stratification and urbanism. This project uses a case study of one important
crop to gain new insights into the development of this unique agricultural
economy, while enhancing understanding of a plant that was once an important
crop in ENA. In an era when new seed crops are rapidly being developed, this
study is a first step to assessing its potential usefulness to modern
society.&lt;br/&gt;This research will also provide several concrete benefits to
professional archaeologists and students. This project will generate a web
database of integrated archaeological and botanical data from publications and
collections that are currently scattered in inaccessible reports. The methods
developed in the course of this project will also be used as teaching tools.
Opportunities to participate in this research will be built into a new
multidisciplinary course: Historical Ecology of North America. The new methods
developed for using digital photography and morphometrics to study domestication
will enrich Washington University's Paleoethnobotany Laboratory, where students
and faculty are involved in studying the origins of agriculture around the
world. This methodology will also be integrated into a course on microscopy for
archaeologists. The proposed research is part of a larger movement to
historicize pre-Columbian America. The dissemination of this research will be
directed towards the goal of increasing public and academic awareness of ENA as
a region with a long and rich pre-colonial history that is relevant to an
understanding of global processes.