* 1360873
* Exploiting Control and Communications Technqiues to Establish and Maintain Network Connections for Robust and Flexible Multi-Robot Coordination
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Yu Zhou, SUNY Institute of Technology Utica-Rome
* Continuing Grant
* akbar sayeed
* 08/31/2017
* USD 294,123.00

Objective: The objective of this project is to investigate a set of control and
communication techniques for establishing and maintaining communication
connections among multiple collaborating mobile robots, in response to varying
communication conditions in practice, to ensure robust and flexible multi-robot
coordination. The approach is to exploit the features of wireless communications
and mobility of robots to significantly increase the coverage and reliability of
communications and the chance of forming communication links among mobile
robots.

Intellectual merit: This research addresses the critical challenge in the
establishment and maintenance of communication connections among collaborative
mobile robots, which is imposed by unstable communication conditions and the
dynamic nature of robots and environments. The intellectual merit lies in the
transformative development and integration of novel distributed control and
communication techniques for controlled communications, multi-robot motion, and
wireless signal search under unstable communication conditions and robot/task
constraints. The integrated application of these techniques will lead to robust
and efficient communication networking, high-freedom task operation and
exploration, and thus highly robust and flexible coordination among multiple
collaborative robots.

Broader impacts: The broader impacts include 1) facilitating numerous
applications of multi-robot systems by solving the fundamental problem of
establishing and maintaining robust communication connectivity among robots, and
providing a foundation to various research topics based on it; 2) developing new
course materials and training graduate and undergraduate students in a cross-
disciplinary context; 3) providing research opportunities to high school
students and to K-12 teachers and community college faculty, and encouraging
students to set their career goals in engineering and science.