* 1360584
* Early Career:   Development of a New Rock Deformation Apparatus for Investigating Earth's Upper Mantle
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Philip Skemer, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 07/31/2017
* USD 68,420.00

This proposal outlines a plan for the continued development of the Large Volume
Torsion apparatus (LVT), a new rock deformation apparatus designed to
investigate microstructural phenomena at the pressures and temperatures of
Earth's crust and uppermost mantle. The development of a new rock deformation
apparatus will benefit the community in a number of ways. The apparatus will be
optimized for a critical and under-investigated range of deformation conditions,
which will open new avenues for exploration of Earth's upper mantle and the
interiors of other terrestrial planets. This support will assist the development
of an early career scientist and will also enhance the training and development
of a research engineer in rock mechanics. Educational opportunities for students
and postdoctoral researchers will be significant, as they will participate in
all phases of the design, calibration, and implementation of the new apparatus.
The design of the new apparatus will be made publically available, and the
details of its construction will be disseminated via the Internet. Access to
these designs will benefit other early career scientists and established
researchers as they plan their first labs or expand existing
labs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rock deformation apparatus are not available
commercially and efforts to design devices with unique capabilities are
essential for the advancement of rock mechanics, and many active areas of study
within structural geology and geophysics. One critical feature of the LVT is
that it deforms materials in torsion. The benefit of this geometry is that
samples can be deformed to extremely large strains. Research at lower pressures
and temperatures has emphasized the importance of large strains for developing
steady state deformation microstructures. Large strains are needed to generate
microstructures that are viscously anisotropic and to reproduce microstructures
observed in mantle shear zones; viscous anisotropy and localized deformation are
key factors that control the dynamics of plates. Large strains are also needed
to investigate the generation of crystallographic fabrics; the relationships
between these fabrics and seismic anisotropy are essential for interpreting
patterns of flow in the mantle, particularly in the vicinity of plate
boundaries. Elevated pressures, which are possible with this apparatus design,
expand the range of materials and planetary conditions that can be studied, by
suppressing unwanted&lt;br/&gt;phase changes, melting, and brittle deformation.