* 1360241
* Knowledge Outputs and Organizational Changes: Innovation in Collaborative Scientific Research
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2016
* Kjell Doksum, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 07/31/2016
* USD 272,534.00

SES- 1360241 Joan Fujimura Kjell A Doksum University of Wisconsin-Madison

In recent years, many US universities have been seeking to promote creativity
and innovation within the academy by bringing researchers together to transcend
disciplinary boundaries. "Innovation," "collaboration" and "interdisciplinarity"
have become focal points for researchers interested in finding new ways to
increase the pace of scientific discoveries and invention. They are hoping that
these strategies will both move research from with researchers with narrow
expertise toward the production of solutions for biomedical and environmental
problems. They also hope that these approaches will ensure that the US maintains
a competitive edge in higher education and in the global marketplace. But are
these initiatives successful in achieving their goals? If so, how? This project
aims to answer these questions through a longitudinal and comparative study of
two new interdisciplinary and collaborative scientific research institutes on
university campuses.

The interdisciplinary project team uses comparative, ethnographic, historical,
documentary, and quantitative methods to study the science and the research
organization before, during and after the transition of independent laboratories
to the new interdisciplinary research institute. The research focuses on four
questions: 1. Within the context of new institutional models for doing
interdisciplinary science, how are collaborations structured, nurtured, changed,
maintained, hindered or abandoned? What are the barriers posed by differing
disciplines, and specialties? 2. Do these new organizational forms for
collaborative scientific research help to generate new knowledge and applied
products? 3. What are the conditions that limit wider institutional adoption of
interdisciplinary approaches? 4. What metrics can be agreed upon for measuring
the effectiveness of this new approach? This project examines how a new
organizational form built for interdisciplinarity, collaboration and innovation
affects knowledge production and university academic structures. It will yield
knowledge and methods for understanding and measuring how organizational
structures affect the kinds of knowledge produced. The study is also novel
because it compares two research institutes. Finally, the study addresses
whether new efforts to organize interdisciplinary collaboration lead to a
hardening or softening of the boundaries of fields and disciplines in the
university. This is an ongoing process that requires the longitudinal and
ethnographic methods of this study.

Broader Impacts

The study will generate real-time analyses about how the processes and content
of university scientific knowledge production are influenced by concerted
institutional organization around ?innovation? and interdisciplinary
collaboration in science. Research findings have the potential to inform
decisions about future research organization policies. These findings will be
useful to university administrators, policy makers, public and private research
organizations and planners, and both academic and industry researchers in the
biological and engineering sciences. Study findings will be reported in
conference presentations, and via journal articles in the science of science,
sociology of science, sociology of organizations, science policy and statistics,
and the sociology of education. Findings will be distributed to the researchers
studied, as well as researchers at academic and science policy conferences and
meetings, and public groups interested in social and ethical issues related to
biosciences research enterprises and their outputs.