* 1360509
* WSC-Category 1: Advancing Infrastructure and Institutional Resilience to Climate Change for Coupled Water-Energy Systems
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Mikhail Chester, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 06/30/2018
* USD 719,934.00

Western US regions are particularly vulnerable to future climate-induced
environmental changes, given their scarce water resources and heavy reliance on
thermoelectric power generation. As climate-related environmental events become
more common, water and electricity managers will face challenges when handling
vulnerabilities in the interdependent water-electricity systems. These
vulnerabilities may arise because existing infrastructures were designed for a
demand profile that was significantly different from what is expected in coming
decades, and because the institutions that manage the systems do not yet have
anticipatory governance structures that would enable them to proactively address
the future. This project will develop a framework for assessing coupled water
and electricity infrastructure-institution vulnerability to future climate
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is a need to better understand how the
governing of water and electricity services from local to regional scales can be
coordinated to proactively reduce future vulnerability. This project will
develop (1) a cross-scale model of the water and electricity systems in the
Southwest, (2) an institutional assessment of infrastructure managers, decision
makers, and policies that control or impact each component of the water and
electricity infrastructure, and (3) an extreme climate vulnerability assessment
that joins physical infrastructure characteristics with the institutional
processes that govern them. With this coupled infrastructure-institutional
vulnerability assessment (4) a learning game will be developed for
infrastructure managers to both teach them about the vulnerabilities and help
them understand how their institutional structures can be proactively changed to
improve system-wide resilience. Through a series of workshops with
infrastructure managers (5) the game will be tested through visioning and
scenario analysis exercises. New knowledge and methods will be created for
assessing water and electricity systems that acknowledges that failure can
propagate through complex systems and can start with vulnerabilities in both
physical and institutional infrastructure. The project will explore how game-
based learning approaches can provide researchers and managers with knowledge of
the complex system and an understanding of the strategies for creating
anticipatory governance for a climate-impacted future.