* 1360237
* Studies of Madden-Julian Oscillation (MJO) Initiation Using Atmospheric Sounding Data
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2019
* Richard Johnson, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 03/31/2019
* USD 755,986.00

This project consists of processing, analysis, and exploration of field data
taken during the Dynamics of the Madden-Julian Oscillation (DYNAMO) field
campaign, which took place in the Indian Ocean during the 2011-2012 Fall and
Winter seasons. The Madden-Julian Oscillation (MJO) is an envelope of organized
convection that propagates from the Indian Ocean to the Pacific Ocean and
constitutes the dominant form of intraseasonal precipitation and atmospheric
circulation variability in the tropics. The MJO influences a variety of tropical
weather and climate phenomena,including tropical cyclones (affecting hurricanes
in the Gulf of Mexico), the onset and intraseasonal fluctuations of the monsoons
and rainfall over Asia, Australia, Africa, and the Americas, and the onset of El
Nino events. Two complete MJO cycles were observed during DYNAMO.

Data for this project come from a 6-station network of radiosonde (weather
balloon) stations which were organized and co-managed by the PI during DYNAMO,
augmented by a number of other Priority Sounding Sites throughout the Indian and
Western Pacific Oceans. The overall goal of the proposal is to use the sounding
data, after some additional processing and in concert with other DYNAMO
observations, to examine the processes associated with the evolution of
atmospheric moisture during the MJO lifecycle. Preliminary results show that
there was a gradual increase in lower to middle tropospheric relative humidity
leading up to the initiation of both MJO events, and this project seeks to
identify the mechanisms leading to the build-up. One avenue to address this
question is the development of moisture budgets from the sounding data, another
is the use of radar data from the campaign to assess the contribution of clouds
of various types to atmospheric moistening. Additional work will consider the
role of the diurnal cycles of sea surface temperature and non-precipitating
clouds, and variations in the depth of the atmospheric mixed layer (the layer of
the atmosphere in contact with, and strongly influenced by, the underlying sea
surface).

Despite its importance and concerted efforts over several decades, the MJO has
not yet been adequately explained, and global atmospheric circulation models
have difficulty simulating and predicting it. The research thus has societal
broader impacts as it is expected to contribute to improved understanding and
prediction of MJO events. More specifically, the PI will work with modeling
centers around the world to enhance MJO prediction, most importantly by
providing data products for their use such as large-scale forcing fields for use
in numerical simulations of MJO initiation. The PI notes that all radiosonde
data collected through his DYNAMO sub-project will be hosted on several
websites, and work funded here would enhance that data through quality control,
removal of island effects, resolution of inhomogeneities, etc. In addition, the
project provides funding for a graduate student, thereby providing for the
future workforce in this research area.