* 1360734
* CAREER: A Comprehensive Approach for Investigating the Effects of Near-Fault Dynamic Ground Deformations on Engineering Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* George Mavroeidis, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 08/31/2017
* USD 205,324.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program
award is to investigate the effects of near-fault dynamic ground deformations on
the response of engineering structures. The proposed research is based on an
interdisciplinary approach that ranges from the description of the earthquake
source, to ground motion modeling, and to dynamic structural response. Specific
research activities include: (1) simulating dynamic ground deformations using
numerical approaches, and evaluating their accuracy in predicting strain,
rocking and torsional components of ground motion in the near-fault region, (2)
investigating the effect of fault rupture characteristics on near-fault dynamic
ground deformations using a kinematic modeling approach, (3) deriving simplified
mathematical models for the representation of certain components of the dynamic
ground deformation field, (4) investigating the dynamic response of structures
such as towers of long-span bridges to near-fault translational and rotational
motions, and (5) deriving coupled tilt and translational ground motion response
spectra for engineering analysis and design in the near-fault region.

Insights from this research will have a direct impact on the earthquake
engineering community, by providing advanced tools and techniques for assessing
the seismic performance of engineering structures to dynamic ground deformations
in the near field of strong earthquakes. Research results will ultimately lead
to improvements in design codes. The education and outreach plan of this project
includes the involvement of minorities and underrepresented groups at the
university level and through K-12 outreach activities with the objective of
broadening their participation in the fields of mathematics, science and
engineering. Specific K-12 outreach activities include participation in summer
research and mentoring programs designed for high school students, as well as
lectures, demonstrations, computer projects and hands-on laboratory experiments
to students at public high schools in the Washington, DC metropolitan area.
Research results will be published in scholarly journals and conference
proceedings, disseminated through a project website, and integrated into
undergraduate and graduate courses. The project will also strengthen
interactions between the earthquake engineering and engineering seismology
disciplines. An integrated approach will enable the scientific community to
better understand the nature of the earthquake problem, face the research
challenges more effectively, incorporate the progress into engineering codes in
a rigorous way, and ultimately reduce the seismic risk.