* 1360783
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Investigating complex word reanalysis through endangered language data
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2014,10/31/2015
* Adam Tallman, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Colleen M. Fitzgerald
* 10/31/2015
* USD 14,493.00

The Documenting Endangered Languages Program seeks to discover unique linguistic
phenomena that are in danger of being lost as communities cease to speak their
traditional languages in favor of world varieties. Unusual typological features
found in endangered languages contribute to an accurate understanding of the
limits and possibilities of human language, thus documenting the languages where
this data is evidenced is of prime importance. In the large majority of the
world's languages it is impossible for prefixes or suffixes to be separated from
their host words to form independent words. Working under the direction of
Patience Epps at the University of Texas at Austin, Adam Tallman will conduct
fieldwork on an endangered language to further investigate instances of this
unique type of word reanalysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tallman will document
Chacobo, an endangered Panoan language spoken by a few thousand people in the
northern Bolivian Amazon. His findings will form the basis of his doctoral
dissertation, a grammatical description of Chacobo with accompanying audio and
video recordings. Chacobo is especially interesting for linguistic theory
because of the unusual behavior of its morpho-syntactic processes such as the
'split-off' of tense and aspect morphemes and other functional morphology from
an otherwise polysynthetic verb stem. Additionally, the Chacobo data will
provide facts for comparative work in Amazonia and for theories about language
change and the relationship between morphology and syntax. This is because
Chacobo exhibits some grammatical features thought to occur in the Panoan parent
language and not in linguistically related varieties. Therefore, Chacobo grammar
will contribute to the investigation of the nature of earlier forms of the
language and its development into modern varieties. Adam Tallman will also
broaden participation in linguistic fieldwork by training community members in
language documentation methodology. All products from this dissertation research
will be archived and accessible at the Archive of Indigenous Languages of Latin
America at the University of Texas at Austin.