* 1360282
* WSC-Category 1 Collaborative:  A Surface Water Management Framework to Counterbalance Groundwater Withdrawals in Wetter Regions of the U.S.
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Ning Zhang, McNeese State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 07/31/2018
* USD 112,950.00

1360398&lt;br/&gt;Borrok&lt;br/&gt;1360282&lt;br/&gt;Zhand&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
WSC-Category 1 Collaborative: A surface water management framework to
counterbalance groundwater withdrawals in wetter regions of the
U.S.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The over-use of groundwater is becoming a critical
problem in regions historically characterized by abundant rainfall and surface
water, including much of the U.S. Northern Gulf and Southern Atlantic Coastal
regions. This project proposes to develop a theoretical framework and a new
modeling/decision support tool aimed at better managing surface water so that it
can be used to close groundwater supply gaps. The proposed management framework
focuses on understanding human-water-land use interactions, with an emphasis on
agriculture. The research team will explore the potentially transformative
concept of integrating the social and biophysical dimensions of water systems
into a unified framework for improved management of surface water resources.
This includes consideration of the balance between water demand for humans and
ecosystems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team will develop an innovative
geospatial decision support/modeling tool that can identify and evaluate
opportunities to capture and use surface water to replace groundwater in these
wetter regions of the US. The theoretical framework and associated geospatial
decision support tool will be unique for wetter regions of the U.S. where
groundwater and surface water have traditionally been managed separately and
surface water management has focused largely on flood control. The tool will
directly benefit farmers, land managers, regulatory agencies, and state and
local government officials. The research will be integrated with education
through a trans-disciplinary senior/MS-level course at UL Lafayette. Public
outreach, focusing on water conservation efforts, will be part of this course.
We will additionally leverage and expand existing NSF and NOAA watershed-based
education/outreach projects that target graduate students and high school
teachers, respectively. This project also serves as a catalyst for developing a
new collaborative team of researchers interested in water sustainability.