* 1360772
* RUI:Dielectric Permittivity and Charge Transport in Electroactive Polymer Nanofibers: Motivating Undergraduates to Pursue Graduate Studies in Materials Science
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2014,09/30/2018
* Nicholas Pinto, University of Puerto Rico at Humacao
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 09/30/2018
* USD 185,002.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

In this project electrospinning will be used to prepare nanofibers of
electroactive polymers and their composite blends. The PI's approach to making
polymer nanofibers via electrospinning differs from common approaches that
typically use templates or other complex methods. The electro-active polymers
include those that exhibit conducting, semiconducting and ferroelectric
properties at room temperature. The fundamental charge transport mechanisms and
charge storage in these polymer nanofibers will be investigated via temperature-
dependent conductivity and dielectric permittivity measurements. Nanofibers
naturally possess a confined environment for charge flow, thus the presence of
defects will lead to changes in charge transport and provide a handle on how
best to prepare defect-free nanofibers. A better understanding of charge
transport and charge storage in conducting, semiconducting and ferroelectric
polymers as proposed here might then be exported to other macromolecules that
exhibit similar physical properties. The composite nanofibers retain the
properties of the individual components and are thus inherently capable of being
used in devices that are multifunctional and hence more versatile. Modified
experiments based on the proposed research will be included into the senior
laboratory course for undergraduates, thereby integrating research and
education.



NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY

The principal investigator (PI) proposes to prepare fibers of electrically
active polymers having a diameter roughly one-one thousandth that of a human
hair using an inexpensive fiber-spinning technique called electrospinning. The
materials to be studied are special polymers that are individually capable of
carrying a current or storing charge while at the same time are light in weight,
flexible, and inexpensive to manufacture. By combining these polymers as
composites, the current carrying capacity of one together with the charge
storage capacity of the other will lead to novel materials that are more
versatile. Fabricating nanofibers of such composite materials is new and
unexplored, and the PI's ultimate goal is to make devices and sensors with
superior properties. Devices fabricated from nanofibers are also expected to be
small in size and to consume less power. The proposed research is
multidisciplinary across polymer science, physics, nanoscience, and electronics,
thus giving students a sound and direct research experience that will train them
in the scientific method and prepare them to be future scientists and engineers.
This proposal will also increase the number of undergraduate students
participating in scientific research from groups currently underrepresented in
the fields of science and engineering and will extend the PI's outreach to
include an international collaboration.