* 1360546
* Laser Excitation of the 229-Th Nuclear Isomer
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Alexander Kuzmich, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2018
* USD 440,000.00

While typical nuclear excitation energies are in the keV to MeV range, there are
several exceptional cases where the excitation energies are much lower. The
subject of this project is the thorium-229 isotope, which, uniquely, has an
excited state in the UV optical spectrum. Several experimental searches for
optical emission in this range undertaken in the past ten years were
unsuccessful or inconclusive. In addition to searching in the wrong energy
region, the searches were challenged by the narrow linewidth of the nuclear
transition. In this work, an alternative electron-bridge transition will be
employed for the initial laser excitation of the nuclear isomer level in
thorium-229. The nuclear transition is likely to be exceptionally sensitive to
the variation of fundamental constants, due to the interplay of the strong and
electroweak interactions inside this nucleus. After the isomer level is found,
the sensitivity of the nuclear transition to time variation of the fine
structure constant will be determined.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will
have broad impact across several areas of physics and technology. Laser
excitation and coherent manipulation of nuclear states would establish a new
bridge between atomic and nuclear physics, with the promise of new levels of
accuracy for frequency metrology. The project will involve extensive graduate
and undergraduate student training and participation.