* 1360463
* WSC-Catergory 2 Collaborative: Impacts of Agricultural Decision Making and Adaptive Management on Food Security
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Tom Evans, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 06/30/2018
* USD 2,058,374.00

Despite significant attention from governments, donor agencies, and NGOs, food
security remains an unresolved challenge in the context of global human welfare.
Both technical and conceptual limits have prevented the collection and analysis
of rich empirical datasets with high temporal frequency over large spatial
extents necessary to investigate how changes to seasonal precipitation patterns
are affecting food security. This research project will transform both
methodological and conceptual frameworks for assessing the sustainability of
dryland agricultural systems. The research will bring new understanding of how
dryland farmers adapt to within-season variability in climate and how those
adaptations affect their current and future resilience to climate variability
and climate change. Project findings will improve forecast models used to
monitor and predict the sustainability of water-dependent agricultural systems.
By marrying the simple idea of cell phone adoption with state-of-art research in
data science, crop prediction, and environmental/social monitoring, the project
will advance and accelerate scientific understanding of an important global
sustainability problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will focus on
characterizing the nature and impact of intra-seasonal smallholder decision
making on adaptation to climate variability in semi-arid agricultural systems.
Specifically, the research addresses three critical research questions: (1) How
do intra-seasonal dynamics of both the environment and social systems shape
farmer adaptive capacity? (2) To what extent does intra-seasonal decision making
enable farmers to adapt to climate uncertainty? and (3) How can intra-seasonal
data improve the ability to model, predict, and improve adaptation to climate
variability in ways that enhance food security? The research team will integrate
physical models of hydrological and agricultural dynamics with real-time
environmental data and weekly farmer decision making in individual fields. These
real-time data are obtained from previously-developed novel cellular-based
environmental sensing pods coupled to real-time reports of farmer decision
making submitted via cell phones. The team will use a combination of
environmental and social data to develop a suite of modeling tools for
understanding how climate variability impacts the sustainability of agricultural
systems in the study regions. The research team also will develop modeling tools
for improved forecasts of food security capable of producing new understandings
of the intra-seasonal dynamics of both social and environmental processes.
Although the test bed for this research is the Southern Province of Zambia and
portions of the Rift Valley and Central Provinces of Kenya centered around the
Laikipia District, the results may well be broadly applicable to other semi-arid
and arid regions of the world.