* 1360889
* Low-Loss, Impedance-Matched Dirac-Cone Metamaterials for Integrated Optics
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2016
* Eric Mazur, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Miriam Deutsch
* 06/30/2016
* USD 400,000.00

Non-technical Description: This project implements a new form of optical
materials - integrated impedance-matched metamaterials with zero refractive
index. These materials do not bend light like ordinary transparent materials and
can be incorporated in optical devices. Using this novel material platform, this
project explores the exotic physics of zero refractive index materials and
implements a number of applications in integrated photonics, including beam-
steering and super-coupling. To efficiently transfer this new type of optical
metamaterial from academia to commercial applications, the research team
collaborates closely with industrial partners. This project contributes to the
Principal Investigators' effort in education and outreach in two ways: first,
this novel type of metamaterial can be used as a simple platform in education
and exhibitions to demonstrate the exotic material properties and interesting
physical phenomena of metamaterials; second, students at many different levels
involved in this project gain research experience in state-of-the-art
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: This project investigates
optical metamaterials achieved by a Dirac cone at the center of the Brillouin
zone of a photonic crystal. Because the homogenization criterion is met in the
vicinity of the Gamma point, the photonic crystal can be treated as a
homogeneous bulk metamaterial with low or zero refractive indices near the Dirac
point. This approach offers three important advantages: low loss, free-space
impedance matching, and isotropy. The goal of this project is to design,
fabricate, and characterize Dirac-cone metamaterials consisting of 2D square
array of silicon pillars, which can be fabricated using standard planar
processes, then, based on this 2D platform, to theoretically and experimentally
demonstrate several exotic physical phenomena and potential applications
including beam-steering and super-coupling. Specifically, the research
approaches are: 1) theoretical design using analytical models and commercially
available simulators; 2) experimental fabrication using the clean room
facilities at the Harvard Center for Nanoscale Systems; 3) experimental
measurements of optical properties of Dirac-cone metamaterials using a fiber-
launch coupling system.