* 1360886
* Organic Transformations via Activation of Monohalogenated Substrates in Copper Catalyzed Atom Transfer Radical Addition
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Tomislav Pintauer, Duquesne University
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 06/30/2018
* USD 410,405.00

With this award, the Chemical Catalysis Program in the Chemistry Division is
funding Dr. Tomislav Pintauer from Duquesne University to develop new methods to
produce pharmaceuticals and other useful chemicals in an environmentally sound
fashion. The new methods use catalysts formed from copper instead of the more
commonly-used ones that contain mercury or other toxic metals. Their work is
helping to expand the range of conditions where these copper catalysts can be
used so that environmentally benign agents that do not generate free radicals,
such as Vitamin C, can be used. Their new method is appealing because very low
concentrations of metal are required, further reducing the environmental
footprint while still providing society with useful chemicals such as drugs. The
work is having a broader impact through the development of new courses at
Duquesne University on green catalysis and other topics. The research team is
further broadening the impact of their work by including and mentoring under-
represented minority and economically disadvantaged high school students from
the Pittsburgh area in their research program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research is focused on developing highly active copper catalysts for atom
transfer radical addition (ATRA) reactions involving monohalogenated substrates,
as well as cyclization (ATRC) reactions leading to the formation of
synthetically useful lactones. Both of these methods have shown great potential
for mediating C-C bond formation utilizing a variety of alkyl halides and
alkenes. Currently, there is no known catalyst with an acceptable level of
activity for both of these transformations, so the work is filling an important
void. The main focus of the project is specifically tailored ligand design, with
special emphasis on structural and mechanistic understanding of the carbon-
halogen bond activation catalyzed by copper complexes.