* 1360445
* WSC-Category 3: A National Energy-Water System Assessment Framework (NEWS): Stage I Development
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2014,09/30/2020
* Jerry Melillo, Research Foundation CUNY - Advanced Science Research Center
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 09/30/2020
* USD 2,336,571.00

1360445 (Vorosmarty). The focus of this research is on the national grand
challenge known as the "Energy-Water-Climate Nexus." Specifically, this research
is on the reliability of electric power sector infrastructure and operations
(electric power grids) and climate change adaptation when viewed from the
perspective of strategic water issues. The electric power sector is the nation's
leading user of fresh water. It is critically dependent on this resource,
particularly to cool its large population of thermoelectric power plants, making
the sector particularly sensitive to any shifts in seasonal disruptions of water
supply. Recent energy-water nexus studies by this research team, done at
regional-to-national scales, have revealed several findings that can be used to
guide the next-stage of study: (i) current electric sector infrastructure is
sensitive to climate constraints on water supply, regulatory constraints, and
economic competition with other sectors for water; (ii) the frequency and
intensity of water-related vulnerabilities in today's power sector is likely to
increase with climate-driven changes in the water cycle plus growth in
population and electricity demand; (iii) water-linked disruptions in electricity
supply yield substantial impacts on regional economies, if not that of the
nation as a whole; (iv) system shocks can be attenuated by different technology
mixes and deployments of energy infrastructure. This research focuses
specifically on electric power infrastructure, meaning the types, spatial
distributions, and levels of investment in technologies that deliver or could
deliver electricity to the U.S. economy. The central hypothesis is that today's
portfolio of electric power sector infrastructure is unsustainable in the
context of satisfying its water needs under anticipated climate change and
rising electricity demands. Water-mediated feedbacks will reverberate negatively
throughout the national economy, affecting the productivity of other sectors, as
well as U.S. competitiveness abroad, unless technology alternatives and
infrastructure reconfigurations are put in place. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research unites three ongoing efforts that have been addressing the Energy-
Water-Climate Nexus: (a) NREL/Sandia national energy-water assessment, (b) NSF
EaSM-funded research on integrated assessment/policy engagement work expanded to
national scale, and (c ) UCSB strategic energy economic assessment using input-
output models. The principal science goal is to create a National Energy-Water
System assessment framework (NEWS) to evaluate, in the context of anticipated
climate and economic change: (i) the performance of the nation's electricity
sector; (ii) the feasibility of alternative pathways to improve climate
adaptation; and, (iii) the impacts of energy technology and investment tradeoffs
on the productivity of the economy, water availability and aquatic ecosystem
condition. NEWS will be applied in a series of scenario studies to 2050 using
AR5 RCP/SSP climate realizations to drive: technology assessment models for
renewable and non-renewable power production and their water requirements;
hydrology and thermal impact simulations; and input/output economic models at
national and sub-national levels. Future climate and changing energy demands
will test the limits of current energy infrastructure in the context of
environmental regulations and national climate adaptation and mitigation
policies. New energy technologies, including renewables, hold the promise of
off-loading substantial water limitations in the electricity sector, that is, if
sufficient knowledge, economic realities and political will are in hand. This
study is organized to address each of these requirements. The focus is on
energy-water adaptation, and the research seeks to identify constraints as well
as opportunities over a multi-decade timeframe. This research is motivated by
recommendations in the National Climate Assessment (NCA), to which the study
team has contributed in terms of its overall leadership, chapter authorship and
review contributions. A policy charette process, instituted under an NSF EaSM
grant, will be expanded to engage state, regional, and national stakeholders.
This research represents the first stage in developing a more complete national
energy-water sector assessment framework. Also included is an education and
workforce-development plan to train next generation water scientists, strategic
planners and policymakers, as well as to promote participation of
underrepresented groups in designing the nation?s sustainable water future.