* 1360506
* Water Sustainability in Snow-Fed Arid Land River System
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2021
* Derek Kauneckis, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 06/30/2021
* USD 1,841,833.00

This project will create a framework to engage diverse stakeholder communities
interacting with regard to water within the Truckee-Carson River System of
northern Nevada. The approach, combining a systems-based hydrologic model and an
agent-based stakeholder model, has the potential to inform and transform water
management in Northern Nevada and the American Southwest. This project will
produce new models and actionable information for Tribal, Federal, State, and
local resource managers and policy makers. Two federally recognized American
Indian tribes (Pyramid Lake Paiute and Fallon Paiute-Shoshone) will be engaged
to increase the capacity of the Indian Tribal Governments to effectively steward
natural and water resources on reservation lands. Presentations will also be
made to the Intertribal Agriculture Council, the Board of the Indian Land Tenure
Foundation (600-700 tribal members per meeting) and the Association for
International Agriculture and Extension Education. Engagement with Latino groups
will occur through the student diversity office. Three post-docs and two
graduate students will be trained as well as two UG students who will
participate in the summer research REU.

This project will develop an integrated systems-based approach (1) to predict
(a) the robustness of the Truckee-Carson River System (TCRS) water supply to
future hydroclimatic conditions, (b) the resilience of the system to extreme
events and changes in land-use and economic growth, and (2) to assess
stakeholder acceptance of alternative water policy institutional arrangements
designed to enhance sustainability. A water supply model will be linked to both
climate projections and extreme weather events, as well as an agent-based model
to simulate the behavior of water rights holders and users along the system.
Stakeholders will be engaged throughout the project to enhance understanding of
how individuals and policy institutions might respond to future hydroclimatic
conditions, assess the adaptive capacity of current water management agreements
and, as adaptive capacity is reached, test the willingness of stakeholders to
accept new policies and practices.