* 1360758
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Structural differences between French and Picard: Evidence from phonetics and phonology
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2014,02/29/2016
* Michael Dow, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 02/29/2016
* USD 12,449.00

When should a dialect be considered a different language? Though French and the
Picard language both developed from Latin, the political and linguistic
unification of France has led to a decline in the use of Picard. Today, Picard
is classified as "severely endangered" by UNESCO, and considerable uncertainty
has been expressed regarding its independence as a separate language. At worst,
it is labeled a corrupted dialect of French, but recent linguistic analyses have
revealed both important structural differences and complexities in
Picard.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to expand that body of evidence
with respect to nasality. Though the two languages share identical inventories
of nasal and oral vowels, they are reported to display opposite patterns of
regressive nasalization, i.e., where nasal airflow overlaps with a vowel before
nasal consonants. Several phonetic studies have shown that this applies to high
vowels /i, y, u/ in French, which have no nasal counterpart in either language.
However, there is disagreement about whether this occurs at significant rates,
and whether it is part of the phonological grammar of French or a minor phonetic
reflex. Meanwhile, a major reference grammar of Picard reports that this process
applies only to /a, e, o/, which do have nasal counterparts in both languages.
However, in contrast with the French studies, there are no phonetic data for
Picard to support these claims. Given the possibility that the French government
might adopt policies that aim to increase its recognition and support for its
regional languages and the general lack of empirical evidence concerning the
languages that are most closely related to French, the proposed research is both
urgent and extremely timely.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nasal acoustic energy will be
measured to document which vowels undergo nasalization, and to what extent, in
Picard, Standard French, and the regional French of Picardie. This project will
offer not only a phonological analysis of an understudied language, but also a
comparative analysis of two closely related languages. In addition, this study
may reveal insights concerning structural relations among nasal vowels. By
determining major phonological differences from low-level phonetic phenomena,
this study will contribute objective criteria by which a full-fledged language
may be distinguished from a dialect, and its methodology is easily adapted to
any setting where similar work is needed.