* 1360286
* WSC-Category 1 Collaborative Proposal: Coupled Multi-scale Economic, Hydrologic, and Estuarine Modeling to Assess Impacts of Climate Change on Water Quality Management
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Raymond Najjar, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 06/30/2018
* USD 119,829.00

1360280 Easton 1360285 Li 1360286 Najjar

WSC-Category 1 Collaborative Proposal: Coupled Multi-scale Economic, Hydrologic,
and Estuarine Modeling to Assess Impacts of Climate Change on Water Quality
Management

One of the most important questions facing our society is the potential impact
of climate change on water quality, water resources and ecosystem function.
Confounding issues such as urban sprawl and agricultural intensification make it
difficult to determine the singular effects of climate change on water quality,
ecosystem function and on the costs to achieve water quality goals. In view of
the challenges facing the Chesapeake Bay (urban growth, agricultural
intensification, climate change) an integrated multi-disciplinary approach is
critical to provide policy makers with robust and reliable information. The
approach that the research team will use is to integrate key climate,
hydrologic, estuarine, and economic drivers at multiple scales which will
provide water management options for the Chesapeake Bay system.

One way to assess the impacts of climate change in the face of these other
stressors is to develop coupled models that incorporate the pertinent controls
on the water system. The overarching goal of this project is to develop a
quantifiable, predictive framework that couples biogeochemical and hydrologic
drivers of terrestrial nutrient export with climate change to evaluate the
effects of ecosystem management on estuarine function and costs of water quality
protection. To achieve this goal, the project proposes to work broadly across
common regional Chesapeake Bay watershed physiographic gradients and dominant
land uses (e.g., agriculture, forest and urban) using a multi-scale model
evaluation of the impact of climate change and climate variability on the
hydrologic, biogeochemical, and economic drivers of water quality degradation in
the Chesapeake Bay estuary. Climate data will be down scaled from global and
regional climate models and applied to watershed models to predict hydrologic
activity and nutrient production across five test-bed watersheds where
significant investments in land management (e.g., Best Management Practices)
have been made. Test-bed model results will be used to populate an economic
model to quantify the optimum tradeoff between water quality improvements and
their associated costs. The watershed models will then be upscaled to predict
hydrologic and nutrient delivery to an estuarine model to determine estuary
impacts.