* 1360066
* RAPID: Assessing Sentinel Responses of Lake Ecosystems to the Rim Wildfire
* BIO,DEB
* 11/15/2013,10/31/2015
* Craig Williamson, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 10/31/2015
* USD 140,000.00

Wildfires transform and transport large amounts of organic carbon across
landscapes at regional to continental and even global scales. The burning of
vegetation and soil organic matter, followed by increased runoff of water and
erosion, can have big effects on lakes. In addition, smoke plumes from wildfires
may even influence lakes much farther away indirectly through what are called
teleconnections. The 2013 Rim Fire was the third largest fire ever in California
and presents an opportunity to examine these different types of movements of
carbon and their impacts on lakes. This project rallies a team of experts from
across the country to apply advanced optical and acoustic technology in order to
examine the responses of lakes in the Sierra Nevada Mountains to changes in the
quality and quantity of dissolved organic carbon (that colors water) and the
consequences for the biology of the lakes. Two main questions are: What
characteristics of lakes respond to changes in organic matter due to fires
within their watersheds, and can such responses also be detected in lakes in
distant watersheds through teleconnections? To address these questions, eight
larger lakes and a suite of smaller lakes will be sampled over one year. The
watersheds of two of the larger lakes have been extensively burned and
influenced by smoke plumes from the Rim Fire. Three other larger and several
smaller lakes are located about 150 miles north of the Rim Fire itself, but were
still under the smoke plume from the fire. Finally, three lakes are outside of
both the smoke and burn areas and will serve as control sites. Intensive
sampling of the lakes themselves, data from satellite remote sensing, and
detailed chemical analyses will be used to determine the exposure of all the
lakes to either fire in the watersheds or just the smoke, as well as the effects
on lake ecology.

This project will provide support for two postdoctoral fellows and three
graduate students, who will study various aspects about tracing the flow of
carbon from the land and air into and through lakes. Collaborations will enable
the exchange of information between the research team and managers of the San
Francisco water supply and reservoirs, as well as the general public. Other
outreach opportunities will happen through collaborations with the Tahoe
Environmental Research Center.