* 1360658
* Untangling the Energetics and Dynamics of Reactions of Ground State Silylidyne Radicals with Hydrocarbon Molecules
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2014,05/31/2018
* Ralf Kaiser, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 05/31/2018
* USD 480,000.00

With this renewal award, the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms A
Program (CSDM-A) of the Division of Chemistry supports Professor Ralf I. Kaiser
of the University of Hawaii in a project that will investigate the mechanism and
energetics of the reactions of a diatomic silicon species with hydrocarbon
molecules. These experiments will be carried out by crossing beams of the
reacting molecules in the gas phase and allowing them to interact. Experiments
will be combined with sophisticated computational studies to provide mechanistic
and thermodynamic data for these reactions. Since molecules containing silicon
are important components of the interstellar environment, significant advances
in our understanding of astrochemistry are predicted to result from this
project. In connection with these studies, the principal investigator will
organize symposia on interstellar and gas phase chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will investigate the energetics, dynamics, and
potential energy surfaces of the diatomic radical, silylidyne (SiH), with
hydrocarbon molecules employing crossed molecular beam experiments. The data
resulting from these experiments will be combined with ab initio and quasi
classical trajectory (QCT) calculations to determine reaction mechanisms, the
structure of products and intermediates and thermodynamics over a broad range of
collision energies. These studies will enable a comparison of the chemical
dynamics of the silylidyne radical (SiH) with those of the isoelectronic
methylidyne radical (CH).