* 1360568
* CAREER:  Holistic 3D Brain Image Parsing by Integrating Implicit and Explicit Models
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2015
* Zhuowen Tu, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 06/30/2015
* USD 197,514.00

&lt;br/&gt;Designing automated algorithms to extract and analyze anatomical
brain structures from neuro-images is of significant scientific and clinical
importance in detecting abnormal brain patterns, analyzing various brain
diseases, and studying the brain growth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
develop a general statistical modeling/computing framework to perform 3D
holistic brain image understanding. The framework emphasizes rigorous,
efficient, and effective learning-based statistical models to integrate the
complex appearances, varying 3D shapes, and the large spatial configuration of
anatomical brain structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Implicit models through
discriminative approaches have the advantages of fusing a large amount of
information and obtaining decisions quickly. Explicit models through generative
approaches can directly represent the information and thus, better explain the
structure and model the transformation and scale change. The PI explores
harmonic relationships between discriminative and generative models for 3D image
parsing by combining implicit and explicit models along several directions: (1)
learning-based models with rich appearance, and implicit shape and context; (2)
integrating skeleton with surfaces for 3D shapes; (3) effective 3D shape
representation and similarity measure; (4) component-based simultaneous
registration and segmentation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will
contribute to automating the process of extracting a large number of anatomical
structures, and enhancing the shape analysis needed for detecting brain
diseases, monitoring health conditions, studying drug effects, and discovering
brain functions. The scope of the proposed model goes beyond medical image
analysis and can be applied in other problems of statistical modeling/computing,
computer vision, multi-variate labeling in machine learning.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;