* 1360515
* CNIC: U.S.-Nepal Collaborative Research to Assess and Mitigate Pollution in the Densely Populated Kathmandu Valley
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Mohammad Iqbal, University of Northern Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 08/31/2017
* USD 55,500.00

Technical description &lt;br/&gt;This Catalyzing New International Collaboration
(CNIC) award supports the U.S.-Nepal collaboration between Drs. Mohammad Iqbal,
University of Northern Iowa (UNI) and Tara N. Bhattarai, Head, Department of
Geology, Tribhuvan University (TU) for environmental research on the Bagmati
River in the Kathmandu Valley. The goal of this project is three-fold: 1)
provide US-students with exposure to environmental problems in Nepal, 2) engage
with the Nepalese counterparts to develop field procedures that may be
applicable nationally and internationally, and 3) conduct innovative research
and exchange technical expertise to prevent further degradation of the
environment. The Bagmati River has become highly polluted in recent decades due
to the dramatic increase in population and urban development. TU will provide
laboratory and office space for data analysis and management, and project
coordination. Dr. Bhattarai will facilitate access to the hydrologic and
meteorological data base maintained by the Department of Hydrology and
Meteorology (DHM) in Kathmandu. This proposal requests funding for the first
phase of this project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will apply
scientific principles and methodology to solve an important environmental
problem. Faculty and students will focus on developing an effective hydrological
assessment scheme for a polluted body of water in a densely populated urban
setting. A detailed procedure for water and sediment analysis will be applied to
the Bagmati River study. The hydrologic characteristics will be studied to
develop maps of pollution hotspots in an attempt to develop best management
practice guidelines. Severe damage to watersheds resulting from accelerated
urban growth is a worldwide problem. Globally, environmental policy makers are
looking for new approaches to watershed management. The Bagmati study will
provide insights into elements that are of primary importance to understanding
temporal and spatial distribution of urban
pollutants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader description &lt;br/&gt;This
investigation establishes linkages among three critical aspects of urban
watershed studies: ecosystem management, environmental health, and cultural
awareness. Scarcity of fresh water is currently recognized as one of the
greatest challenge of the 21st century. The research team proposes to deal with
this challenge by sharing technical knowledge, expertise, and resources that
will reduce the impact of environmental pollution in the densely populated
Kathmandu Valley. The project will create unique opportunities for US students
to gain experiential learning at an international location. They will work as a
team with Nepalese students in an interactive learning environment that includes
observation, syntheses of data, scientific reasoning, and conclusions. US and
Nepalese students will learn to understand different cultural perspectives, and
for the PI, this project will contribute to teaching effectiveness and the
ability to work with international partners. A follow-on proposal to this CNIC
award will be submitted to the NSF/DUE Improving Undergraduate STEM Education
(IUES) program.