* 1360962
* The Engagement of Professional Engineering Societies in Undergraduate Engineering Education
* ENG,EEC
* 03/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Catherine Didion, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Edward Berger
* 08/31/2019
* USD 995,771.00

In this project, the National Academy of Engineering will draw high-level,
national attention to the important roles played by engineering professional
societies in supporting improvements in undergraduate engineering education.
These roles include setting and maintaining professional standards, clarifying
the knowledge and skill base needed by those practicing in the field, and
serving as a bridge between employers and schools of engineering. Little is
known from an empirical standpoint about the extent and impact of societies'
work in engineering education, however, and this lack of information hinders the
ability of policy makers, engineering education institutions, funders of
engineering education reform, and employers to effectively leverage these
contributions in their own work. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To begin to address this
knowledge gap, the project will conduct a detailed review of the relevant
published literature, conduct a comprehensive survey of professional societies'
activities in this area, and solicit testimony from the societies at a national
workshop. The workshop and five follow-on regional stakeholder meetings will
provide opportunity for productive communication and collaboration among the
societies and between the societies and other stakeholders, particularly
industry and higher education. The workshop report and regional meeting recaps
will be disseminated to the various stakeholders in order to encourage future
collaboration. This communication and collaboration, in turn, has the potential
to enhance the effectiveness of societies' initiatives as well as inform
decision making by National Science Foundation and other funders that support
engineering education reform.