* 1360046
* Spectroscopic Elucidation of Cu and Fe Active Sites in Zeolites
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2017
* Edward Solomon, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 06/30/2017
* USD 533,800.00

Professor Edward I. Solomon of Stanford University is using funds from the
Chemical Catalysis program of the Chemistry Division to study the selective
hydroxylation of methane (and other simple hydrocarbons) at Cu/O and Fe/O active
sites in Cu- and Fe-exchanged zeolites. The hydroxylation of methane (the chief
component in natural gas) produces methyl alcohol that can be used as a liquid
fuel. In fact, methane is the world's most abundant fossil fuel, but is a potent
greenhouse gas. Its direct conversion to methanol would be a valuable source of
green energy, decrease our dependence on oil reserves, and reduce one of the
greenhouse gasses. This project is focused on understanding how Cu and Fe ions
bound to zeolites (a family of porous minerals) facilitate the selective
oxidation of methane and other simple hydrocarbons to produce liquid fuels and
chemical precursors for industrially significant reactions. These studies will
aid in rational catalyst design, enabling more efficient use of hydrocarbon
feedstocks. Outreach activities coupled to this research program enhance
professional development of local high school teachers and provide local high
school students the opportunity to experience chemical
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The selective hydroxylation of methane (and other
simple hydrocarbons) in Cu- and Fe-exchanged zeolites is being investigated
using coupled spectroscopic and computational methods to elucidate the
geometries, electronic structures, and contributions to hydrocarbon reactivity
of the Cu/O and Fe/O active sites. Resonance Raman spectroscopy indicates a
[Cu2O]2+ species to be the catalytic site in Cu-ZSM-5. Studies are now directed
toward: 1) using a variety of site selective spectroscopic methods to further
define this active site; 2) understanding the mechanisms of formation of
[Cu2O]2+ from N2O and O2; 3) defining the complete reaction coordinate for CH3OH
formation, the nature of the product binding site, and the mechanism of its over
oxidation; 4) evaluating the Cu/O2 sites in other zeolites for
structure/function correlations and enhanced reactivity; 5) extending these
studies to Fe-ZSM-5 and other Fe zeolites to understand the mechanisms for
selective oxidation and product binding; 6) understanding differences in the
reactivity of Fe- vs. Cu-ZSM-5; and 7) extending these studies to other
TMI/zeolite/O2 reactions and intermediates These studies are correlated to
potentially analogous sites in Cu- and Fe-containing metalloenzymes to establish
correspondence between biological and heterogeneous catalysis. Molecular-level
insight derived from this research will inform rational catalyst design and
enable more efficient use of hydrocarbon feedstocks such as methane. In
particular, establishing methanol derived from methane as a viable source of
green energy would protect the environment and decrease our dependence on oil
reserves.