* 1360210
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Science of Science and Innovation Policy: Personnel Movement, Knowledge Transfer and Innovation in the Laser Industry
* SBE,SMA
* 05/15/2014,04/30/2017
* Erin Fahrenkopf, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Fiegener
* 04/30/2017
* USD 14,685.00

Firms innovate through the combination of new and existing knowledge. Often some
of the knowledge required to innovate comes from outside the boundaries of the
firm. Hiring scientists and engineers with the right experience is a powerful
mechanism for transferring knowledge into the firm. Not only can the movement of
scientists and engineers between firms affect innovation within firms, it can
also affect the aggregate development of high-technology industries. Yet, we
know relatively little about this channel of knowledge communication. What type
of employee prior experience aids a firm in successfully pursuing new
technological areas? What are the social and structural factors within an
organization that facilitate employees? transferring knowledge developed during
their prior experiences? And ultimately, what are the implications of this
knowledge transfer for firm innovation and industry evolution?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses three important questions. First,
using archival data it documents the aggregate impact of employee mobility on
firms and industries and the implications of employee mobility for innovation
and innovation policy. Second, complementing the archival analyses, the project
uses interviews with scientists and engineers working on laser technology and
provides a detailed analysis of how employees transfer knowledge from their
prior experiences and what facilitates this process. Third, the project uses an
experimental approach to examine the causal mechanisms through which personnel
mobility enables knowledge transfer and innovation. This multi-method approach
combining a field study, which has high external validity, with a laboratory
study that has high internal validity provides insights into challenging, yet
important, questions on knowledge transfer by personnel
mobility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;This research
increases understanding of employee mobility?s role in innovation in firms. For
instance, the movement of scientists and engineers from firms currently in a
high-technology market to firms not yet in the market can lower the barrier for
these firms to enter. These firms can benefit from vital knowledge individuals
bring with them on market logistics or norms or ideas on new product variants
that the prior employer did not pursue. From this understanding, there are
implications about the conditions under which the employment mobility of
scientists and engineers ought to be supported, by, for example, fostering
policies that allow individuals to more easily move from job to job (such as
non-employer tied health insurance or limiting employee non-compete contracts)
or encouraging organizational structures that facilitate knowledge transfer by
individuals.