* 1360063
* Startup to IPO: Understanding Changes in Key Personnel in Technology-based Startups through a Longitudinal Open-Source Database
* SBE,SMA
* 07/01/2014,04/30/2019
* Martin Kenney, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Cassidy Sugimoto
* 04/30/2019
* USD 316,226.00

Venture capital-financed, technology-based entrepreneurial firms (VTEFs) are
widely acknowledged to be among the most dynamic firms in the U.S. economy. Yet,
with only a very few exceptions, little is known about the how these firms
evolve. This project uses a novel data collection method -- extracting
information from the Internet archiving website, "The Wayback Machine," which
since 1996 has periodically visited websites and preserved them in searchable
form -- to compile data from 600 VTEFs that made a public stock offering between
1996 and 2014 and 600 comparable VTEFs that did not complete a public offering
during this period. Information about the names and biographies of the
management team, investors, scientific advisors, firm description, and location
from "The Wayback Machine" will be combined with dates of venture capital
funding and information from the Dataverse patent database to build histories of
each firm. The result will be a comprehensive history of the composition of firm
management teams, the firm's self-description, the headquarters' location, and
evolving managerial roles of the founders as these firms are formed, receive
venture capital, and, finally, fail, survive, or have an initial public offering
of stock.

Firm growth is based upon the capabilities the founder(s) bring, those resources
recruited from the environment (personnel, venture capital, etc.), and those
assets built internally (patents etc.). With a few important exceptions,
however, the dynamics of this firm-building process is largely a black box. The
database that this project builds will open this black box. Among the topics to
be examined are: When in the firm's evolution is the position of Chief Financial
Officer filled? Is there a pattern to when key Top Management Team (TMT) members
are added to the firm? When are founders replaced or are they relocated within
the firm, e.g., from CEO to CTO? Do TMT and Board of Director changes vary by
technology, region, or by fate of the firm, e.g., acquisition, bankruptcy, or
IPO? Recently, public policy debates have wondered why women are under-
represented in entrepreneurial firms. This project allows gender identification
of all managers and board members for each firm. With this data, we can track
gender issues from the firm's founding to an IPO or other liquidity event. The
ability to address these empirical questions can test and improve current
theories of entrepreneurial firm formation and growth.

Broader Impacts: The results of analysis of the data set will be valuable to
venture capitalists and entrepreneurs seeking to understand and improve the
performance of new firms. For policy-makers understanding the firm development
process this project will provide social scientifically-informed insight into
interventions meant to encourage the establishment and improve the growth of
such firms. Finally, we anticipate scholars will use this data in ways that
cannot be foreseen as it becomes a research input to other projects.