* 1360347
* Radical Cage Effects in Organometallic Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2019
* David Tyler, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 06/30/2019
* USD 420,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamic & Mechanism B Program
of the Chemistry Division, Professor David R Tyler of the Department of
Chemistry and Biochemistry at the University of Oregon will investigate the
reactivity of a class of molecules known as radicals. Radicals are implicated in
many important chemical reactions and processes including aging, plastics
manufacturing, plastics degradation, photosynthesis, cellular processes, solar
energy conversion and storage, and the environmental damage caused by
pollutants. The goals of this research are to understand how radicals react so
that we can exploit their development for useful purposes and, when necessary,
mitigate their damaging reactivity. The project lies at the interface of
organic, inorganic, organometallic, and biochemistry and is therefore well
suited to the education of scientists at all levels. This research group also
has a strong commitment to the education and training of students
underrepresented in science. Outreach activities involving non-science majors
and students interested in communicating science to the public will also be part
of the funded project.

Radical cage effects have an enormous impact on reactivity in solution, and the
overall goal of the project is to uncover the underlying principles that govern
radical cage effects so radical reactivity can be understood and interpreted
better. Radical cage pairs will be generated by photolysis of metal-metal or
metal-carbon bonds in organometallic molecules. Both laser pump-probe methods
and steady-state irradiation methods will be used to measure the cage effects in
these systems. Experiments are proposed to answer the following fundamental, as
yet unanswered, questions. 1. Are cage effects more properly analyzed using
solvent microviscosity rather than bulk viscosity? 2. What are the effects of
radical mass, size, and shape on the cage effect in systems in which the two
radicals in the solvent cage are not identical? The answer to this question,
when combined with the information learned during the investigation of question
1, will provide a quantitative predictive capability that can be applied to a
wide variety of different radicals and solvents. 3. Does the cage effect depend
on the excitation wavelength used to generate the radicals? 4. Is the cage
effect affected by tensile or shear stress on a molecule?