* 1360439
* Lifetime Reliability of Systems-on-Chip: Unified Modeling and Dynamic Reliability Management
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Cristinel Ababei, Marquette University
* Standard Grant
* tao li
* 08/31/2016
* USD 173,316.00

Future integrated circuits will contain tens, hundreds, or even thousand cores
per chip. However, technology downscaling that can make this possible may also
make the underlying hardware less reliable due to an increasing number of
defects and wear out mechanisms. Therefore, one of the major problems facing the
design of multiprocessor systems-on-chip is reliability. Because either the
cores or the network-on-chip (used for communication between the cores) can
become a reliability bottleneck for these systems, it is imperative that the
reliability be addressed in a unified manner. To address the reliability
challenge, this research develops a novel unified theoretical lifetime
reliability modeling framework. This framework is based on efficient Monte Carlo
methods to treat multiprocessor systems-on-chip as a combination of computation
and communication units. The goal of this research is to develop new dynamic
reliability management techniques based on dynamic voltage and frequency scaling
and application remapping. Based on control theory concepts, these techniques
proactively improve the lifetime reliability of multicore systems.

The proposed dynamic reliability management techniques enable the development of
more reliable multiprocessor systems-on-chip, which have a dramatic impact on
society via applications ranging from entertainment and gaming to bio-
engineering, military and space. More broadly, the results of this project
impact significantly the design of future integrated systems by advancing the
understanding of the tradeoffs between reliability as a new design concern and
power consumption, performance and area as traditional objectives.