* 1361413
* Assessing the Potentials of the Adaptive Natural Density Partitioning Methods for Rationalizing Chemical Bonding in Novel Clusters, Solids, Interfaces, and Clusters on Surfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Alexander Boldyrev, Utah State University
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 07/31/2018
* USD 330,000.00

Professor Alexander Boldyrev of Utah State University is funded by the Chemical
Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms A (CSDM-A) Program for research to develop
new theoretical tools to rationalize bonding, structure, stability, and
reactivity of novel and unusual chemical species. The newly developed Adaptive
Natural Density Partitioning (AdNDP) and Solid State Adaptive Natural Density
Partitioning (SSAdNDP) methods for solids, biomolecules and reaction
intermediates will advance the ability to decipher chemical bonding in clusters,
nanoparticles, solids, biomolecules, catalysts, as well as to study mechanisms
of chemical reactions. The results obtained in these studies can have
significant potential for future advancement of nanotechnology, catalysis,
material science and biotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
assessing the potential of the AdNDP and SSAdNDP methods for interpreting a
general electronic wavefunction of molecules, clusters, condensed phase
materials and their surfaces, clusters on the surfaces of solids, molecules
adsorbed on clusters on the surfaces, and interfaces of two solids. First, a
software program capable of finding global minimum and other low-lying isomers
of main group and transition metal clusters on the surface of solids is being
developed. The way gas phase clusters are altered upon binding to surfaces also
is being addressed. Second, these methods are being applied to investigate the
2D-3D transition in negatively charged pure and doped boron clusters and the
electronic spectra of boron clusters. Third, the SSAdNDP software is being used
to elucidate the chemical bonding in solid-state phosphide compounds. The
broader impacts involve the incorporation of these methods into teaching
computational and quantum chemistry to undergraduate and graduate students, as
well as to high school students during the annual Utah State University High
School Summer Internship. Teaching the methods is beneficial to students as it
is the only tool capable of rendering a complete chemical bonding picture for
molecules featuring both localized and delocalized bonding.