* 1361765
* Understanding the Chemical Dynamics of Proton-Transfer Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Christopher Cheatum, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 07/31/2017
* USD 390,000.00

CHE-1361765: Christopher Cheatum, University of Iowa, "Understanding the
chemical dynamics of proton-transfer reactions"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this
award, the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms A program is funding the
research of Christopher Cheatum, University of Iowa, to investigate a key
chemical process known as a proton transfer reaction. This simple reaction in
which a hydrogen atom, stripped of its single electron, is moved from one
molecule to another forms the basis for a large number of more complex reactions
in biology and other settings. A familiar example is the reaction between an
acid, such as vinegar, and a base, such as baking soda. The vigorous chemical
reaction that results when these two are brought into contact generates a great
deal of heat and energy but involves, at the molecular level, just a simple
movement of a single hydrogen from the vinegar to the baking soda. In this
project, the investigators are using a sophisticated technique known as two-
dimensional infrared spectroscopy (2D IR) to follow the movement of the hydrogen
atom as it occurs during the chemical reaction. The specific project funded here
is to study a model system using a small molecule, formic acid, reacting with a
simple base similar to ammonia. A model system is being used in order to fully
develop the observation technique and, eventually, apply it to more complex
systems. In contrast to earlier studies which involved the application of laser
light to force the movement of the hydrogen atom from one molecule to another,
this research is investigating this important reaction under ordinary
conditions, where the hydrogen moves by itself. The results are, thus, expected
to provide a more realistic glimpse into what actually happens during this
important, fundamental chemical process. The work is having a broad impact on
many fields of science through the development of new scientific instruments
that can be used to study a variety of phenomena from biology to materials
science and beyond. The work is having a further broad impact on the training of
the next generation of scientists through the involvement of students at all
levels, even elementary school, in this research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proton-
transfer reactions are fundamental in chemistry and have important applications
in biology, energy, and the environment. Proton transfers are challenging to
understand and control because they can involve quantum tunneling of the proton,
solvent control of the reaction coordinate, and strong anharmonic couplings of
the proton to many degrees of freedom of the complex. Given the importance of
proton-transfer reactions and the difficulties associated with accurate modeling
of their chemical dynamics, there is a critical need for a ground-electronic-
state, experimental model system in which the kinetics and dynamics of the
proton transfer can be measured directly. The goal of this project is to develop
such a model system and to use that system to test theoretical predictions about
the factors that control the reaction dynamics. This work is yielding insights
into proton-transfer reaction dynamics that will improve the models that
scientists use to think about these reactions and how to control them. The
project is divided into three stages: 1. Development of a model system for
studying the kinetics of proton-transfer reactions. Preliminary data suggest
that complexes of deuterated formic acid with tertiary amines have the necessary
spectroscopic and chemical properties to access the proton-transfer reaction
kinetics via 2D IR chemical-exchange measurements. 2. Determining the factors
that control the kinetic properties of the model proton-transfer system. A
working hypothesis is that measurements of the primary kinetic isotope effect,
the temperature dependence of the rate and the isotope effect, and the variation
of the rate with the solvent properties will reveal the factors that control the
proton-transfer reaction dynamics and will serve as a benchmark for
computational methods. 3. Understanding the effect of vibrational excitation on
the proton-transfer equilibrium. A working hypothesis here is that vibrational
relaxation via solvation and nonadiabatic transitions perturbs the proton-
transfer equilibrium as predicted by some theoretical models.