* 1361240
* Emergent properties of synthetic microbial consortia
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Tomas Gedeon, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2019
* USD 745,616.00

Microbiology research is currently undergoing a revolutionary transition from
the study of primarily monocultures to the study of natural and synthetic
microbial communities. Microbial consortia play a key role in chronic medical
infections and the human gut microbiome and have been implicated in many chronic
medical conditions including ulcerative colitus. Microbial consortia are also
used in water treatment plants, toxic site remediation and biofuel production.
Understanding the behavior of microbial communities in response to a disturbance
and their subsequent control remains an outstanding scientific challenge. This
project will provide a first step toward the goal of developing analytic and
modeling techniques that will allow rational design of synthetic microbial
communities that are robust and controllable. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are
theories suggesting that diversification in a microbial community may enhance
stability, robustness and increase efficiency; however a precise quantitative
understanding of the advantages that a consortium provides for its members is
needed. This project seeks to experimentally and theoretically determine the
impact of specific metabolic interactions within a microbial community on
emergent properties like enhanced stress tolerance or increased biomass
production. The project will use tools of dynamical systems, like invariant
manifold theory and stability of invariant sets, to analyze models of microbial
communities. Methods of partial differential equations will be used to extend
this analysis to interacting spatially segregated communities. These models will
precisely quantify the relationship between the number of defined microbial
interactions and the magnitude of improvement on both consortia efficiency and
enhanced tolerance. This will provide a systems biology basis for characterizing
consortial behaviors and a scalable methodology to compare the benefits of
membership in a microbial community to the costs for each individual. This
information is fundamental to understanding microbial community persistence and
will provide a rational framework for controlling both unwanted and desirable
consortia. Prior research has yielded preliminary results on the conditions
necessary for increased biomass production in specialized binary communities
versus a monoculture and has demonstrated the existence of invariant manifolds
that simplify the analysis for many types of microbial communities. This project
extends this work by building experimental synthetic communities with well-
defined metabolic roles, measuring the synthetic community's characteristics
like biomass production and robustness to perturbations and constructing
mathematical models for more complex and spatially segregated communities.