* 1361339
* CSEDI Collaborative Research: Grand Challenge for Experimental Study of Plastic Deformation Under Deep Earth Conditions
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Pamela Burnley, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 08/31/2019
* USD 264,000.00

The goal of this research program is to develop and utilize experimental
capabilities for studying the plastic properties of rocks at conditions of the
deep Earth. Over geologic time we see that continents have been ripped apart
with plate boundaries punctuated by earthquakes and volcanoes. However, over the
vast regions of the Earth, these processes proceed smoothly and slowly. While
earthquakes express the dynamic character of Earth deformation, the slow
movement of the continents provides the driving force. The enabling process for
this large-scale motion is the plastic deformation of rocks throughout the
Earth's mantle. The foundation of plate tectonics rests on the contention that
rocks deform slowly but surely at the high pressure and temperature of the deep
Earth. This research program is to continue to build experimental capabilities
to quantify the plastic character of rocks as a function of depth in the Earth.
This program works at the juncture of high-pressure apparatus development and
national synchrotron facilities that can provide intense x-ray probes. This
union promises experimental capabilities that increase the depth range of the
Earth that we can access, with high precision measurement, by a factor of 100
from previous studies. The data that will come from this program will enable
testing and modifying of models of Earth evolution. These deformation facilities
enable new directions in Earth material research at mantle pressure and
temperature including elastic wave attenuation at seismic frequencies, reaction
kinetics, thermal diffusivity, and relationship of lattice preferred orientation
to deformation geometry, which links seismic anisotropy to flow history. They
also provide a potential facility and technical knowhow for studying material
strength and plasticity at extreme conditions such as those generated in the
next generation power plants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Stress, strain, pressure, and
temperature are the primary variables that need to be measured during a
deformation experiment. With the aid of the national synchrotrons (the Advanced
Photon Source and the National Synchrotron Light Source), the investigators have
developed the tools to make these measurements. They have also built the first
generation of high-pressure apparatus for introducing 'large - volume high
pressure' technology into deformation machines. They are now able to make
accurate rheology experiments at pressures 1 to 2 orders of magnitude higher
than could be achieved 10 years ago. The next phase is to take full advantage of
the current hydrostatic high-pressure equipment, including advanced technologies
for making polycrystalline diamonds, to reach lower mantle conditions. The goals
of this program are to 1) increase the pressure range for deformation
experiments to 30 - 40 GPa, well into the lower mantle, 2) improve measurement
resolution of stress and strain with a combination of hardware and software
developments, 3) enable simultaneous measurements of a sample properties such as
preferred orientation of grains and acoustic velocity, 4) explore advanced
techniques such as those developed by the synchrotron community but may be
useful to earth science goals. These are often high risk, but high return tools
such as white beam Laue diffraction that could yield very detailed information
about the individual grains within a polycrystal.