* 1361178
* Molecular Electronic Structure Theory:  Methods and Applications
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2017
* Henry Schaefer III, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 06/30/2017
* USD 431,802.00

Henry (Fritz) Schaefer of the University of Georgia is supported by an award
from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods Program in the
Chemistry Division and the Computational and Data-Enabled Science and
Engineering Program (CDS&E) to develop new quantum chemistry methods to study
the behavior of electrons in molecules. The electrons in atoms and molecules are
responsible for making and breaking chemical bonds. Very small particles, such
as electrons, follow the laws of quantum mechanics. Thus, quantum chemistry or
electronic structure methods are essential for a fundamental understanding of
chemical reactions as well as other important atomic and molecular processes.
The basic equation of quantum mechanics, the Schroedinger equation, is solved on
a computer. An exact quantum mechanical description of all but the smallest
molecules would require vast amounts of computer time. A goal of quantum
chemists is to develop more efficient and more accurate methods. Schaefer and
his co-workers have developed important new methods called Density Cumulant
Theory. (DCT) This research project has two, distinct but related aims. The
first is the hypothesis, formulation, development, implementation, and testing
of the DCT method. Second, these new techniques are used to solve important
prototypical chemical problems. These methods are implemented in a publicly
available, user-friendly quantum chemistry software package called PSI4. Many of
the current developers of PSI4 are currently members of Schaefer's research
group. In the Schaefer laboratory, an important new method is being developed,
Density Cumulant Theory (DCT). More specifically being pursued are (1)
N-representability conditions from analyses of unitary transformations; (2)
N-representability from the idempotency of the two-particle density matrix; (3)
alternative DCT hierarchies using the irreducible contracted Schroedinger
equation; (4) three-electron correlation effects in DCT; and (5) efficient DCT
implementations using pair natural orbitals for large scale chemical
applications. Also being tackled are linear-scaling algorithms for very large
molecular systems. The freely available, open-source PSI4 suite of next
generation computer programs for electronic structure theory is being developed
and distributed. Applications ranging from physical and materials to inorganic,
organic and biological chemistry are successfully being completed with state-of-
the-art theoretical methods.