* 1361670
* RCN - SEES: Sustainable Cities - People and the Energy-Climate-Water Nexus
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Anu Ramaswami, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 09/30/2017
* USD 666,412.00

1140384 (Ramaswami). This award is funded under NSF's Science, Engineering, and
Education for Sustainability (SEES) activities, which aims to address the
challenges of creating a sustainable world. This project will develop a research
collaboration network (RCN) across 20+ US universities and 2 national labs to
coordinate work on the overarching theme of sustainable cities, with focus on
reducing energy use, carbon emissions and mitigating climate-risks to water
supply and public health in cities. The US network will collaborate with
international sustainability research networks (in Australia, EU, Asia) and with
a network of practitioners and policymakers in US and global cities. RCN
activities will lead to the development of (a) inter-disciplinary systems
framework(s) to represent linkages between people, infrastructures and the
natural system, from the city-scale to the global scale, that shape
sustainability outcomes in cities, (b) harmonized methods and international data
standards to operationalize the framework, to report, for example, the carbon
footprints of cities, water vulnerability of cities, or to analyze social actors
who shape urban infrastructures and consumption patterns toward sustainability,
(c) a network of 12 global cities for testing the framework and its component
theories and models/methods in cities with different natural, infrastructural,
socioeconomic and cultural characteristics, (d) a virtual collaborative forum to
share research methods, experiences and teaching tools across more than 20+ US
universities on the common thematic area of sustainable cities. The RCN will
provide science based systems analysis tools, much needed by more than 1000
cities worldwide that are developing sustainability plans addressing energy,
water and climate change. A unique aspect of this RCN is broad-based integration
across urban ecology, industrial ecology, atmospheric sciences, infrastructure
engineering, architecture, urban planning, behavioral sciences, public affairs
and public health toward the goal of sustainable cities. Cross-discipline
integration, coordination of data across scales, and cross-city comparisons are
expected to advance the science of sustainable cities. The RCN has potential to
impact more than 1200 students in participating US universities and 65 million
people in the network of cities where field work will be coordinated.
Dissemination potential is high through network links with policy groups such as
ICLEI-USA and The World Bank who work with cities worldwide.