* 1361267
* Collaborative Research: Three-Dimensional Assessment of Stresses and Fracture Behavior in Sand
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Richard Regueiro, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 07/31/2018
* USD 70,569.00

This award concerns fundamental aspects of stress distribution and fracture
behavior in sands. Granular materials such as sand, gravel, aggregates,
agricultural grains, and pharmaceutical products are comprised of discrete
particles in contact with each other. At the micro-scale, each particle is in
contact with neighboring particles where individual particle properties and
contact mechanics govern particle interaction. At the macro-scale, multiple-
particle assemblies interact through networks of force chains at contact points.
As the applied stresses increase, some particles may fracture, which causes a
change in the distribution of force chains within the mass of the granular
material. Characterization of force chains has been the subject of extensive
research primarily using photoelastic materials and the discrete element method
(DEM). Experimental characterization, however, of the development and evolution
of force chains in three dimensions (3D) is not available. Measuring properties
of force chains and contact forces between particles experimentally - while they
may be fracturing - is an important step toward enhancing knowledge of particle-
scale behavior in granular materials. The award supports fundamental research to
provide critical experimental measurements at a range of length-scales, from the
particle-scale to the size of a typical soil mechanics laboratory specimen. The
research will have major impact on the development of more accurate
computational models that can be applied to better understand a variety of
engineering problems involving flow and deformation of granular materials,
insertion of piles in sandy soils, in-situ measurement of shear strength in
sands using penetrometer devices, tires rolling or skidding through granular
soils on the Earth or other planets, high velocity impact of sands, explosive
loading of soils, grain silo design, and more efficient manufacturing, handling,
and processing of pharmaceutical, agricultural, and food products that are
granular in nature.

The objective of the research is to use 3D x-ray diffraction (3DXRD) and
synchrotron micro-computed tomography (SMT) to answer fundamental questions
about fracture behavior, contact stresses and strains, and onset and evolution
of force chains in silica sand. The research will (i) investigate the influence
of crystallographic orientation on fracture behavior of silica sand; (ii)
measure the distribution of strain and stress within compressed sand particles
and investigate their influence on particle fracture in 3D; (iii) quantify the
contact stresses between sand particles and assess their influence on fracture
behavior of silica sand and on the evolution of force chains; (iv) investigate
the factors that affect the onset and collapse of force chains in sand in 3D;
and (v) model fracture behavior and force transmission behavior of silica sand
in 3D using crystal elasticity and the finite element method (FEM). SMT and
3DXRD are powerful non-destructive 3D techniques that offer complementary
experimental measurements and have the potential to yield breakthroughs in the
measurement of stress and strain in granular materials at multiple length-
scales.