* 1361869
* Conference on Frontiers of Hierarchical Modeling in Observational Studies, Complex Surveys and Big Data, May 29-31, 2014
* MPS,DMS
* 05/15/2014,04/30/2015
* Parthasarathi Lahiri, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Xiaoming Huo
* 04/30/2015
* USD 10,000.00

Conference title: "Frontiers of Hierarchical Modeling in Observational Studies,
Complex Surveys and Big Data"&lt;br/&gt;Dates: May 29-31,
2014&lt;br/&gt;Location: University of Maryland at College Park
&lt;br/&gt;Conference website: http://www.jointprogram.umd.edu/ghosh/
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This conference, titled "Frontiers of hierarchical
modeling in observational studies, complex surveys and big data," will cover a
range of topics, which include Bayesian methods, random effects, hierarchical
models, small area estimation, case-control studies, and large scale data
analysis. The conference will promote the role of statistics in both
interdisciplinary research and the general science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
conference is expected to have an impact on the next generation of statistical
researchers and educators, through interaction with peers and senior
professionals from academia, industries, and government agencies. The conference
will have an excellent slate of plenary, invited, contributed, and poster
sessions. In addition, a special plenary session will be organized for poster
presenters to give three-minute highlights of their papers. During the regular
poster sessions, the conference attendees will have ample time to discuss their
research. Students will be selected for travel awards based on their submitted
papers/posters. The event will provide a forum for junior researchers and
students from diverse backgrounds to interact with respected senior leaders in
the field and with one another. While selecting the recipients, special
consideration will be given to women and minority students.