* 1361771
* NETS: SMALL: Collaborative Research:  Protocol Stacks Design and Evolution: The Role of Layering and Modularity
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Roch Guerin, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 09/30/2017
* USD 250,000.00

Network protocol stacks typically follow a multi-layer hierarchical
architecture. What determines the required number of layers, or the number of
protocols at each layer? The space of applications, services and user
expectations (at the top layer) and the space of elementary functions (at the
bottom layer) are constantly evolving -- how does this dynamic environment
affect the organization of layered protocol stacks? What determines the
evolvability of a protocol stack in the presence of changes? How does
evolvability relate to other important system-wide properties such as robustness
(the ability to deal with unexpected change), optimality and modularity? These
are some of the high-level questions that this research project focuses on.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This research seeks to reexamine the
fundamentals of protocols design and investigate the role of and dependencies
between several central concepts: layering, modularity, complexity, robustness,
optimality. The central theme in this research, however, is evolution --
networking architectures are not designed to work in a static environment.
Applications, services, user expectations, communication and computing
technologies, as well as the underlying economics, are all in a constant state
of flux. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rather than rely on a single modeling framework,
this research starts with two preliminary models, referred to as Stratum and
Lexis. The two models share some features but are also significantly different
and complementary. They both capture the time-varying character of a layered
design process aiming to support a dynamic set of applications from an
underlying set of (also dynamic) elementary functions. Stratum is more
constrained than Lexis as it considers, first, a specific ordering for the
available building blocks, and second, an endogenous model for the ``death
rate'' of existing applications. Lexis, on the other hand, is more general and
more abstract, and captures how a time-varying set of regular expressions can be
constructed hierarchically from a time-varying alphabet, re-using simpler
regular expressions as much as possible.&lt;br/&gt;The Stratum and Lexis models
are initial steps towards developing a base understanding of what factors
influence the evolvability and sustainability of protocols. With this base in
place, further domain-specific insight can be developed and yield targeted
guidelines for the design of future network
protocols.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: There are currently four large
NSF-funded Future Internet Architecture (FIA) projects that pursue a ``clean-
slate'' design approach for a future Internet that is more robust, secure,
evolvable, etc. A goal of this research is to both inform and learn from the
efforts of the four FIA projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of
this project also includes the release of two extensible simulators
(corresponding to Stratum and Lexis) that will allow students and instructors to
experiment with how network architectures evolve in dynamic environments and
under optimization objectives and constraints. No such tools are available
today.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Additionally, this project has a significant inter-
disciplinary component in both its ?inputs and outputs.? Specifically, much of
the prior work behind this research (inputs) has originated in economics,
physics and evolutionary biology. Conversely, the project's results (outputs)
are likely to be relevant to other disciplines such as software engineering,
smart manufacturing and the science of organizations.