* 1361066
* EAGER: Dynamic Surface Interactions for Single Molecule Imaging of Biochemical Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 12/01/2013,11/30/2014
* Tao Ye, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 11/30/2014
* USD 110,000.00

In this EAGER project funded by the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in
the Division of Chemistry, Professor Tao Ye at University of California-Merced
and his group will use atomic force microscopy (AFM) to visualize the
conformational changes and biochemical reactions of DNA molecules that are
anchored to electroactive surfaces, i.e., surfaces that dynamically change their
affinity with molecular adsorbates under electrochemical control. Such novel
dynamic surfaces will help address a long-standing challenge in AFM
visualization of biochemical reactions: if the biomacromolecules are pinned
down, which is needed for high resolution AFM, the interactions with the surface
perturb the reaction. The dynamic surfaces will expand the repertoire of
surfaces and reactions that can be probed by single molecule AFM imaging,
significantly reduce the measurement artifacts, and improve the imaging
resolution. Therefore, the project will further our understanding of the
reactions of biomacromolecules at the nanoscale and single molecule level.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will train graduate students at the cutting
edge of nanoscale measurement and imaging. The proposed research will also
provide research opportunities to undergraduate students at UC Merced, many of
whom are underrepresented minorities.