* 1361649
* Building Capacity in the Behavioral Sciences to Improve the Quality of Life on the Lake Traverse Reservation
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2022
* Erin Griffin, Sisseton Wahpeton Community College
* Continuing Grant
* Jody Chase
* 08/31/2022
* USD 2,586,486.00

A goal of the Tribal Colleges and Universities Program (TCUP) is to increase the
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) instructional and
research capacities of specific institutions of higher education that serve the
Nation's indigenous students. Expanding the STEM curricular offerings at these
institutions expands the opportunities of their students to pursue challenging,
rewarding careers in STEM fields, provides for research studies in areas that
may be culturally significant, and encourages a community and generational
appreciation for science and mathematics education. This project aligns directly
with that goal, and moreover will inform the body of knowledge about the
importance and conduct of undergraduate research experiences in recruiting and
retaining underrepresented individuals into STEM studies, and preparing the next
generation of STEM professionals. The connection of faculty to research and
thereby the students to culturally and geographically relevant research is an
important step in producing retained students who are more likely to pursue
advanced degrees. For those students entering the workforce directly from a
tribal college it is equally important that they have a well-defined skill set
in mathematics, science, and technology for entry into the STEM workforce.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sisseton Wahpeton College (SWC) will implement an
associate of arts degree in the behaviorial sciences. This degree program will
incorporate research in the development of the curricula and as a component of
the educational experiences for students. Core research concepts such as data
collection and analysis, evidentiary standards, ethics, technical writing
skills, and critical thinking will be integrated throughout the curriculum by
the utilization of course modules. These modules will be designed to expose
students to authentic research activities in the behavioral sciences. By
utilizing this design all students, even those enrolled in introductory courses,
will have the experience of employing research methods. The program being
proposed will include a wide range of disciplines within the behavioral
sciences. The design provides students with a strong foundation in the field,
which allows for more options as they pursue baccalaureate degrees at other
institutions. SWC and its university partners are committed to the creation of
program-to-program articulation agreements and enhancing student support
services for matriculating students into baccalaureate degree programs. With
this focus on transfers to other universities, the project will examine the
following research question: Are completion rates higher for American Indian
students that begin at a tribal college than those who begin at a mainstream
college? Additionally, the project evaluation plan will provide insight into
effective strategies for community colleges that seek to strengthen
instructional capacity in STEM.