* 1361053
* Collaborative Research:XPS:CLCCA: Performance Portable Abstractions for Large-Scale Irregular Computations
* CSE,CCF
* 09/10/2013,08/31/2018
* Srinivas Aluru, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 08/31/2018
* USD 299,999.00

Ongoing technology trends are accelerating scientific discovery by allowing
researchers to generate enormous quantities of data, in domains ranging from
computational biology to social networks. There is an urgent need to make it
easy and fast to extract useful content from this data using appropriate
abstractions and parallel runtimes. Work conducted under this project aims to
make "big data" computing more readily available to applications with dynamic
structure and irregular dependencies, thereby enabling advances in scientific
computing in general and computational biology in particular.

This project extends the state of the art in scientific computing by developing
programming abstractions to expose -- and run-time optimizations to exploit --
the parallelism available in large, irregular applications. Parallelism is
essential for the extraction of useful information from ever increasing volumes
of scientific data, but the irregularity of data structure and access in many
problem domains makes efficient parallelization difficult. At the level of the
programming model, the project addresses the challenge of irregularity by
identifying design patterns for important new classes of applications -- in
particular, those that use trees and graphs for data representation and access
but demonstrate some structure in the traversal. At the level of the run-time
system, it is developing computational engines that support and exploit the new
patterns, leveraging the structure exposed to automatically and dynamically map
computational tasks to hardware nodes.