* 1361171
* RAPID: Collaborative Research: Do negative plant-soil feedbacks outweigh positive ectomycorrhizal mutualisms in dipterocarp rainforest?
* BIO,DEB
* 11/15/2013,10/31/2015
* Kabir Peay, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 10/31/2015
* USD 127,847.00

High tree species diversity is a characteristic feature of rainforests in South
America, Africa and Southeast Asia. However, it continues to be difficult for
ecologists to explain how such a large number of species can be different enough
to coexist when they all use the same small set of resources (light, water,
nutrients). Theoretically, only a few dominant competitors should persist. One
hypothesis explaining this conundrum is that soil fungi cause seedlings to die
as tree populations grow, thus preventing any one species from becoming much
more common than any other species. Current research on this topic is promising
but has two primary shortcomings. First, it has largely been limited to Central
and South American rainforests, despite fundamental differences in soil fungi
around the world. Second, it has not considered that some soil fungi benefit,
not harm, seedlings. In this project, investigators will take advantage of a
rare mass seeding event in Malaysian Borneo to establish experiments that will
test hypotheses about positive plant-fungal interactions in this ecologically
under-explored part of the world. The work has great potential to lead to new
insights into the ecological processes that shape the astounding diversity of
tropical rain forests. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to improving our
ecological understanding of the maintenance of tropical biodiversity, the
insights gained through this research will help conserve the critically
endangered rainforest ecosystems of Southeast Asia. Although these rainforests
harbor a major share of global biodiversity and play a critical role in the
function of the global biosphere, the region is experiencing alarming rates of
deforestation. By studying the factors that impact seedling recruitment, this
research will provide important knowledge required for successful reforestation
and restoration of degraded forests. In addition, the study will shed light on
the little known and potentially at risk microbial dimensions of biodiversity in
these rainforests. Finally, this work will provide invaluable training for
graduate students at US universities to work in a very complex ecosystem and
increase US capacity to engage in these ecosystems.