* 1361121
* New Algorithms and their Use in the Study of Nonadiabatic Processes Influenced by Conical Intersections
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2017
* David Yarkony, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 12/31/2017
* USD 425,000.00

David Yarkony of Johns Hopkins University is supported by an award from the
Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Chemistry
Division to develop theoretical and computational approaches to study chemical
reactions that are initiated when a molecule is excited by absorbing energy from
light. Scientists can describe a chemical reaction as a marble rolling on a
surface: reactants point A; products point B; moving downhill is easy (extract
chemical energy); moving uphill is hard (need to add energy). For many light-
initiated processes such as photosynthesis, vision, and solar energy conversion,
this notion must be generalized. In this case, as the result of absorbing light,
the marble starts on a higher surface. Scientists want to know how the marble
gets back to the lower surface and where it ends up on that surface, that is,
what molecules are made and how much energy they have. If the light is provided
by a laser, the task at hand may be laser control of a chemical reaction. If the
light comes from the sun, energy conversion, photosynthesis or cell damage may
be the issue. The passage from the upper surface to the lower surface not unlike
spiraling down a drain - it involves funneling by a double cone-like structure
(two cones joined at their vertices) called a "conical intersection". The
mathematical description of the resulting multi-surface process requires
detailed knowledge of the surfaces and the connecting cones. The more accurate
the description of the surfaces and cones the more likely the computer
simulation will correspond to reality. The principal goal of this project is the
representation of the surfaces and connecting cones using the most accurate
tools available and enabling computers to reliably simulate energetic processes.
A principal issue in nonadiabatic dynamics is the quality of the electronic
structure data (energies and interstate couplings) used. When direct or on-the-
fly dynamics techniques are employed, the quality of electronic structure data
is subordinated to the need to obtain that data quickly. The alternative is to
use fitted coupled potential energy surfaces. This method can use electronic
structure descriptions more accurately than those used in direct dynamics and
can smooth the irregularities that may occur in the electronic energies due to
the orbital changes inherent in nonadiabatic processes. The challenge is to
determine the fit. By combining least squares fitting with exact data
representation and incorporating derivative coupling data directly into the
fitting process, an algorithm has been developed that provides a quantifiably
quasi-diabatic fitted representation of electronic structure data including a
reliable description of seams of conical intersections. That approach is
suitable for 4-5 atom systems. The goal of this research is to extend this
algorithm to treat significantly larger molecules, such as the photodissociation
of phenol. The proposed fit surfaces algorithm will make high quality electronic
structure data available for the study of nonadiabatic dynamics in nucleobases
and a multitude of comparably sized systems. Determining how far this
methodology can be extended, that is how large a system can be treated, is one
of the principal goals of this research.