* 1361654
* Harnessing the Unusual Electronic Properties of the Ketimide Ligand:  The Pursuit of High Oxidation State Metal Ions and Metal-Metal Bonds
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2017
* Trevor Hayton, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 05/31/2017
* USD 390,000.00

This award from the Chemical Synthesis (SYN) Program of the Chemistry Division
supports work by Professor Trevor W. Hayton at the University of California
Santa Barbara to carry out fundamental studies on the synthesis and reactivity
of molecules in unusual oxidations states. Often, these molecules have the
ability to effect challenging bond forming and bond activation reactions;
reactions that are relevant to a wide variety of catalytic processes. In
addition, these complexes further our understanding of metal-ligand bonding and
help to validate new computational methodologies. These molecules are stabilized
by the ketimide ligand, which possesses a combination of orbital interactions
that permits it to stabilize both high and low oxidation states. The basic
research funded by this award advances our understanding of the chemistry of the
earth abundant elements and assists in the transition to a carbon-neutral,
sustainable economy. The broader impacts of this work include potential societal
benefits, such as the use of these materials in catalysis or magnetic
information storage, as well as the training of undergraduate and graduate
students in the synthesis and characterization of inorganic and organometallic
complexes. Professor Hayton helps organize the Southern California
Organometallics meeting (SoCal Organometallics). This meeting allows
organometallic students from Southern California to present their current
research and interact with students and faculty from neighboring
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project pays particular focus on
ketimide-containing complexes of the earth abundant elements, manganese, iron,
and copper. Their properties are being studied using a variety of techniques,
including NMR spectroscopy, X-ray crystallography, and SQUID magnetometry. Their
reactivity with small molecules, such as carbon monoxide, carbon dioxide, and
ethylene, is also being explored.