* 1361795
* I/UCRC: NSF Net-centric and Cloud Software and Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 04/15/2014,03/31/2021
* Farokh Bastani, University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* Behrooz Shirazi
* 03/31/2021
* USD 238,748.00

The NSF Net-centric and Cloud Software and Systems Industry/University
Cooperative Research Center (NCSS I/UCRC) is a multi-university cooperative
established in 2009 with a collaborative research partnership between the
University of North Texas (UNT) and the University of Texas at Dallas (UTD),
with Southern Methodist University (SMU) as an affiliated academic site. The
original academic sites (UNT and UTD, with SMU as an affiliated member) will
complete Phase I in February 2014 and are seeking to continue operations as
Phase II I/UCRC sites. The research focus of the NCSS I/UCRC is on cost-
effective methods of enabling the rapid design and deployment of highly
efficient and dependable net centric and cloud hardware/software systems that
must operate in various environments subject to potentially stringent response
time, power, heat, security and resource constraints. By combining the diverse
capabilities and expertise of the participating academic institutions and the
real-world experiences of engineers from well-known innovative high tech
companies, the center will enhance the research capabilities of all the
participants. The NCSS I/UCRC will develop innovative and practical technologies
for modeling, analysis, design, implementation, verification and validation,
deployment, and evolution of a variety of net-centric and cloud systems. This
systems-oriented research is aimed at enabling the coordinated hardware/software
development of highly dependable integrated net-centric and cloud
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NCSS I/UCRC research will enable industry to
develop and leverage emerging net-centric and cloud computing platforms and
infrastructures. The industrial sectors that benefit from the center include
defense, energy, transportation, health care, commerce, homeland security, and
emergency preparedness/emergency response industries. The Center has actively
worked with the Metroplex Technology Business Council (MTBC) Innovation Group in
Dallas/Fort Worth metropolitan area and led to the creation of a new MTBC
Special Interest Group (SIG) in the area of cloud computing. The NCSS I/UCRC
will continue to provide education and training of students to meet our nation?s
future workforce needs in these rapidly emerging and evolving technology areas.
Many of the software tools, and infrastructure (e.g., sensors labs) developed at
UNT site were made available to students in various courses such as sensor
networks (with 30 students per year), computer architecture (with 40 students
per year). The UTD site developed courses on cloud computing systems, Internet
of Things, programming and optimization of applications on heterogeneous
multicore systems, power management for multi-core systems, and other NCSS
related topics. Over 60 students have enrolled in these courses over the past 3
years. A significant growth in enrollments in these courses is anticipated. The
Center activities also have and will continue to provide real-world research
experience for several graduate and undergraduate students as well as
international education and research collaboration in this area with some
faculty and students from universities in China, France, Germany, Italy, Taiwan,
and Turkey.