* 1361728
* Homogeneous and Heterogeneous Ligand Centered Catalysts for Reversible Proton Reduction
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Craig Grapperhaus, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 07/31/2017
* USD 420,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Catalysis Program in the Chemistry Division is
funding Professor Craig Grapperhaus of the University of Louisville to develop
catalysts for the production of hydrogen as a renewable fuel source. Finding
practical renewable energy sources is a great challenge we currently face, and
the transformation and storage of solar energy as chemical energy is one of the
solutions that is actively pursued because plants have achieved this feat
through photosynthesis. The research focuses on catalysts in which a metal
coordinates ligands that can accept or donate electrons; consequently, the
ligands rather than the metal would be directly involved in the chemical
interaction with the protons and the molecular hydrogen production. This
research creates educational opportunities for undergraduate and graduate
students from the University of Louisville and the Campbellsville University, a
neighboring undergraduate institution. These students will gain expertise and
experience in synthesis, electrochemistry, computational chemistry, and
catalysis. The project will also create opportunities for interactions with
engineers in the Conn Center for Renewable Energy Research at the University of
Louisville, which focuses on research on renewable energy and sustainability
issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of the research is to develop ligand-
centered catalysts for the reversible reduction of protons to hydrogen. The
catalysts will be designed to promote a ligand-centered mechanism facilitated by
the incorporation of non-innocent, redox-active thiolate donors. The function of
the catalyst depends on the interaction between the metal center and the ligand.
The catalysts under development employ strong metal-ligand interactions that
favor electron delocalization, thus supporting new mechanistic pathways for
catalytic proton reduction/hydrogen evolution. Catalysts will be prepared and
characterized in solution. Electrochemical investigations will probe the
reaction mechanism. Ligand modification coupled with computational studies will
be used to address the electronic effects on overpotential and ligand basicity.
Additionally, the isolation and characterization of reaction intermediates will
be pursued to validate the proposed mechanism. Successful candidates will then
be immobilized on a solid support for the development of heterogeneous
derivatives that could have greater practical utility.