* 1361896
* Collaborative Research: Hybrid Organic-Inorganic Thermoelectric Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2017
* Zhiqun Lin, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 06/30/2017
* USD 160,001.00

Proposal 1400246&lt;br/&gt;Collaborative Research: Hybrid organic-inorganic
thermoelectric materials&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Thermoelectric materials are materials which can be used
to convert thermal energy directly to electricity. The performance of a
thermoelectric material is measured by the "figure of merit", termed ZT. There
has been much research into increasing thermoelectric materials, figure of
merit, however, progress in this area has been slow and most of the researched
thermoelectric materials up to now are suffering from either high fabrication
cost, usage of rare earth or toxic elements, or poor mechanical properties.
Organic thermoelectric materials (OTEs) have recently attracted attention for
low temperature applications (&lt; 300K), especially cooling purposes, as they
are flexible, low-cost and abundant, and low-cost fabrication methods for
synthesizing them exist. However, the ZT of the state-of-the-art OTEs is
significantly lower than the ZT of their inorganic counterparts. In fact, there
are only few candidates for low temperature thermoelectric devices even among
inorganic materials. In the case of inorganic thermoelectric materials, the
limiting factor in improving ZT is the electron mobility. This work will allow
for the fabrication of high-ZT thermoelectric materials by addressing the
challenges in mobility enhancement. This will be done by combining the two
classes of materials (organic and inorganic), using a fabrication scheme in
which high-mobility inorganic nanowires are embedded inside organic compounds.
The researchers are a multidisciplinary team with complementary expertise and
with common interest in the thermoelectric field. Graduate and Undergraduate
Students involved in this project therefore will benefit largely from the
multidisciplinary nature of the work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work is applying
new doping schemes (3D modulation-doping and field-effect doping) to hybrid
organic-inorganic materials and to simulate, design, fabricate and characterize
a new class of low temperature thermoelectric nanocomposites. The two-phase
material uses the organic phase (e.g. conjugated-polymer or organic molecules)
as a source of electrons and the inorganic semiconducting phase (e.g. Si
nanowires) as the electron transport channel with high mobility. The key is to
use the modulation-doping scheme to favor carrier transfer from the source of
carriers (e.g. conjugated-polymer) to the high mobility inorganic semiconducting
phase (inorganic nanowires) and optimize the carrier concentration to design a
high Z hybrid thermoelectric material. A large class of semiconducting
nanostructures (e.g. Si, CdTe, Bi, and PbTe nanowires and holely structures)
combined with conjugated polymers (e.g., chemically-modified PEDOT and low
bandgap polymers) and organic molecules (specifically charged chemical species
attached to molecules such as CF3- substituted styrene molecules) will be
simulated, synthesized and optimized to identify new hybrid materials with a
potentially high ZT.