* 1361323
* RAPID: Immediate Behavioral Response to Flash-Floods in Uttarakhand, North India
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/01/2013,11/30/2015
* Sudha Arlikatti, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* David Mendonca
* 11/30/2015
* USD 39,887.00

The objective of this Rapid Response Research (RAPID) proposal is to better
understand people's immediate response to the June 16th - 17th, 2013 flash
floods in the hilly state of Uttarakhand in North India. This event has claimed
over 1,000 lives with over 5,700 still reported missing and presumed dead as of
early August. Data will be collected through field observations and semi-
structured interviews of over 300 flash flood survivors from six affected
villages. The interviews with survivors will examine their traditional knowledge
about floods and landslides and actions they take, their understanding of how
the environment changes, number of floods they have experienced, their sources
of warning, the actions they took prior to evacuating, their emotional state at
the time of the flash floods, and their responses related to protecting
themselves, their family and friends. The project activities will advance the
state of knowledge about people's response to flash floods and provide a
foundation for cross-cultural comparisons of flash flood response. This will be
extremely significant because there are few studies of flood response and
virtually none on flash flood response in developing countries. Adopting
questionnaire items from previous surveys used will provide a basis for
comparing responses to the Uttarakhand flash floods with responses to other
rapid-onset hazards (the Mt. St. Helens mudflows, the Christchurch and Hitachi
earthquakes, and the American Samoa earthquake and tsunami).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;University contacts made in India during the data
collection stage will be of value in catalyzing future collaborations for
faculty and student exchanges and research endeavors between UNT and Delhi
University. The project activities will advance teaching, training, and learning
in the US as the project findings will be incorporated into course modules by
the PI. Lectures and exercises will be developed in undergraduate and graduate
classes such as Special Populations, Sustainability and Emergency Management,
Foundations of Emergency Management, Disaster Response Planning and Disaster
Research Methods, reflecting the findings and challenges of disaster management
in a developing country. This study will also provide field research and data
collection experience to five Indian graduate students and data coding,
analysis, and publication experience to a doctoral student at UNT.