* 1361768
* Stone Child College TSIP
* EDU,EES
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2018
* Eric Shulund, Stone Child College
* Standard Grant
* Jody Chase
* 05/31/2018
* USD 498,944.00

The Tribal Colleges and Universities Program (TCUP) is designed to support
improvements in the scientific, mathematical, engineering
and&lt;br/&gt;technological education infrastructure in (a) tribally-controlled
colleges and universities, or (b) those colleges that serve significant numbers
of Alaska Natives or Native Hawaiians. Targeted STEM Infusion Projects (TSIPs)
are offered as a TCUP strand for meritorious projects that focus on smaller
scale transformative efforts. The Stone Child College (SCC) TSIP is designed to
directly benefit students' academic performance in STEM, foster greater
mathematics preparation for future students who enroll at this or another
institution of higher education, and broadly impact the community served by the
college with increased mathematics literacy and performance. It will also
increase the diversity of the STEM workforce by increasing the mathematics
success of American Indians seeking to enter STEM studies and
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will improve students' mathematics
competency, reducing their need for and time spent in remedial coursework, and
enhancing the college's mathematics courses by: (a) providing local high school
seniors the opportunity for an early assessment exam; (b) conducting specialized
intensive sessions, some targeting college freshmen and some provided for any
student who wishes to increase his or her math competency; and (c) reassessing
and updating the mathematics curriculum to ensure it aligns with the standards
of four-year institutions, to increase students' successful transfer to
baccalaureate programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goal of the Stone Child
College TSIP is to effect long-range improvement in STEM education and to
increase the flow of Native American students into scientific technological
careers. This will be accomplished through two primary objectives. The first
objective is to operate a Targeted STEM Infusion Project with 12 students per
cycle. There will be three cycles per year, and each cycle will last eight
weeks. The first two cycles in a year will focus on college freshmen and
sophomore students who are in need of assistance to raise achievement levels so
they can remain on track for a timely college completion. The third cycle will
be open to any students at any level who will benefit from supplemental
instruction in STEM fields. The second objective of the Stone Child College TSIP
is to reassess and update the mathematics curriculum at Stone Child
College.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In 2011, 36.5% of the students entering SCC were
required to take remedial math courses. As a result of this placement, students
have to attend SCC for a minimum of two extra semesters. The Stone Child College
TSIP is going to create three math learning courses each year. The objective of
the three courses is to enhance the learning of the students and to help them
complete the SCC math requirements in a timely manner. As a result of the
enhanced knowledge through the project, more students will be placed in STEM
occupations.