* 1361462
* Mechanistic Studies of Organic Reactivity
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2019
* Jeehiun Lee, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 06/30/2019
* USD 420,000.00

Professor Jeehiun Katherine Lee of the Department of Chemistry at Rutgers
University will utilize funding provided by the Chemical Structure, Dynamic
&amp; Mechanism B Program of the Chemistry Division to explore organocatalysis
by N-heterocyclic carbenes. Specifically, the Stetter reaction, a highly useful
synthetic transformation, will be explored in the gas phase. Mechanistic details
will be revealed by examining this reaction in the absence of solvent. This
project represents fundamental science that lends itself well to the education
of both undergraduate and graduate scientists. The mentoring and training of
students underrepresented in science will also be part of this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;N-Heterocyclic carbenes (NHCs) are stabilized
carbenes that have a wide variety of applications, including as effective novel
ligands for transition-metal-catalyzed reactions; as catalysts in their own
right, for a range of organic transformations; and in protonated form, as
environmentally "clean" nonvolatile solvents for organic reactions (ionic
liquids). Despite the widespread use of NHCs, their fundamental reactivity is
not well characterized. In the proposed work, the reactivity of NHCs will be
characterized through the investigation of the Stetter reaction. The Stetter is
a highly useful synthetic transformation that involves the use of NHCs as
catalysts. The mechanism remains unknown, and can be difficult to probe due to
the reactivity of intermediates, particularly in solution. Through the use of
gas-phase experimental and theoretical methods, the intrinsic reactivity of
thiazolylidenes in the Stetter reaction will be examined to answer specific
mechanistic questions. Mechanistic understanding of the Stetter will aid in the
development of catalysts for the reaction.