* 1361355
* Single-cell to population-based analysis of the microRNA-p53 interaction network
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Leonidas Bleris, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2019
* USD 744,324.00

The ability of cells to detect, process, and react specifically to various
stress signals is a key property of life. To characterize these complex signal
transduction pathways, quantitative experiments can be synergistically combined
with predictive modeling and simulation. This project focuses on the network
underlying the stress response of the p53 protein. The p53 protein is a key a
biomolecule involved in cancer. This research will advance the understanding of
the dynamics between the tumor suppressor p53 protein and the nucleic acid
biomolecule, microRNA, that regulates gene expression. Combining experimental,
mathematical, and computational approaches, the single-cell and cell-population
behavior of these cellular networks will be explored. This project will enhance
the educational infrastructure at the University of Texas at Dallas by
integrating mentoring, teaching, and research. Through this interdisciplinary
project, undergraduate and graduate students will be trained at the interface of
mathematics, engineering, and molecular biology. As an outreach component,
summer internships will be offered to local high school students. Members of
underrepresented groups will be encouraged to explore their interests and build
self-confidence in pursuing cross-disciplinary career
paths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The cellular stress response is crucial for
maintaining homeostasis. The p53 tumor suppressor protein plays a critical role
under cellular stress conditions. In response to a variety of stress signals,
p53 transactivates genes to trigger cancer-preventing functions. A class of
regulators, termed microRNAs, is directly associated with the p53-mediated
cellular stress networks. While many of the molecular interactions among p53 and
microRNAs have emerged, a systems-level understanding of the regulatory
mechanism remains elusive. Furthermore, the significant heterogeneity across a
cell population in p53 stress response poses an additional challenge. The
single-cell and cell-population behavior of the microRNA-p53 networks will be
studied by integrating a range of mathematical, engineering, and molecular
biology techniques. A predictive mathematical model will be developed that
accounts for the feedback loops mediated by microRNAs, and importantly, the
diverse noise sources originating from intra- and inter-cellular sources will be
integrated and investigated. A range of experimental techniques will be applied
to assay the p53 and microRNA activity at single-cell and cell-population
levels. Experiments in human breast cancer epithelial cells will be used to test
and inform model-driven hypotheses in an iterative manner.