* 1361807
* Mechanisms of Complex Carbocation Rearrangements
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2016
* Dean Tantillo, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 07/31/2016
* USD 280,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamic & Mechanism B Program
of the Division of Chemistry, Professor Dean J. Tantillo of the Department of
Chemistry at the University of California-Davis will use modern computer
modeling techniques, coupled with laboratory experiments, to uncover fundamental
principles of chemical reactivity that govern mechanisms of formation of complex
molecules. This research will uncover principles of reactivity and test their
generality. The mechanistic models resulting from this work will be of utility
to those working in the synthetic organic, biological, physical organic and
chemical education fields. In addition to the fundamental importance of the
chemistry uncovered through this research, the projects pursued will be used to
train students (graduate and undergraduate, several from underrepresented
groups) in multidisciplinary approaches to mechanistic chemistry and expose them
to careers that employ such techniques. In addition, new methods for making
applied computational chemistry accessible to blind and visually impaired
students will be developed as part of an effort to encourage this group to
pursue careers in STEM fields.

This research will advance knowledge in mechanistic chemistry through the
construction of new mechanistic models for rearrangements of complex
carbocations. Specific mechanistic models for particular terpene-forming
carbocation rearrangements will be developed, and general principles of
reactivity for carbocations with complex molecular architectures will be derived
from extensive studies spanning different classes of carbocations. The goals of
this research are to (a) use modern quantum chemical methods to assess the
energetic viability of various carbocation cyclization and rearrangement
mechanisms leading to terpene natural products, characterize the electronic
structures of the intermediates and transition state structures involved in
these processes, and assess the dynamical tendencies associated with the
potential energy surfaces for these rearrangements, (b) assess the ability of
these intermediates and transition state structures to engage in
noncovalent/intermolecular interactions with functional groups present in enzyme
active sites and assess the consequences of these interactions, and (c) uncover
fundamental, general principles of carbocation reactivity in complex systems.