* 1361948
* Building a MEMS-based Fab-on-a-Chip as a Technique for Nanomanufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2018
* David Bishop, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 05/31/2018
* USD 393,747.00

Over the last several decades, nanotechnology research has made significant
progress allowing for unprecedented control and understanding of matter at the
nano-scale. However, much of this progress has taken place using instruments and
techniques that, while powerful research tools, won't be usable as one migrates
from research to the manufacturing of nano-scale devices. Moving from research
to making products and the accompanying jobs they create requires the
development of a new class of techniques for nanomanufacturing as distinct from
tools for nano research. In this project, large (macro) machines are used to
build small (micro) machines and then those small machines are used to build
tiny or nano devices and structures. The approach advances manufacturing
technology through the use of what is, in essence, a 3D printer at the atomic
scale allowing for the assembly of materials in a digitally programmable way.
The interdisciplinary approach of focusing on design, testing and modeling and
having the MEMS devices built in an external foundry allows the research team to
engage underrepresented groups in novel ways, broadening participation, as well
as giving the team a platform to enhance engineering education at both the
graduate and undergraduate levels.

The research team will build, test and model micro versions of all the machines
one typically finds in a semiconductor fab and place those devices on a silicon
chip. This "Fab-on-a-Chip" will then be used to manufacture nano devices and
structures. They will build resist-free lithography tools with nanometer
apertures created with a focused ion beam, micro sources of atoms, film
thickness monitors, heaters, thermometers, masks, shutters, interconnects and
all of the other systems needed to manufacture a nano device. Our approach is
fundamentally additive in that it can place atoms when and where needed instead
of depositing large numbers of atoms and then removing most of them in post
processing which is the traditional method for modern integrated circuit
fabrication. The micro machines will be built using micron scale lithography;
nano scale resolution is provided by being able to tune and control the devices
with nanometer precision. Building the devices in a low-cost merchant fab will
keep the development costs modest. This also allows the team to give "Fabs-on-a-
Chip" to others for their use in much the same way a crystal grower provides
samples to a large number of other researchers.