* 1361318
* Collaborative Research: Modeling Stochastic Spatial Effects in Epithelial Mesenchymal Transformation, Signaling, and Cell Migration and Invasion
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Allan Brasier, University of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2018
* USD 550,000.00

It has been discovered that cancerous tumors are capable of enrolling support
from "normal" cells of the host organism. Some of these cells are then reverting
to normally suppressed behaviors such as mobility and invasion as well as
resistance to cell death. In the process, cells also lose ability to organize
themselves into sheets and other structures common in normal tissue. This
process is known as the epithelial-mesenchymal transformation (EMT). Motivated
by this example, the investigators developed an experimental model of one type
of EMT and, along with biological experiments, are now able to reproduce some
features of EMT in computers, i.e., to model the EMT mathematically. In the
current project, the investigators pursue research based on these preliminary
results. These experiments and computer models give rise to a better
understanding of signaling processes and, in some cases, leads to better
predictions of the effect of treatments on behavior of cancer cells, thus
helping advance the fight against cancer.

In more technical terms, the objective of the proposed research is
multidisciplinary and multiscale analysis of the Epithelial Mesenchymal
Transformation (EMT). EMT is the process by which epithelial cells reversibly
lose baso-apical polarity and cell-cell junctions, acquiring plasticity,
mobility, invasivity, stem-cell characteristics, and resistance to apoptosis.
This mechanism is important in embryogenesis, as well as in wound healing and in
cancer metastasis. The investigators are particularly interested in the role of
NF-kB and p53 and their crosstalk in cancer-related (type III) EMT. The goal is
to build a mathematical model that will relate signal transduction pathways to
changes in cell behavior, focusing on observing and modeling cell motility. An
experimental system is developed to measure motility and proliferation using the
new Cell Tracker software and Lineage Tracker for quantitation. Gene expression
and flow cytometry measurements will be included. Preliminary data show
activation of the NFkB pathway increases motility. Results of the project can be
used to reduce cellular invasion in epithelial malignancies, or sensitize cancer
cells to chemotherapeutic agents. Although the current study has a basic nature,
the resulting insights will inform biomedically oriented applications.