* 1361062
* EXP: Developing a tutor to guide students as they invent deep principles with contrasting cases
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Catherine Chase, Teachers College, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* John Cherniavsky
* 08/31/2017
* USD 548,676.00

This is a project to develop a tutor that will teach the skills of innovation
through invention. The Invention Tutor will simulate the guidance of a well-
trained inquiry teacher, who asks critical questions and gives feedback just at
the right time, to push students' thinking forward. By tracking student
trajectories through the Invention process, the Invention Tutor will respond
adaptively to student moves. Most importantly, the tutor will eliminate the
constraint of needing a large teacher: student ratio to implement the Invention
method successfully. This work will have broader impact by scaling up a
successful instructional technique, with the ultimate goal of enhancing deep
learning and transfer in science domains, for both high and low-achieving
student populations. The project also has significant intellectual merit. The
research will identify effective forms of support for Invention tasks and expand
our understanding of the Invention process itself. More generally, findings will
inform the field's understanding of the process of discovery and how best to
guide it. In addition, the Invention Tutor will represent a new kind of tutor
that guides open-ended discovery tasks, as opposed to the more typical tutor
that guides students to solve well-defined problems.

Innovation is an important 21st century skill. The Invention tutor strives to
teach that skill without the high teacher:student ratio typically required when
teaching such soft skills. Most intelligent tutoring systems rely on a fixed set
of rules that guide how the tutor interacts with students that are derived from
a study of the tutor's discipline and a cognitive task analysis of what is
required to learn the subject. The Invention tutor has no such underlying
cognitive task analysis and the challenge of building the tutor will lie in
uncovering the rules that guide tutor-student interactions and building upon
previous tutor-student successful interactions. The intelligent tutoring system
will be disseminated through free web access and the data collected in the
project will be available for secondary analyses.