* 1361025
* Diversity Stalled: Explorations into the Stagnant Numbers of African American Engineering Faculty
* ENG,EEC
* 03/01/2014,02/28/2018
* William Robinson, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Julie Martin
* 02/28/2018
* USD 349,918.00

A diverse engineering university faculty and workforce are necessary to achieve
and maintain a country that is prosperous, secure, and attentive to the
technological and social well-being of all individuals. Thus, this research
study investigates one of the challenges to a diverse engineering faculty and
workforce by exploring the causes behind why African Americans remain one of the
most underrepresented racial groups in engineering faculty positions, remaining
steady at 2.5% for the past five years, despite intervention programs that aim
to broaden the participation of minorities in engineering. This three-year study
explores the barriers and opportunities facing a cohort of (1) African American
engineering PhD students/candidates/postdocs pursuing engineering faculty
careers and (2) current and former African American engineering faculty members.
The proposed study examines factors that impact the production of African
American PhDs in engineering, as well as those factors that affect the pathway
to tenured faculty positions in engineering. This research includes an
assessment of the current engineering faculty climate through surveying and
interviewing African Americans in engineering, from PhD candidates and
postdoctoral students through full professors, including a subset of former
African American engineering faculty. This study analyzes the faculty-
engineering climate by including the implementation of a national survey for
Black PhD engineering students, Black engineering faculty, and a subset of
former Black engineering faculty. The PIs will also interview a subset of each
of these groups. The methodological and analytical structure of this study is
guided by the literature on racial/gender stereotypes and Social Cognitive
Career Theory. The intellectual merit of this work should lead to a better
understanding of the career trajectories African American PhDs in engineering
and the technical, societal, and cultural influences that impact their career
decision making. Although this study focuses on African American faculty,
overall faculty diversity creates a more effective learning environment. Schools
with greater racial diversity tend to have better retention, satisfaction, and
intellectual development. The broader impact of this study has the potential to
change the model of how engineering candidates of color are mentored and primed
for engineering faculty positions.