* 1361595
* Modeling Catalysis for Sustainable Processes
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2017
* Christopher Cramer, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 12/31/2017
* USD 420,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamic &amp; Mechanism B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Christopher J. Cramer of the
Department of Chemistry at the University of Minnesota will employ
computational/theoretical models to study mono- and polynuclear transition-metal
complexes based on copper, iron, cobalt, and ruthenium, with the key focus being
to characterize mechanistic details associated with their ability to catalyze
reactions having special relevance to sustainability. Catalytic processes that
will be assigned the highest priority for study include (i) the oxidation of
otherwise unactivated C-H bonds, (ii) water oxidation to generate molecular
hydrogen and oxygen, (iii) reduction of carbon dioxide. The first catalytic
process provides access to high-value functionalized molecules from cheaper
hydrocarbon feedstocks, the second is a reaction of key importance in the
conversion of solar energy into a green chemical fuel (hydrogen), and the third
offers the opportunity to convert cheap and abundant CO2 into industrially
useful commodity chemicals like formaldehyde and methanol, which is of
considerable interest not only from an economic perspective, but also because of
the influence of increasing atmospheric CO2 levels on global climate change. Any
locally developed code/software that implements new models will be made broadly
available to the greater chemistry community, and ongoing incorporation of
models into open source and commercial codes will further extend their
availability. Outreach and mentoring activities will be accomplished through
continued work with a number of University of Minnesota programs, including the
College of Science &amp; Engineering Summer Bridge Program, the Multicultural
Summer Research Opportunities Program, and the North Star STEM alliance/Louis
Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation program, amongst
others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Density functional and highly correlated single and
multideterminantal wave function theories will be applied to complex chemical
systems designed to catalyze reactions of interest from a sustainability
standpoint. In order to treat the influence of a surrounding condensed phase on
the catalytic cycle, continuum (and cluster-continuum) solvation models for use
in both equilibrium and non-equilibrium situations (e.g., computations of
standard reduction potentials and solvatochromic shifts, respectively) will be
employed. Thermochemical and spectral quantities will be determined and
validated against experimental data where available. High priority targets for
study include water splitting focusing especially on catalysts based on earth-
abundant metals, for which mechanistic details remain obscure in several systems
based on copper or iron, for example. Reduction of carbon dioxide remains
another challenging problem, particularly from a catalytic standpoint, and the
ability of mono- and polynuclear transition-metal complexes to bind and activate
CO2 to reduction will be examined in order to understand those electronic
structure details (and how they are influenced by ligands) that facilitate
reaction. Lastly, "green" oxidation reactions employing molecular oxygen as the
oxidant and activating C-H bonds, for example, will be explored for systems
where catalytic activity has been observed based on copper or manganese
containing coordination compounds.