* 1361962
* Mechanisms of Photochemical Reactions -- Emphasis on Biochemically Significant Molecules
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2020
* Jack Saltiel, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 07/31/2020
* USD 300,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms-B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Jack Saltiel of The Florida State
University is determining the response of molecules of biological interest to
excitation by light absorption. The research focuses on (i) processes involved
in the photobiological and industrial formation of vitamin Ds, (ii) the
photochemical properties of resveratrol, a molecule found in the skin of grapes
that has many medicinal qualities and is thought to be responsible for the
"French Paradox", the beneficial effect of wine drinking, and (iii) the chemical
behavior of certain arylacetylenes that are attractive candidates for use in
light induced cancer cell death. The research is performed by students at all
levels and Professor Jack Saltiel has a proven record of attracting many of them
to highly successful scientific careers.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Findings from
this project provide the experimental foundations which test theoretical
predictions of the behavior of electronically excited states. The theory of
electronically excited states is a scientific frontier whose progress relies on
valid experimental conclusions such as those provided by this project.
Sophisticated computer-based quantitative chemometrics analyses of spectral
matrices are being developed which are widely applicable in chemical research.
Detection of resveratrol photo products in nature has medicinal implications.
Research on the arylpyridylacetylenes is in collaboration with Professor Igor
Alabugin whose research group has synthesized them and shown them to be highly
effective as DNA double strand photocleavers.