* 1361188
* EAGER: Exploratory Research in Accordion-Style Genome Dynamics
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2014,02/28/2017
* Ellen Neidle, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 02/28/2017
* USD 299,908.00

Intellectual Merit In all organisms dynamic genetic changes can occur in which
segments of the chromosome increase or decrease in copy relative to surrounding
regions. Such expansion and contraction of the genome, termed "accordion-style
dynamics," can play a critical role in adaptation and evolution. Although the
process has many important biological implications, it is difficult to study.
The difficulty in identifying specific genetic alteration stems from the
transient and stochastic nature of the chromosomal changes and the variability
of the events that occur in different cells of the population. This project will
exploit special features of a soil bacterium, Acinetobacter baylyi ADP1, to
facilitate experimental investigation. The high efficiency of natural
transformation and recombination in this bacterium make it possible to design
and engineer strains in which most cells of the population have multiple copies
of the same segment of the chromosome arranged adjacent to each other in a high
copy tandem array. These engineered strains can then serve as laboratory models
to investigate the molecular details of the contribution of copy number change
in adaptation and evolution. First, specific genes will be deleted from the
genome. Next, other genes will be properly positioned such that they can
substitute for the missing genes if the genome expands to place them in tandem
arrays. In the restructured bacterial population, the large number of cells that
have the same "expanded" version of the chromosome increase the opportunity for
evolutionary processes to optimize new genetic and enzymatic activities. The
restructured bacterial population also amplifies the signals that can be
detected during experimentation such that the specific genetic changes can be
much more readily observed. This research will involve testing specific gene
sets to demonstrate that genomic expansion occurs as predicted. Having
established the tandem arrays, it will be possible to vary the growth conditions
for the bacteria to allow genetic evolution to be monitored and tested in a
highly sensitive and reproducible manner. The advantages of developing a system
that undergoes directed genetic expansion also include facilitating the
bacterial production of important compounds for biotechnology and generating new
enzymes with useful activities.

Broader Impacts The manipulation and analysis of chromosomal rearrangements will
contribute to efforts in the scientific community to take advantage of large
scale DNA sequence data. In addition, ongoing programs at the University of
Georgia will dovetail with this project to help broaden participation and
increase diversity. Such programs include an NSF-supported Research Experiences
for Undergraduate (REU) site program in prokaryotic biology. Research on the
soil bacterium Acinetobacter baylyi ADP1 is also being integrated into an
undergraduate lab course that uses authentic research projects to involve
students in active learning and scientific engagement. High school students,
undergraduates, and graduate students will participate in this project, and they
will receive multidisciplinary training in genetics, biochemistry, and
bioinformatics.