* 1361814
* SusChEM:  Studying Catalysts and Reaction Intermediates for Water Oxidation by Spectroscopy of Cryogenic Mass-Selected Ions
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* J. Mathias Weber, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 07/31/2019
* USD 439,835.00

With this award from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms A program,
Mathias Weber of the University of Colorado at Boulder develops a new
experimental approach to study chemical reactions that occur in a solar energy
conversion reactor. The type of reactor being studied utilizes a catalyst
molecule that contains either ruthenium or copper to split water molecules into
hydrogen and oxygen. Energy from sunlight is, thus, used to extract a
sustainable source of fuel from water, but the precise way it works is not fully
understood. This lack of understanding hinders the design and improvement of
catalysts and reactors for this important technological process. One of the
complicating factors in studies of this system is the presence of the water
itself. The current research is getting around this problem by removing the
molecules produced in the solar reactor and putting them into a vacuum. Highly
sophisticated pieces of equipment can then be used to study the detailed nature
of these chemical species. The measurements made in vacuum will then provide
signatures that can be used later to identify those species when water is
present, in other words, in the reactor as it normally functions. The work
addresses an important societal problem, the development of alternative sources
of energy that do not rely on carbon-based fuels. Training the next generation
of scientists is an integral part of this project. It includes budding
researchers as young as grades five through nine through a Saturday morning
science program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the investigators are
studying the electronic and geometric structures of selected ruthenium- and
copper-based catalysts for water oxidation, as well as certain reaction
intermediates that arise in the catalytic conversion process. Ions of catalyst
and reaction intermediates are transferred into the gas phase by electrospray
ionization. The ions are then cooled in an ion trap, mass selected, and
irradiated by pulsed light, which is tunable throughout the mid-IR, visible and
near-UV spectrum. Photon absorption is monitored by photofragmentation of the
target ions, allowing the measurement of their vibrational and electronic
spectra. Cooling the ions to low temperatures is crucial to obtain the necessary
spectroscopic detail. Vibrational spectra will result in structural information
about the ions under study, which is particularly important for reaction
intermediates. Measuring the electronic spectra of catalysts and reaction
intermediates will aid clarification of speciation in reactive solutions. In
addition, the excited state vibrational structure is assisting the investigators
in computational modeling studies of the excited state dynamics and reactivity.