* 1361484
* Dynamical fluctuations in proteins, organic semiconductors, and nanoparticle catalysts
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2019
* Roger Loring, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 06/30/2019
* USD 420,000.00

Roger Loring of Cornell University is supported by an award from the Chemical
Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Chemistry division to
develop detailed models and perform calculations that interpret and motivate new
measurements of molecular motions. The motions of molecules determine chemical
and biological processes, as well as mechanical and electronic properties of
materials. Recent experimental techniques obtain information regarding these
motions on ever smaller length scales and shorter time scales. Loring and
graduate student coworkers model mechanical vibrations and energy flow in
biomolecules such as proteins, individual events in chemical reactions catalyzed
by the surface of small gold particles, and charge carrier transport in
molecular semiconductors with the potential for use in plastic electronics.
Graduate students contribute to K-12 education through teacher training and
enrichment programs coordinated by Cornell University.

Multidimensional vibrational spectroscopy probes structure and relaxation in
biomolecules, but full interpretation requires modeling the measurement with an
atomic level of detail. New methods for computing nonlinear vibrational response
functions based on the semiclassical mean-trajectory approach approximate
quantum dynamics using input from classical simulations. Electric force
microscopy has the capacity to measure charge carrier dynamics in a disordered
organic semiconductor. Calculations from classical statistical mechanics and
classical electrodynamics of the observables of electric force microscopy,
noncontact friction and probe frequency noise, reveal the connections between
these quantities and charge transport in an organic electronic device. Single-
turnover studies of nanoparticle catalysis measure fluctuations from the mean
kinetics observed in a bulk measurement. Loring and coworkers develop
statistical measures of correlations in time and space among chemical events at
different active sites on metal nanostructures, elucidating the analogs in
inorganic catalysts of allosteric effects in enzymes.