* 1361945
* Sulfur isotope studies of sulfide oxidation
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2017
* James Farquhar, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 05/31/2017
* USD 130,142.00

Sulfur is a common redox-active element in Earth's oceans that is cycled by a
variety of chemical and biological processes. Its most common form in seawater
is as the sulfate ion, which is also its most oxidized form. In marine sediments
and also in some parts of deep basins this sulfate is reduced to sulfide. This
reaction is driven by the metabolic activity of single-celled prokaryotes and
accounts for as much as 50% of the total sedimentary organic carbon that is
reoxidized to carbonate/bicarbonate/carbonic acid/carbon dioxide. A majority
(~80-95%) of sulfide produced this way is reoxidized by biological and
abiological processes. The remaining sulfide is fixed, primarily by reaction
with iron to form the sulfide mineral pyrite, generating a buried reservoir of
reduced sulfur that balances almost 30% of the long-term oxygen production
today. This grant supports a study of the rates and isotopic signatures
associated with the abiological pathways of sulfide oxidation in seawater. The
isotopic signatures in sulfur compounds produced by biological and abiological
pathways are different, and calibrations of these isotope effects in the context
of well-characterized reaction rates can be used to trace oxidation pathways in
modern and ancient environments. This information will provide fundamental data
that will be used to calibrate geochemical models that describe carbon burial
and a long term oxygen production and also to disentangle the distribution of
biological and abiological oxidation processes in marine environments. This
grant also supports a Ph.D. student and includes plans to develop a program to
assist teachers and students at local Title I elementary school with the
development of their STEM program.