* 1361946
* Topics in protein and RNA folding and dynamics
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2014,04/30/2016
* Devarajan Thirumalai, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 04/30/2016
* USD 797,637.00

Devarajan (Dave) Thirumalai is supported by an award from the Chemical Theory,
Models and Computational Methods program in the Chemistry Division to develop
novel theory and computational methods to understand how proteins and
ribonucleic acids (RNA) get their shapes, and how these shapes affect their
interaction with other substances. Proteins and RNA are among the most important
molecules of life. They carry out all the functions in cells by adopting
specific shapes and through mutual interactions. In a third project, Dr.
Thirumalai uses modern theoretical and computational tools to decipher how
molecular motors transport cargo by walking on polar tracks. Such transport is
required for cells to function properly. Thus, fundamental principles of
chemistry and physics are used to describe the molecular basis of the
translation of cellular information, resulting in increased understanding of
essential biological processes. The Biophysics program in the Division of
Molecular and Cellular Biology and the Physics of Living Systems program in the
Physics Division contribute equally to this award. In addition to students and
postdoctoral associates, undergraduates from several universities contribute to
these projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to attain the broad
goals outlined above, Dr. Thirumalai addresses key questions in three areas. (1)
Protein Folding: In order to function, proteins must fold to a compact three-
dimensional shape, which is specified by the primary sequence of amino acids. It
is suspected that the initial step in this process is the collapse of the chain
from an extended state although the conclusions based on different experiments
vary. In order to resolve this important controversy, Dr. Thirumalai will use
fully atomistically-detailed simulations of both model systems and proteins to
dissect the nature of the collapse process. (2) RNA folding: In contrast to
protein folding, little is known about RNA folding. These highly charged
molecules, built from four nucleotides, require cations to fold. Thirumalai
develops new models to describe how these cations interact with RNA to
facilitate their folding. This project combines analytical theory with novel
computational methods. (3) Molecular Motors: kinesin, dynein, and myosin are
motors that transport cargo across microtubules and actin, which are polar
tracks. Many beautiful single molecule experiments have shown that they walk
hand-over-hand across these tracks. The molecular basis of this motion is not
fully understood. Dr. Thirumalai develops new models to simulate their movements
in order to illustrate the coupling between the internal dynamics and the
motility. In addition, he and his coworkers explore the design of the lever arm
to explore the robustness of their motions on the polar tracks.