* 1361031
* CDS&amp;E: Advances in Coupled-Cluster Theory with Molecular Applications
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* John Stanton, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 08/31/2017
* USD 399,846.00

John Stanton of the University of Texas at Austin is supported by an award from
the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Chemistry
Division and the Computational and Data-Enabled Science and Engineering program
(CDS&amp;E) to develop theoretical methods and software to describe the
properties of molecules in which the electrons have been excited. The major
thrust of the work is to develop and use quantum mechanical methods to
understand experiments in the field of molecular spectroscopy and to predict the
results. Spectroscopy probes how molecules interact with electromagnetic
radiation. By investigating how a particular molecule behaves at various
wavelengths (energies) of irradiation, one can determine the structure of the
molecule as well as infer most of the detailed information that governs the
chemical reactivity and other behavior of the molecule. A major goal of the
project is to develop quantum-mechanical methods that are useful for analyzing
the spectra of molecules in the visible and ultraviolet energy ranges, which is
the most relevant region for the electrons that drive chemistry. The
computational methods and tools developed by the Stanton group are embodied in a
free and publicly available computer program, CFOUR, which computes very
accurate quantities that can be compared with experiment. This computer code
takes advantage of state-of-the-art computer architecture. Both graduate and
undergraduate students are involved in these projects. The work has relevance to
many fields including interstellar and atmospheric
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In terms of traditional quantum chemistry,
Stanton and his research group focus on methods development at very high levels
of coupled-cluster theory, specifically those that involve quadruple excitation
effects. This includes methods for energy and gradient calculations, as well as
extension to radicals, ions and excited states that can be accessed by the
equation-of-motion approach. All methods are incorporated into the CFOUR program
package, leading to new program modules that will exploit advantages offered by
massively parallel computers. Additional research focuses on non-adiabatic
effects in spectroscopy, both in the development of interpretive tools as well
as development of programs. While computer program development is a major focus
of the planned research, the aforementioned investigation of interpretive tools
is not computational in nature. Similar in his respect are two other project
activities: the establishment and benchmarking of a tool for analyzing the
adequacy of particular levels of coupled-cluster theory for treating specific
problems; and analysis of some formal properties of Miller's semiclassical
transition state theory.