* 1361421
* OPT-PDE Analysis and FRET Imaging of Constitutive Connections between Physics and Chemistry in Live Cells
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Shaoying Lu, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2018
* USD 1,004,945.00

Understanding molecular transport and interaction within single live cells is
crucial for advancing life sciences and medicine. This project integrates
mathematics with live-cell imaging to study diffusion tensor maps and the
relationship between molecular transport and interaction in live cells. For this
purpose, mathematical theory and computational algorithms will be developed for
applications in image-based quantitative biology. This project integrates
research with education and will provide research training opportunities for
students. An annual summer workshop, featuring computational mathematics, live
cell imaging, and quantitative biology, will be organized for graduate and
undergraduate students. Members of underrepresented groups will be encouraged to
participate in both the research training and workshop activities. Outreach
activities will bring the project's laboratory research results to high school
students.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The research goal of this project is to
establish governing equations connecting physics and chemistry in live cells.
Molecular diffusion and transport are fundamental processes in biology,
biochemistry, and physics. However, the construction of subcellular diffusion
maps in living cells based on imaging data remains a challenge. This project
will develop an optimization model problem with partial differential equation
constraints (OPT-PDE) to compute the diffusion map of intracellular molecules
with high spatiotemporal resolution in live cells. Meanwhile, this project will
apply fluorescence resonant energy transfer (FRET)-based biosensors to visualize
subcellular molecular activities. The correlative FRET imaging microscopy (CFIM)
technology will then be employed to evaluate the connection between the
subcellular diffusion and the molecular activity imaged by FRET in live cells.
Specifically, the protein tyrosine kinases Src and FAK will be selected as
examples to demonstrate this connection. Therefore, the results of this project
will reveal the spatiotemporal connection between biochemical activities and
biophysical properties of desired molecules in live cells.