* 1361293
* Non-Born-Oppenheimer Effects between Electrons and Protons
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2014,04/30/2018
* Sharon Hammes-Schiffer, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 04/30/2018
* USD 636,991.00

Sharon Hammes-Schiffer of the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign is
supported by an award from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods
program in the Chemistry Division and the Division of Advanced
Cyberinfrastructure to develop efficient and accurate computational methods that
describe the coupled motion of electrons and protons in chemical and biological
systems. The coupling between electrons and protons plays a vital role in a wide
range of biological and chemical processes, including photosynthesis,
respiration, and energy production in solar cells. It is difficult to develop
computational approaches to accurately describe this coupling because electrons
and protons are so light that they must be treated quantum mechanically. After
extensive assessment and validation, these computational methods will be
incorporated into a computer program that will be available to the public.
Moreover, these computational methods will be applied to specific processes of
biological and chemical relevance to elucidate the underlying fundamental
principles that determine the processes. Professor Hammes-Schiffer and her
research group maintain a web site that contains software and educational tools
related to this topic. The computer programs, tools, demonstrations, and
tutorials available on this web site enable scientists in a broad range of
fields to learn about the coupled motion of electrons and protons. In addition,
this project will facilitate technological and biomedical advances through a
better understanding of this important research area. An important example is
the design of more effective solar cells and other alternative, renewable energy
sources. Another example is the design of more effective drugs through
modification of enzymes that rely on the coupling between electrons and protons.

The objective of this project is to develop new theoretical and computational
approaches to provide insight into the underlying fundamental principles of
proton-coupled electron transfer (PCET) reactions. These reactions play a vital
role in a broad range of biological and chemical processes. The specific issues
to be examined include the roles of nuclear quantum effects, hydrogen tunneling,
and non-Born-Oppenheimer effects, which are thought to be significant in PCET.
These issues will be explored using the nuclear-electronic orbital (NEO)
approach, in which all electrons and the transferring proton(s) are treated
quantum mechanically on the same level with molecular orbital methods or density
functional theory. This approach enables the calculation of key quantities in
PCET theories for determining rates and mechanisms. It is also applicable to a
wide range of other chemical and biological systems. A major goal of this
project is to develop algorithms to enhance the computational efficiency of this
approach, assess and validate the methodology, and port the NEO code to GAMESS,
a general quantum chemistry package available to the public. The NEO method
benefits from the optimized components of other parts of the general electronic
structure package, and portions of the NEO code will be useful to other
scientists. This software development enables calculations that are not
currently possible with existing codes. In addition, a web site on PCET is
maintained and enhanced to convey useful information to the general community.