* 1361001
* Hermitian Analysis and CR Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2014,05/31/2019
* John D'Angelo, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 05/31/2019
* USD 351,596.00

The PI will continue his study of analysis and geometry as it relates to complex
numbers. Complex numbers and functions of complex variables have become very
useful tools in the study of other areas of pure mathematics and in the
application of mathematics. For instance, the study of airflow over a wing uses
complex numbers and complex functions to model this flow. The subject continues
to be a vital and important topic in the mathematical sciences. Realizing this,
the PI has recently begun teaching what is called Advanced Engineering
Mathematics. Teaching this material shows in a precise sense how the proposed
research develops higher dimensional analogues of fundamental mathematics
currently used throughout physics and engineering. In addition to the
mathematical research, the PI will also work with the Engineering College at the
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign on fine-tuning the curriculum in
Advanced Engineering Mathematics.

Hermitian analysis has its roots in 19th century mathematics. The subject
began, two centuries ago, with the work of Fourier on heat diffusion.It has
developed using the theory of Hilbert spaces, by its applications to quantum
mechanics, and via its role in signal processing. Modern Hermitian analysis both
relies upon and informs complex analysis and CR geometry, the PI's primary
research areas. The modern point of view emphasizes the tools of orthonormal
expansion and orthogonal projection. The PI has introduced an algebraic
technique called orthogonal homogenization which connects these ideas to the
geometry of proper mappings between balls. The PI has reformulated one of his
older results, on volumes of proper images of balls, as a variational problem,
thereby extending the results to considerably more general situations. The PI's
work on proper mappings between balls in different dimensional complex spaces
has also uncovered unexpected connections to representation theory and algebraic
combinatorics. The primary purposes of this research are to extend the ideas of
orthogonal homogenization to the rational case, to establish additional
variational inequalities, to study homotopy for proper holomorphic mappings of
positive codimension, and to further develop the subject of CR complexity. In
the process the PI will continue to mentor young mathematicians in these topics
and to organize and attend conferences.