* 1361221
* CSEDI Collaborative Research:  Towards a unified model of the geomagnetic, geochemical, and thermal evolutions of Earth's mantle and core
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2016
* Joseph Stoner, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 04/30/2016
* USD 153,988.00

The magnetic field of the Earth, generated inside the fluid portion of Earth's
Iron core, protects the Earth and orbiting satellites from a barrage of
potentially harmful charged particles streaming through space. The magnetization
of ancient rocks has shown us that the magnetic field has been shielding Earth
for at least 3.5 billion years. Beyond that age, there are no observations
currently available to assess if a magnetic field was present. It is a mystery
when exactly the magnetic field arose, and also a challenging puzzle as to how
it has been sustained for billions of years. The answers to those questions will
greatly impact our understanding of how our Earth evolved from its initial state
into a habitable planet able to develop and sustain life on its surface. The
proposed research aims to take a new approach to answer these difficult
questions by looking at the role a deep magma ocean overlying Earth's core might
have played in helping sustain an ancient magnetic field.

Recent experiments that are able to simulate the extreme pressures and
temperatures within Earth's deep interior have provided new knowledge on how
Earth materials behave under such conditions. Using this recently gained
information on material properties, in conjunction with theoretical
considerations of the energetics of magnetic field generation, this project will
build physics-based models of Earth's interior and cooling through time. These
efforts will specifically investigate scenarios in which there is a long-lived
magma ocean on top of the core. These models will test if this scenario can
explain the generation of Earth's magnetic field during ancient times. While we
will learn directly about the Earth's deep interior, this work impacts our
understanding of surface processes as well, since the magnetic shielding of
highly charged particles aimed at Earth (or lack thereof) will affect the
atmosphere and surface of the Earth.