* 1361150
* Developing the multilayer multiconfiguration time-dependent Hartree theory
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Haobin Wang, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 12/31/2014
* USD 420,000.00

Haobin Wang, of New Mexico State University is supported by an award from the
Chemical Theory, Models and Computational method in the Chemistry Division and
the Computational and Data-Enabled Science and Engineering (CDS&E) program to
develop and apply computational approaches to study electron transfer processes
in several technologically-important materials and devices such as dye
sensitized solar cells, molecular junction devices, and new electronic/magnetic
materials. Because electrons are very small objects, they obey the laws of
quantum mechanics. To get a sufficiently accurate description of many of these
systems, quantum mechanical methods must be applied to both the electrons and
the atomic nuclei. Professor Wang and his colleagues have developed an accurate
and efficient quantum mechanical approach that is designed for this purpose
called the multilayer-multiconfiguration time-dependent Hartree (ML-MCTDH)
theory. The fundamental understanding resulting from this research contributes
to the rational design of new materials such as for solar energy conversion and
molecular electronics. The numerical techniques and software developed in this
project have potential applications to a broad range of problems in science and
engineering, e.g., numerical methods, signal compression, and parallel
computation. Both undergraduate and graduate students contribute to this
research.

With the extension of ML-MCTDH to the second quantization representation for
treating identical particles, the theory is formally complete. The purpose of
the current research is: (i) to investigate as many important physical models as
possible that can be treated accurately via the current ML-MCTDH implementation;
and (ii) to develop new algorithms within the ML-MCTDH framework to treat more
general models. Specifically, the principal investigator and his coworkers apply
the current theory to a variety of important and challenging problems in physics
and chemistry, e.g., heterogeneous electron transfer using the Anderson-News
model, spin relaxation where the electronic and nuclear spins are treated on
equal footing, and the Kondo effect using the Anderson impurity model. Beyond
those straightforward applications the current implementation of the ML-MCTDH
theory is being extended to more general forms of potential energy functions.
Further goals are to improve the relevant ML-MCTDH algorithms, e.g., using
multilayer improved relaxation to generate the initial density matrix at low
temperatures, grouping and streamlined evaluation of a series of operators, and
modifying ML-MCTDH equations of motion that remove the regularization of the
numerical singularities. The software developed in this research will be made
freely available to the research community.