* 1361252
* Understanding and Controlling Biomolecular Structure and Function at Surfaces and Interfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2017
* Lauren Webb, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 07/31/2017
* USD 385,281.00

With this new award, the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms A Program
(CSDM-A) and the Chemistry of Life Processes Program (CLP) of the Division of
Chemistry support Professor Lauren Webb of the University of Texas at Austin in
a project that will investigate new methods for attaching proteins to surfaces
under conditions that allow the protein activity to be studied. These studies,
which will allow construction of surfaces with functional proteins attached,
will have applications in material science and biomedical engineering. This
project, which combines biophysics, molecular biology with surface and materials
chemistry, will provide multidisciplinary training to students, from
undergraduates to post-doctorals, including those from groups historically
underrepresented in the sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prof. Webb and her group
are conducting a multi-pronged effort with the aim of developing surfaces that
mimic stable and functional biological materials capable of both natural and
artificial functions. Specific experiments that are being conducted include: (1)
the further work on the chemical functionalization of alkane thiol surfaces with
peptides, with engineered secondary structure; (2) the binding of more complex
protiens to the protein surfaces created in (1); (3) the use of surface
functionalization developed in (1) to drive the formation of protein aggregates
on the surface; (4) the use of protein-functionalized surfaces to bind
functional forms of enzymes to the surface and to measure their activity.
Students working with Prof. Webb are obtaining significant experience in
analytical, physical and biochemical methods. This interdisciplinary training
prepares them for work in the technical workforce.