* 1361470
* Nanoscale Transition Metal Pnictides: Materials by Design
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2018
* Stephanie Brock, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 05/31/2018
* USD 420,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;With support from the National Science
Foundation, Division of Materials Research, the development of new materials and
knowledge for the design of cooling devices will be achieved. Air conditioning
and refrigeration is a part of daily life, with air conditioning consuming 5%,
and commercial refrigeration up to 20%, of energy output. The conventional
process of refrigeration (gas compression and expansion) has limited efficiency,
and the refrigerants are often ozone-depleting and/or Greenhouse gases, raising
concerns whenever inevitable leaks arise. A more energy efficient (by up to 50%)
and environmentally friendly process is magnetic refrigeration, where
application of a magnetic field to a magnetocaloric (MC) material results in
heat emission, and removal of that field results in heat absorption, effectively
acting as a heat pump. Traditional MC materials are based on the rare-earth
metal gadolinium, which suffers from poor efficiency near room temperature and
is prohibitively expensive. In this NSF-DMR supported project a rational
approach will be exploited for the development of MC materials based on
nanoparticles comprising earth-abundant elements. The effect of nanoparticle
composition and size, as well as interactions between particles on magnetic
properties will studied en route to developing inexpensive and efficient devices
for magnetic refrigeration. Over the course of the project, graduate and
undergraduate students will develop critical thinking and technical skills, as
well as hands-on experience with cutting-edge techniques, for developing the
next generation of advanced technologies. The project will also introduce
Detroit-area middle and high school girls, many of whom are underrepresented
minorities, to materials science through the GO-GIRL (Gaining Options-Girls
Investigate Real Life) Material Girls outreach
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;With support from the
National Science Foundation, Division of Materials Research, the principal
investigator will produce functional transition metal pnictide (pnicogen = Group
15 element) nanoparticles and assemblies, focusing on materials for magnetic
refrigeration (MR). Transition metal pnictides comprise a large but relatively
underexplored class of materials, despite having properties that span the energy
landscape. These materials are being investigated in thermoelectric devices
(waste heat conversion), batteries (energy storage), catalysis (fuel
processing), and magnetic refrigeration (climate control). Many of the
envisioned advances in these technologies presume the ability to control the
physical dimensions of the materials on the nanoscale, a significant challenge.
Moreover, confinement to nanoscale dimensions impacts properties in sometimes
unexpected ways (intraparticle effects), as does integration/assembly
(interparticle effects). These issues have hampered the development of
transition metal pnictide nanoparticles to address key technological problems.
MR is based on the absorption and release of energy during a magnetic transition
(the magnetocaloric effect), and is 50% more efficient than traditional gas
compression/expansion systems and more environmentally friendly, as it does not
exploit ozone-depleting or greenhouse gases. Heretofore inaccessible but
promising nanoscale phases for MR will be produced by exploiting ion-exchange
routes and direct syntheses, targeting Fe-doped Mn pnictides (Aim 1). On a
parallel track, anion (P, Sb) doped MnAs nanoparticles will be synthesized and
detailed structure-property-size correlations established (Aim 2). This
information will be used to narrow the parameter space for production of new
materials in Aim 1 so as to target the most promising phases and sizes. The
final parallel investigation (Aim 3) will focus on integration and assessment of
interparticle interactions in known phases, subsequently moving to new phases as
materials from Aims 1 and 2 become available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;