* 1361197
* FRG: Collaborative Research: Developing Mathematical Algorithms for Adaptive, Geodesic Mesh MHD for use in Astrophysics and Space Physics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2017
* Dinshaw Balsara, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2017
* USD 281,163.00

Simulation tools for astrophysical and space physics systems share a set of
common requirements: they need to robustly simulate magnetohydrodynamic (MHD)
flows around spherical bodies with high accuracy. This multidisciplinary project
will develop algorithms from applied mathematics for robust, highly accurate
non-relativistic MHD on geodesic meshes. In the past few years new schemes for
simulating conservation laws with truly multi-dimensional divergence free
approximate Riemann solvers for applications have been developed. Currently,
these Riemann solvers are only available for two-dimensional rectangular
structured meshes for MHD. This project will employ a geodesic mesh to provide
the best possible coverage for simulations of magnetohydrodynamic flows around
spherical bodies and to incorporate Delaunay triangulation to achieve high
accuracy. Divergence-free formulations of vector fields can be found on these
triangular meshes.

Simulation tools for astrophysical and space physics systems share a set of
common requirements: they need to robustly simulate magnetohydrodynamic (MHD)
flows around spherical bodies with high accuracy. Building a computational
framework, based on shared needs in space physics and astrophysics, will unleash
important synergies between these two allied fields of study. The MHD equations
are a combination of the Navier-Stokes equations for fluid dynamics and
Maxwell's equations for electromagnetism. Thus, the MHD equations require
numerical solvers that incorporate the hydrodynamic fluid motion and enforce the
divergence free magnetic field, i.e. no magnetic monopoles, requirements on the
geometric domain approximated by a polygonal mesh. The nature of the MHD
equations closely couples solution methodologies to the underlying mesh, making
it necessary to develop new algorithms for the divergence-free reconstruction of
the magnetic field on novel mesh structures. Additionally, the MHD system is
formulated as a system of conservation laws. With a traditional conservation
law, the fluxes can be evolved on a dimension-by-dimension basis. The fact that
different flux components are coupled in an involution-constrained system also
makes a case for multidimensional upwinding based on multidimensional Riemann
solvers. Such solver strategies are again intimately coupled to the mesh
structure.