* 1361487
* CSEDI:  Layering within cratonic lithosphere: Integrated constraints from xenoliths, seismic structure and geodynamical modeling
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2018
* E Parmentier, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 05/31/2018
* USD 519,493.00

Cratons are the old, stable cores of continents. They are regions that have not
experienced significant deformation for the last 2.5 billion years. A variety of
geochemical and geophysical data indicate that they are underlain by thick
mantle lithosphere that is unusually cold relative to the surrounding mantle.
The internal structure of the cratonic mantle also includes layering in both
physical and chemical properties. However, much remains to be learned about the
origin of this internal structure. The researchers plan to use the velocities at
which seismic waves propagate through the cratonic mantle to provide bounds on
the temperature of the mantle rocks, their chemical composition, and their grain
size and rock fabric. The multidisciplinary research team plans to directly
measure the geochemistry and rock fabric of samples of the cratonic mantle that
have been erupted to the surface to provide complementary information on their
chemical evolution and deformation history. The goals of the proposed work are
to: 1) better constrain layering in geochemical and seismic velocity structure
internal to cratonic mantle lithosphere, 2) explore the relationships among
different types of layering, and 3) shed new light on the processes that formed
the cratons and the mechanisms that permit them to remain stable over billions
of years. Understanding the stable cores of continents will help us understand
the evolution of the Earth and its continents through time. This project will
contribute to the education and career development of two or more graduate
students and several undergraduates, and the interdisciplinary nature of the
project will serve to broaden their research expertise. Our faculty team will
also teach a semester-long seminar at Brown on the topic of cratons for upper-
level undergraduates and graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team
proposes an integrated program of seismological and xenolith-based geochemical
and microstructural analyses and geodynamical modeling focused on three mantle
lithospheres that have experienced varying degrees of disruption in the last 2
billion years: the Slave craton, the Wyoming craton and the Colorado Plateau.
Each region provides excellent xenolith suites that sample the deep cratonic
mantle and broadband stations that will allow progress on resolving seismic
velocity structure. They plan to investigate the relationships between different
types of layering in the cratonic mantle (mid-lithospheric seismic
discontinuities, layering in azimuthal anisotropy, depletion, refertilization,
grain size, olivine fabrics) with a variety of new techniques. Joint inversions
of scattered wave, surface wave, ambient noise and SKS splitting data will
provide better constraints on seismic structure. In xenoliths from a range of
mantle depths we will use well-established analytical techniques to determine
bulk and trace element compositions and major, trace and water contents in their
constituent minerals to establish: the pressure-temperature conditions of the
last tectonomagmatic event, the degree of hydration of the mantle, and the
source of the metasomatic fluids/melts that affected the lithospheric mantle
(subduction-related versus subduction-unrelated). Xenolith microstructural
analyses will yield constraints on grain size, water content, and lattice
preferred orientation. Thermobarometry, modal analyses, volatile content and
grain size will be used to predict seismic velocities via a combination of
elastic models (which include the effects of composition) and anelastic effects;
these predictions will be compared to the observed seismological layering. Based
on these comparisons, a range of models will be defined that reflect the best
fits to geochemical, microstructural and seismological constraints. To explore
the implications of these models for the stability of the cratonic mantle, we
will use the xenolith constraints to calculate effective viscosity using
experimental flow laws for olivine, as well as density. The range of possible
density and viscosity structures for each study region will be incorporated in
geodynamical numerical modeling of lithospheric stability, including their
vulnerability to subduction processes at their margins. This work will provide
new insight on several questions. 1) What is the internal layering (physical and
chemical) of the cratonic mantle lithosphere? How do different types of layering
correlate with each other? 2) How has their internal structure permitted stable
cratons to remain largely intact over billion-year time-scales? How does
subduction at the edges of a craton affect the stability of the cratonic mantle
lithosphere? 3) How do the different types and scales of cratonic layering
'test' models of cratonic formation?