* 1361832
* Experimental Micromechanics and Toughness of Heterogeneous Solids
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/2014,08/31/2018
* Roderic Lakes, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 08/31/2018
* USD 408,000.00

This research seeks to understand how the internal structure of tough
heterogeneous materials enhances fracture resistance and to use this knowledge
to create novel tough materials. It is often very difficult to transcribe, let
alone improve or optimize, clever designs in natural highly-tough materials into
synthetic materials, partly because their complex structures occur over many
length scales. A systematic experimental study will be conducted on several
naturally-occurring materials that show the highest resistance to failure by
fracturing, such as woods, bone and nacre. The study will measure all the key
properties of these materials needed to describe them in a theoretical framework
that is more sophisticated and powerful than the one commonly employed to
describe material behavior. Not only will this deepen the knowledge of existing
highly fracture-resistant materials, the more powerful theoretical framework
will then be employed to explore, optimize and create new highly-fracture-
resistant materials. Such materials will be useful in making stronger, lighter
and safer components and structures in a wide variety of civilian, manufacturing
and aerospace applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The approach of this project is
understanding and modeling high toughness microstructures, and creation of novel
ultra-tough materials: model microscale material response by a generalized
continuum theory (Cosserat elasticity) that captures the effects of
microstructure in a richer, yet still continuum, way. A systematic experimental
investigation will determine, for the first time, all Cosserat moduli for
several naturally toughest materials: woods, bone and nacre. This will reveal
the key material microstructural characteristics, as captured by Cosserat
theory, that produce high toughness. A closely allied theoretical investigation
will: (i) analytically determine Cosserat moduli for several of these naturally
tough microstructures; (ii) employ Cosserat material to represent near-crack-tip
(fracture process zone) material response to confirm these characteristics lead
to high toughness, and to permit Cosserat moduli optimization to produce the
highest possible toughness. This approach has the fascinating prospect to escape
and improve upon biomimetics (Nature has not discovered all nor perhaps even the
best tough microstructures) by taking the key Cosserat features learned from
testing naturally tough materials, and from the theoretical toughness
optimization, and employing these to create novel fracture-tough microstructures
exhibiting these key Cosserat features. Such new microstructures could differ
substantially from those of the natural materials. Fabrication and testing of
novel materials created in this way will confirm their high toughness. An
integrated outreach an education plan consisting of demonstration materials,
course enhancement, web resource development, and interdisciplinary research and
training interactions will be pursued.