* 1361975
* I/UCRC: Technology Innovation for Novel Cost-reducing and Quality-enhancing Musculoskeletal Therapies
* ENG,EEC
* 04/15/2014,03/31/2020
* Jeffrey Lotz, University of California-San Francisco
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 03/31/2020
* USD 520,500.00

The I/UCRC for Disruptive Musculoskeletal Innovations intends to bring together
expertise in medical device design; new advancements in materials, nano-
technology, and medical imaging; computer modeling; clinical expertise in
musculoskeletal care; business acumen for medical device innovation; and
analysis of large national databases that include both clinical outcomes and
cost data. By doing so, CDMI has the potential to advance knowledge by bridging
these academic skills to pressing needs of the medical technology (MedTech)
industry. CDMI plans to conduct research encompassing multiple disciplines,
including material science, biomedical engineering, nanotechnology, biosensors,
implant design, information technology, and advanced imaging that have the
potential to reduce costs and improve outcomes.

The med-tech industry has an important role in the US economy. However, US pre-
market regulatory processes, combined with coverage and reimbursement
uncertainties, create significant deterrents to innovation, and places America?s
leadership position in jeopardy. Without confidence that a new medical
technology will be paid for, industry cannot justify the investment required to
bring that technology to market. As a result, there is a pressing societal need
to create more value from the money spent on medical technology, and thereby
manage healthcare cost increases without sacrificing the benefits of innovation.
For the US to maintain its leadership in medical technologies, healthcare
dollars need to be channeled in ways to foster innovation that is sustainable.
The cooperative research efforts of the CDMI seek to provide, in part, a
framework to achieve these ends.