* 1361532
* I/UCRC:  Center for Health Organization Transformation
* ENG,EEC
* 04/15/2014,03/31/2020
* Eva Lee, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 03/31/2020
* USD 156,830.00

In Phase II operation, the I/UCRC for Health Organization Transformation (CHOT)
Intends to approach the multifaceted problems of health organizations with
prospective, multi-disciplinary, and multi-level research strategies that take
advantage of quasi-experimental designs and natural experiments, where feasible.
In its five years of Phase I, CHOT has quickly removed research silos by pairing
multi-disciplinary research teams of engineers, strategic management experts,
management scientists, and health services researchers with high-impact problems
that top-tier health systems struggle to address. Specifically, CHOT has
produced research that enables health systems to better identify, apply,
optimize, and assess the impact of innovations on access, quality, and
efficiency of healthcare services. The organizational transformations identified
through these collaborative efforts will continue to be disseminated as best
practices where innovations indicate a need for sustained changes.

U.S. healthcare expenditures, at 17.9 percent of GDP, account for over twice the
healthcare spending per capita of the average of the 34 developed nations of the
OECD. Nonetheless, U.S. falls below the OECD averages on many population health
conditions. Current and planned CHOT research projects coincide with the most
expansive change in healthcare policy in the U.S. CHOT members benefit by
obtaining early validation of the direct impact of the innovations in their own
organizations. Center researchers and students work closely with health
managers, engineers, and other front-line professionals in health systems being
studied. This kind of training, especially for doctoral students, supports the
ability of future researchers and teachers to address industry issues from a
position of real-world experience. It also engages participating industry
professionals in identifying significant problems and understanding existing
knowledge bases related to these problems so that they can more effectively
implement any needed changes. Aggressive recruiting for graduate students among
under-represented groups will continue, increasing the diversity of the
workforce for both academia and industry. Exciting new opportunities will
continue for undergraduate students in Center research activities, exposing them
to health services research and encouraging them to pursue graduate education.