* 1361678
* RAPID: Inputs of Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbon to Drinking Water Sources from the Yosemite Wildfire
* ENG,CBET
* 12/15/2013,11/30/2014
* Randy Dahlgren, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 11/30/2014
* USD 49,770.00

1361678&lt;br/&gt;Chow&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Yosemite Rim fire, the third
largest fire in California, burned 257,314 acres (402 square miles) adjacent to
a major source of drinking water for 2.6 million people. This fire burned for
nearly 10 weeks and was reported 100 % contained October 26, 2013. The research
team has already collected the first set of samples which are post-fire and pre-
rain. The next sampling will be post-rain as close to initial runoff as
possible. One of the big questions is how did this fire affect the water quality
of the reservoirs in and around Yosemite National Park and what might be the
impact subsequently on drinking water quality. The burning will likely increase
the concentration of chemicals controlled under the Safe Drinking Water Act,
namely polynuclear aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs). However; little to no
information is known on the potential formation of black carbon, soot to most of
us, and its impact on water quality or drinking water quality. Another unknown
is the impact of the fire on natural organic matter from the forest floor. This
organic matter from "leaf litter" is normally transported to streams, rivers and
lakes by rain and it may lead to the formation of disinfection by-products
during water treatment. The impact of fires on this organic matter is unknown
and because the waters in the surrounding area are the source of drinking water
it may affect drinking water quality. Through the association of the PIs with
California Department of Fish and Game and the CA State Water Resources Control
Board material will be developed for use by the Agencies education and outreach
programs.