* 1361554
* EAGER: Developing Stress Tolerant Plants Through Cytoplasmic mMdification
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2017
* Changbin Chen, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* thomas okita
* 03/31/2017
* USD 299,757.00

PI: Shahryar F. Kianian (University of Minnesota-Twin Cities/ USDA-ARS Cereal
Disease Laboratory)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CoPI: Changbin Chen (University of
Minnesota-Twin Cities)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The interaction between the nuclear
and cytoplasmic genomes plays a critical role in the development of all
eukaryotes. Hundreds of human diseases and many phenotypic variations in plants
are known to be the result of alterations affecting this communication. However,
the nature of nuclear-cytoplasmic interactions in plants is poorly understood.
Wheat has the largest array of alloplasmic lines containing cytoplasmic genomes
derived from wild and related species than any other mammalian, insect, or plant
system and is an ideal model system for the study of nuclear-cytoplasmic
interactions. Studies in the PI's laboratory showed that alloplasmic lines
containing cytoplasm from wild wheat relatives showed significantly increased
disease resistance, vigor, and productivity when compared to the corresponding
euplasmic (with true cytoplasm) lines. Sequencing data from these lines also
show that not only does the mitochondrial genome change by replacement of the
nuclear genome but that those changes result in alteration of mitochondrial gene
expression patterns. This EAGER proposal will investigate the role of
cytoplasmic modifications in stress tolerance which could provide a new way of
breeding for biotic and abiotic stress in crop plants. The specific objectives
are to: 1) determine the extent and role of cytoplasmic genomes on biotic and
abiotic stress tolerance by investigating ~100 alloplasmic lines for resistance
to pathogens and salt stress; 2) identify the cytoplasmic genome that is
responsible for the altered response to biotic and abiotic stress; and 3)
investigate the molecular mechanism underlying the effect of cytoplasmic genomes
on stress tolerance. This project will advance understanding of the role that
cytoplasmic genomes play in providing increased tolerance to biotic and abiotic
stressin plants and will be important in breeding. Current breeding strategies
rely purely on homogeneous cytoplasmic background of the predominant species.
This study could change this paradigm to take advantage of cytoplasmic genomes
from wild species that confer tolerance to biotic and abiotic stress.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research activities will be interfaced with the
University of Minnesota's programs designed to recruit and train students at all
levels. A postdoctoral scientist will be mentored and advised by the two PIs and
given training in genomics, bioinformatics, grant writing, networking and
teaching, according to the individual development plan designed by the
postdoctoral associate. All sequencing data generated by this project will be
deposited in public databases such as NCBI. The germplasm developed by this
project will be made available upon request through the USDA National Small
Grains Collection.