* 1361476
* Variable Coefficient Fourier Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2017
* Christopher Sogge, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Edward Taylor
* 06/30/2017
* USD 360,000.00

The principal investigator will study several problems in geometric Fourier
analysis. The settings for these problems involve geometric manifolds of
dimension two or more. Associated to a given manifold are fundamental objects
called eigenfunctions. These are the fundamental modes of vibration of the
manifold, and they are the higher dimensional analogs of the familiar
trigonometric functions for the circle. Designers of musical instruments are
well aware that the shape of, say, a drum or the soundboard of stringed
instrument affects the basic tones that it omits. Similar phenomena arise for
manifolds, and we wish to study precisely how their shapes, such as how they are
curved, affect the resulting eigenfunctions. Just as in music, one particularly
expects different shapes and geometries to become more apparent in the behavior
of the fundamental modes of vibration as the frequency becomes larger and
larger. These eigenfunctions are solutions of a differential equation that is
similar to the wave equation, and the project will also study similar problems
involving it. The general theme is to study how solutions of wave equations are
affected by their physical backgrounds, such as whether or not black holes are
present or whether the background becomes very close to a vacuum near infinity.

Among the specific problems in the project, the principal investigator desires
to obtain improved estimates for the nodal sets (zero sets) of eigenfunctions.
There is a conjecture of Yau asserting that the size of this codimension-one set
should be comparable to its frequency. Although it has been fully settled in the
real analytic setting, less is known for smooth manifolds. The principal
investigator has already shown that there are connections between this problem
and Lebesgue space estimates for eigenfunctions that can detect certain types of
concentration. Several problems in the project involve developing this active
field. The principal investigator would also like to obtain improved bounds for
so-called period integrals of eigenfunctions under the assumption of negative
curvature. This assumption is known to be necessary, and the problem measures
the random cancellation of eigenfunctions along geodesics. There are connections
with this problem and analytic number theory, but to date the results that the
principal investigator has recently obtained using harmonic analysis are the
best known. He would like to combine them with number theory techniques to try
to obtain improved bounds. There are connections between these problems and
other problems that the project will study involving estimates for wave
equations ("Strichartz estimates") and microlocal analysis, especially
propagation of singularities.