* 1361847
* I/UCRC:  Consortium for Embedded Systems - Phase II
* CSE,CNS
* 04/15/2014,03/31/2022
* Spyros Tragoudas, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Continuing Grant
* Behrooz Shirazi
* 03/31/2022
* USD 216,000.00

The NSF I/UCRC Center for Embedded Systems (CES), was established in 2009 as a
collaborative effort of Arizona State University (lead) and Southern Illinois
University at Carbondale, to perform the industry relevant research for
advancing the field of Embedded Systems (ES) hardware and software. It commenced
its fifth year of operation of Phase I in Fall 2013. This proposal is for
continuation of the CES as a Phase II I/UCRC. During Phase I, CES organized its
research program into six main research topics, (1) Power, Energy and Thermal-
Aware Design, (2) Electronic System-level (ESL) Design and Technologies, (3)
Embedded Multicore Architectures and Programming, (4) Embedded Software Systems,
(5) Cyber-Physical Systems, and (6) Integrated Circuit Technologies, Design, and
Test. It has conducted fundamental, industry-relevant research, with 70 industry
funded projects from 17 companies, involving average of 12.6 faculty, and 26.4
graduate students per year. Industry sponsored student internships have led 50
permanent, full time positions. In Phase II, CES will build upon the ongoing
research efforts and cover new topics within these areas, and possibly re-
balance its emphasis based on the existing and new industry partners, and
additional faculty. Specifically, new projects are expected involving emerging
nanotechnologies such as memristors and spintronic devices; a greater emphasis
on energy harvesting techniques for ultra-low power systems; more projects
addressing security and trustworthiness; design techniques and tools for
guaranteeing provably correct behavior; and new computation paradigms that
perform decision making in the presence of uncertainty. The research conducted
at CES addresses many of the challenging problems posed by ES, the solutions to
which can be applied to other design microelectronic system platforms.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The multi-disciplinary nature of the work, and the
diversity of the faculty expertise and the industrial partners will result in
societal impact of CESs research outcomes. For instance, CES? work on improving
the energy efficiency of ES hardware and software, improves and expands battery
powered devices for medical applications and consumer electronics, and can also
significantly improve the energy efficiency of high performance servers, thereby
reducing the damage to the environment. Similarly, CES? work in verification of
hybrid systems is being used to ensure that controls systems in automobiles will
operate correctly. The same technologies will be used in all sorts of safety
critical systems. CES? work on sensors for monitoring bridges is yet another
example of the far reaching societal benefits of its research program. CES
maintains a popular internship program at ASU for both undergraduate and
graduate students. CES graduate students have learned the necessity and
importance of explaining and justifying their work to industry members in a
public forum with limited time and to an audience with varied backgrounds. This
has made them and their work enormously more marketable to industry. Finally,
both ASU and SIUC have successfully inducted outstanding female faculty, and CES
will continue this effort in Phase II. In Phase II it is expected that at least
one new site (Northeastern University) will be added to CES and continued
efforts will be made to expand CES? industrial membership following a strong
marketing plan that has been developed to achieve set targets. In addition, CES
will explore the possibility of adding one or possibly two international sites:
the University of Patras (UoP) in Greece, and the Indian Institute of Science
(IISc), Bangalore, India. UoP officials are expected to attend the January 2014
meeting of CES, and IISc has expressed interest in exploring ways to become a
I/UCRC site, through their recently established Robert Bosch Center for
Cyberphysical Systems.