* 1361522
* Research Engagement Across Curricular Tracks
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2021
* Gary Ramsey, Chief Dull Knife Memorial College
* Continuing Grant
* Jody Chase
* 08/31/2021
* USD 2,999,999.00

A goal of the Tribal Colleges and Universities Program (TCUP) is to increase the
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) instructional and
research capacities of specific institutions of higher education that serve the
Nation's indigenous students. Expanding the STEM curricular offerings at these
institutions expands the opportunities of their students to pursue challenging,
rewarding careers in STEM fields, provides for research studies in areas that
may be culturally significant, and encourages a community and generational
appreciation for science and mathematics education. This project aligns directly
with that goal, and moreover will inform the body of knowledge about the
importance and conduct of undergraduate research experiences in recruiting and
retaining underrepresented individuals into STEM studies, and preparing the next
generation of STEM professionals. The connection of faculty to research and
thereby the students to culturally and geographically relevant research is an
important step in retaining students who are more likely to pursue advanced
degrees. For those students entering the STEM workforce directly from a tribal
college, it is equally important that they have a well-defined skill set in
mathematics, science, and technology.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of
this project is to model how and why TCUP supported innovations, such as early
exposure to research, have contributed to the enhancements of teaching and
learning among STEM students in the tribal college. This proposal builds on
prior research conducted in relation to the two TCUP projects conducted at Chief
Dull Knife College (CDKC) over the last ten years and addresses key issues
concerning tribal college student retention and completion in STEM fields. One
of the major findings of the past ten years of TCUP capacity building at the
college is that students who are involved with research at the two-year college
tend to remain engaged longer in the educational process. The research projects
have served as a tool to keep students involved in STEM fields and helped them
choose STEM areas for degrees and for workforce placement. The first objective
of this work is to increase the number of students choosing STEM majors and
continuing in those majors upon transfer to four-year colleges. The Research
Engagement Across Curricular Tracks (REACT) project proposed here includes
exploring the use of research as a tool for recruitment, retention and success
among CDKC students. The second objective is to increase the number of STEM
students entering the STEM workforce. The addition of a new Associate of Applied
Science degree program to the college addresses this objective and will help
students focus their skill sets and fulfill local STEM employer needs. The third
objective of this work is to increase number of students choosing STEM majors
upon enrollment in the Tribal College. To help accomplish this objective, the
college will offer a summer research experience for area high school students.
Students will interact with current research and older college age science
research interns helping facilitate the transition from secondary school to
college STEM programs.