* 1361677
* Thermodynamic Formalism, Dynamics and Dimensions
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Mariusz Urbanski, University of North Texas
* Continuing Grant
* Justin Holmer
* 08/31/2018
* USD 209,999.00

This project will further develop an important subfield of mathematics called
dynamical systems. This field originated at the end of nineteenth century and at
the beginning of twentieth century with the work of great mathematicians such as
Henri Poincare and Jacques Hadamard, to mention only two. Their research
overlapped with physics, classical mechanics, and differential geometry; this
current project is also multidisciplinary. It involves, in addition to dynamical
systems, several other subfields of mathematics such as number theory and
probability theory. In this project the PI will build on these fields and
contribute to their development by laying down rigorous methods as applicable to
those fields as to dynamical systems. The project is intended to involve at
least eleven scholars from three continents as collaborators. Among them
included are four scholars from the United States, one from Canada, five from
Europe, and one from Japan. The results of the proposed research will also form
a source for further research and provide material for teaching advanced
graduated courses. The supported scholars will visit the PI's institution in
Denton, Texas to conduct research, deliver seminar lectures, and interact with
faculty and graduate students there.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
principal investigator proposes, in seven separate but interrelated subprojects,
to advance the theory of Diophantine approximations, transfer (Perron-Frobenius)
operators, discrete groups, countable alphabet conformal iterated function
systems, holomorphic dynamics, random dynamical systems, and ergodic averages.
Diophantine approximations include geometrically extremal measures and badly
approximable vectors in finite-dimensional Euclidean spaces. Transfer operators
include Apollonian circle packings and dynamical systems with holes. Discrete
groups include geometric rigidity for Kleinian groups and Gromov hyperbolic
spaces. Conformal iterated function systems include harmonic measure, exact
dimensionality, continuity of Hausdorff measure, and non--autonomous conformal
iterated function systems. Holomorphic dynamics includes doubling measures and
rational semigroups. Random dynamical systems include shrinking targets,
dynamical rigidity in random conformal dynamical systems, random conformal
iterated function systems with transversality, random rational functions, and
random transcendental meromorphic functions. These subprojects will require
methods from dynamical systems, ergodic theory, functional analysis, geometric
measure theory, number theory, complex analysis, and probability theory. The
goal of each subprojects of this proposal is to solve the major dynamical,
geometric, and analytical problems related to these fields. It builds upon the
methods and results the PI has obtained throughout his entire research career,
focusing mainly on about 40 papers written in the past five years.