* 1361620
* Development of New Aryne Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Daesung Lee, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Tarek Sammakia
* 06/30/2018
* USD 420,700.00

Through this award funded by the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Division of
Chemistry, Prof. Daesung Lee of the University of Illinois at Chicago explores a
new synthetic method evolved from the formation of an unconventional strained
aromatic intermediate. This method has many applications for the synthesis of
biologically active natural products, pharmaceuticals, drugs, and other
functional materials containing aromatic substructures. The reaction discovery,
exploration of its utility and general scope, and application to the synthesis
of natural and medicinally relevant compounds, provides an effective research
platform for equipping students with the knowledge and skills to become
competitive researchers in the work force. Importantly, because most students
trained through these research areas are expected to pursue careers in either
academia or industrial settings, their contributions will range from basic
science to human health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research exploits a method
for the formation of reactive arynes directly from acyclic multiyne precursors.
The favorable reactivity of these arynes and their congeners generated in
unconventional manners allows their subsequent functionalization to undergo
Alder-ene reactions, nucleophilic addition, hydrohalogenation, and
haloalkylation. In the presence of transition metal catalysts, these arynes also
can promote an efficient functionalization of unactivated C-H bonds on alkyl
groups, which can be further extended to aromatic systems, providing a formal
hydroarylation. The reactivity profiles and mechanisms of these aryne-based
transformations are further investigated by DFT-based theoretical calculations.
These new aspects of aryne reactivity, in combination with a mechanistic
understanding, provide an alternative approach to the limitations of current
methods involving 1,2-elimination of functionalized benzene derivatives. Through
the direct construction of arynes from non-aromatic precursors, a versatile new
synthetic tool is evolved for the synthesis of various functionalized aromatic
systems, including indoles, indolines, carbazoles, and many other aromatic
structures.