* 1361229
* What is Engineering Knowledge: A Longitudinal Study of Conceptual  Change and Epistemology of Engineering Students and Practitioners
* ENG,EEC
* 09/30/2013,07/31/2015
* Shane Brown, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Elliot Douglas
* 07/31/2015
* USD 105,540.00

The goal of this engineering education research project is to understand the
conceptual and epistemological differences between young undergraduates and
early-career practicing engineers and to understand the processes that result in
these differences. Past research has shown that engineering, science, and
mathematics students do not understand concepts fundamental to their discipline,
but researchers do not fully understand the conceptual and epistemological
frameworks used by early-career practicing engineers. Since one of the
objectives of undergraduate engineering education is to prepare students to
practice engineering, it is essential to understand how and what practicing
engineers know. This project, focused on the specific context of civil
engineering, will model the development of student and early-career engineer
epistemology and conceptual understanding of civil design concepts, and identify
key conceptual and epistemological changes that challenge early-career
engineers.

To understand how students' knowing changes as they become practicing engineers
this research project is based on two external sources of foundational research:
(1) Theoretical cognitive research on conceptual change that provides extensive
evidence of the value of conceptual understanding and a methodological basis for
researching engineering thinking and knowing. (2) Epistemology research that
provides clear evidence of the importance of epistemology to diversity,
retention and learning and a framework for understanding how engineers use
knowledge differently than other disciplines.

The broader impacts of this project can directly inform engineering teaching and
learning by providing roadmaps representing how conceptual change and
epistemology vary across gender and ethnic backgrounds. This knowledge can help
understand, and thus improve retention. To maximize the impact of this research,
the results of this project will be shared with engineering educators.