* 1361755
* I/UCRC:  Center for Advanced Forestry Systems University of Georgia Site Phase II
* ENG,EEC
* 04/15/2014,03/31/2019
* Richard Daniels, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 03/31/2019
* USD 300,000.00

In Phase II operation, the University of Maine Site of the I/UCRC for Advanced
Forestry Systems (CAFS) intends to focus its research portfolio so as to advance
understanding of plantation growth dynamics and yield and product quality
impacts of forest management activities. Many of the problems and opportunities
facing the management of forests today bridge disciplinary and regional
boundaries. For technological advances to be made, it is necessary to approach
research questions on multiple spatial and temporal scales, including the
molecular, cellular, individual-tree, stand, and ecosystem levels. CAFS has been
successful at providing the administrative structure and funding that has
allowed scientists from these existing cooperatives to initiate much need cross-
disciplinary research in areas of genetics, site manipulation, and growth and
yield modeling. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research conducted by the University of
Georgia site of CAFS is targeted at increasing the competitiveness of forest
products industries and forest landowners. Technology transfer between CAFS
scientists and industry and government member personnel fosters rapid
implementation of new technologies. Students trained via CAFS research are
unique in the forestry sciences because of their applied problem-solving skills
using interdisciplinary techniques across multiple scales. Aggressive recruiting
for graduate students among under-represented groups will continue to be
conducted, increasing the diversity of the workforce for both academia and
industry in this traditionally diversity-deficient discipline. Opportunities
will continue to be sought to involve undergraduate students in CAFS research
activities, exposing them to the excitement of forest science and encouraging
them to pursue graduate education.