* 1361928
* SusChEM: Hydrogen Chemistry of Earth Abundant Metals
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* D. Michael Heinekey, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Tarek Sammakia
* 06/30/2018
* USD 434,963.00

This award in the Chemical Synthesis (SYN) program in the Division of Chemistry
supports a project by Professor Michael Heinekey in the Department of Chemistry
at the University of Washington. The project will explore the chemistry of
hydrogen. Hydrogen has the potential to become a significant transportation fuel
and an important part of our energy infrastructure. Progress in this area has
been hindered by the cost and limited supply of platinum and related metals,
which are the current materials of choice for catalysis of hydrogen production
and utilization. This project will explore the use of less expensive and more
abundant metals such as iron, nickel and cobalt. This project will also provide
excellent interdisciplinary training of undergraduate and graduate students,
including those from groups historically underrepresented in the sciences. It
will allow both Professor Heinekey and students to continue to participate in
outreach activities directed to the general public.

Biomimetic approaches to hydrogen activation will be explored, with inspiration
provided by the recently discovered active site structures of hydrogenase
enzymes. Model complexes will be prepared with one iron center, two iron centers
and iron/nickel pairs, along with appropriate co-ligands, including carbon
monoxide and isonitrile ligands. The binding of hydrogen to these complexes will
be studied as a model for the oxidized form of the enzyme.Additional studies of
hydrogen binding to iron and nickel complexes will be undertaken to elucidate
the mechanism of proton transfer from bound hydrogen to various bases.
Interconversion of dihydrogen, terminal hydride and bridging hydride ligands
will also be investigated as a model for the activation of hydrogen by the
hydrogenase enzymes. Hydrogen complexes will also be studied as catalysts for
the hydrogenolysis of carbon chlorine bonds in Freons, which may lead to
practical processes for recycling of these ozone depleting molecules.