* 1361944
* Planning Grant:  I/UCRC for Geoscience
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2014,12/31/2015
* John Vidale, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Raffaella Montelli
* 12/31/2015
* USD 11,472.00

The proposed Center for Earthquake Risk Reduction (CERR) aims to protect lives
and infrastructure from the devastating effects of earthquakes through
development of tools and strategies to reduce their impact. CERR will solve
industry relevant and challenging problems, while providing educational
opportunities for students, which are multi-disciplinary in scope. The initial
university members of CERR will be the University of California, Berkeley (UCB),
the California Institute of Technology (CIT), and the University of Washington
(UW). These three institutions already have a close partnership in the rapidly
evolving area of Earthquake Early Warning (EEW) including having industry
partners contributing to that development. Building on this existing partnership
kernel, CERR will expand its mission beyond earthquake early warning, attract
additional industry and government partners, and welcome additional university
partners. This planning grant proposal seeks to fund a two-day planning workshop
between the industry, government, and university groups (UCB, UW, and CIT) to
map out an initial research agenda, agree on center policies, and establish the
Industry Affiliates Board (IAB).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CERR would be in the
unique position to bring together industrial, government, and academic expertise
to advance the field of earthquake risk reduction. The critical challenge is to
translate discoveries in earthquake science into actionable information, which
impacts businesses, government sectors, and the public at large. This will be
accomplished through the development of real-time information feeds, enhanced
research for site-specific risk reduction (including path effects), physics-
based rupture scenarios, the integration of low-cost sensor data, and analysis
of the mechanics of induced earthquakes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching
vision is to push the state of the art in available data and knowledge areas to
significantly impact risk mitigation both before and after a large rupture. The
I/UCRC framework provides an important mechanism to bring together diverse
groups who share common interests, but who have not historically had a method to
leverage their individual strengths. Working together, there is a high potential
for broad impacts on the challenge of risk reduction. CERR will also train the
next generation of student researchers in an environment with an exposure to a
broad range of business and government sectors.