* 1361496
* CNIC: US-Italy Research Project Development on Alpine Mountain Drainage Basin Response to Climatic Warming
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2017
* Sara Rathburn, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 08/31/2017
* USD 73,742.00

Non-technical Abstract

This US-Italy research effort will catalyze a new collaboration to develop
methods to identify how different river basins in the eastern Italian Alps
respond to climate change. U.S. PI Sara Rathburn will work with three U.S.
students and partners from the Free University of Bozen-Bolzano and the
University of Milano-Bicocca to develop a project to study basins in the Adige
River Valley selected for the valley's physical characteristics and the channel
network that influences movement of water and sediment. The glaciers in the
Italian Alps appear to be particularly prone to climate change due to their size
and geographic location. Therefore, the team intends to use preliminary
observations of drainage basin response to deglaciation to develop a
quantitative index that can help identify particularly sensitive or resilient
basins which may require different management under hazardous conditions.
Changes to the amount of water and sediment delivered to mountain rivers
influences the shape of river channels, and whether or not water is delivered
efficiently and with minimal or abundant sediment to downstream communities.
Given the importance of such glaciated headwater streams, this work may have
implications for controlling the timing and amount of water available for
agricultural, municipal, and hydropower needs. Findings may offer a useful
comparison for similar basins in the U.S. Using historical documents of channel
change that date to the Little Ice Age, over the last 250 years, and current
field data on water and sediment discharge, the sensitivity index will then be
tested for use in future projections. U.S. and Italian university students will
participate in cooperative field research and should gain valuable early career
experience with the practical implications of global climate change on water
supply.

Technical Abstract

The US-Itaian collaboration is to establish methods to characterize response
domains for drainage basins undergoing deglaciation in the Italian Alps to
develop landscape sensitivity indices of past, present, and future changes in
flow and sediment dynamics. Sensitivity indices will be based on valley
geometry/channel morphologic changes and modern processes. Quantitative indices
of drainage basin response to climate change are not widely available in current
literature. The lack of quantitative indices limits the ability to identify
particularly sensitive or resilient basins that require different management
under changing climate. Research findings should advance our knowledge of how
valley geometry and channel planform record changes in water and sediment
discharge over the last 250 years, and quantitative measurements of current
fluvial processes will be used as input to the conceptual model, with a final
comparison based on projected climatic warming. Climate change poses myriad
environmental and socieo-economic challenges, and research addressing landscape
response has large and tangible benefits for communities weighing different
hazard mitigation, adaption and resource protection options. U.S. and Italian
students will collaborate on all phases of the research and gain exposure to
complex, real-world environmental issues. Exposing students to collaborative
research highlights the benefits of international teamwork in scientific inquiry
and innovation to address future challenges of landscape change.