* 1361737
* Planning Grant:  I/UCRC for Broadband Wireless Access and Applications Center Site at the Catholic University of America
* ENG,EEC
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2016
* Ozlem Kilic, Catholic University of America
* Standard Grant
* Thyagarajan Nandagopal
* 03/31/2016
* USD 13,000.00

The Catholic University of America (CUA) is planning to join the Broadband
Wireless Access and Applications Center (BWAC), an existing multi-university
Industry/University Cooperative Research Center (I/UCRC) comprising of the
University of Arizona (lead institution), Auburn University, Virginia Tech, and
the University of Virginia. The planning grant will be used to organize a
workshop that will result in a joint industry and university research agenda for
the CUA site. The planning grant will also be used to attend the meetings with
industry members and travel for recruiting new members. The research activities
at CUA will be complementary and synergistic with the other BWAC sites through a
focus on emerging wireless networking technologies. The CUA site intends to
address the research challenges of broadband wireless access and applications
with an integrative approach, and focus on areas including software defined
wireless networks (heterogeneous radio access and core networks), information-
centric networking and mobile content distribution, cognitive and cooperative
communications, advanced antenna design, and sensor data analysis and privacy.

The efforts at CUA site will increase the impact of BWAC in technical,
educational and outreach activities, and help more fully address the needs for
scientific and technological advances to improve the competitiveness of the US
wireless sector. The CUA site, in combination with the existing center, will
address a critical area of the economy and has potential to help reach the
nations broadband goals and enhance the societal ability to access the broadband
wireless services. The site will further provide opportunity to develop
broadband wireless as a platform for innovation through innovative research
projects that are cooperatively selected with the industry partners. The site
will be committed towards enhancing the diversity of faculty and students, and
underrepresented undergraduate and graduate students will be actively recruited
to the program. The partnership of the CUA site with companies and government
agencies will provide students early exposure and opportunities in their career
development, and enhance the intellectual capacity and quality of the
engineering and science workforce.