* 1361145
* Inference of Network Dynamics and Architecture in Neural Systems with Data-Driven Methods
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2020
* Eli Shlizerman, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2020
* USD 879,377.00

Neural systems are remarkable in their ability to perform a diversity of
coherent tasks such as sensory processing, information transfer, and information
storage. Understanding how neuronal circuits interact to form coherent networks
is challenging due to their complexity. In this project, the olfactory neural
system in insects is studied as a model for vertebrate and human sensory neural
circuits because it encodes environmental cues into coherent perceptual objects
and electrophysiological recordings can be obtained while the invertebrate
animal is behaving. This project will develop mathematical tools to use
multineural recordings from the olfactory processing unit in moths to classify
robust patterns and to infer a predictive computational model. The computational
model will help to reveal the design principles upon which these neuronal
circuit networks are built. Simulations generated by the model for complex and
dynamic olfactory stimuli will be used to guide electrophysiological and
behavioral experiments to quantify how the olfactory network responds,
classifies, and recognizes these stimuli.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project
electrophysiological recordings will be used to infer a dynamical network of the
antennal lobe, the primary olfactory processing center in insects. For that
purpose, a large dataset of neural recordings will be obtained, and mathematical
tools that extend state-of-the-art data reduction and structure inference
methods will be developed. These tools will be designed to optimally represent
the multidimensional time-series data and infer the network structure. In
particular, the research will be focused on constructing a decision space from
data, spanned by population vectors (neural codes) each representing a stimulus,
in which scents can be classified and recognized. By associating with each
neuron a dynamical model, the network wiring that produces similar dynamics in
the odor space will be inferred using optimization. With the predictive model
and stimuli classification methods, this project will resolve questions
regarding network design, such as why do the encoding dynamics appear to be
robust even for noisy stimuli or how does the network structure, particularly
inhibitory connections and feedback, produce robust patterns of neural activity.
Optimal values of parameters and those that cause alteration of dynamics will be
identified as a result of the study. Additionally, both the output of the model
and electrophysiological recordings will be used to predict responses to dynamic
inputs, background odor, and mixtures of odors.