* 1361921
* CCCC Targeted STEM Infusion Project
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2020
* Lane Azure, Cankdeska Cikana Community College
* Standard Grant
* Jody Chase
* 07/31/2020
* USD 491,095.00

The Tribal Colleges and Universities Program (TCUP) is designed to support
improvements in the scientific, mathematical, engineering and technological
education infrastructure in (a) tribally-controlled colleges and universities,
or (b) those colleges that serve significant numbers of Alaska Natives or Native
Hawaiians. Targeted STEM Infusion Projects (TSIP) is offered as a TCUP strand
for meritorious projects that focus on smaller scale transformative efforts,
such as within a department.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will establish
the first associate of science degree in forensic science at a tribal college.
It is anticipated that such a degree will encourage more interest in STEM
studies generally, and can provide short-range employment preparation, and the
foundation to transfer to further studies in the field of forensic science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cankdeska Cikana Community College's "CCCC Targeted STEM
Infusion Project" aims to develop and implement an associate of science degree
in forensic science with seamless matriculation into the third year of the
University of North Dakota's (UND) Bachelor's of Science (BS) degree in Forensic
Science. This initiative responds to a national growing interest and demand by
tribal college students in the field of forensic science. Cankdeska Cikana
Community College's (CCCC) TSIP proposal is designed to take into account the
particular needs of tribal college students by offering a bridging pathway based
on hypothesis-driven summer research internships in addition to state of the art
technologies that will facilitate the transition of tribal college students to a
large university campus. The general strategies are: to establish a forensic
science curriculum that is on par with national standards, and that will
seamlessly matriculate to a BS program at UND; to effectively prepare CCCC
students for other (STEM) academic and professional aspirations; to enhance the
college's science courses to include forensic science modules; and to ensure
that the college's course requirements will be culturally appropriate to fit the
needs of tribal colleges and students as well as mainstream institutions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Utilizing both formative and summative evaluation steps
through the various stages of development and implementation of this project
will provide CCCC with explicit insight on success of the broader outcomes for
this project, increasing applied and basic science enrollment for tribal college
students in mainstream universities and in developing science professionals that
will serve American Indian communities and the nation.