* 1361490
* Integrating Expert Knowledge and Simulation-Based Assessment for Wastewater Management Training
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* David Feldon, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 08/31/2018
* USD 939,446.00

This project is designing and implementing an innovative approach to improving
the statewide training of wastewater technicians at the South Carolina
Environmental Training Center. The integrative approach includes 1) cognitive
task analyses of industry experts to elicit both explicit and tacit knowledge
and skills as a basis for elements of mastery, 2) using instructional design
principles to develop an authentic simulated practice system with embedded
intelligent feedback, and 3) linking simulations to courses and curricula for an
Associate Degree in Applied Science, for a workforce certificate program, and
for continuing education courses for current wastewater
operators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project represents a flexible, next-
generation solution to increasing training capacity, allowing extensive practice
and problem solving in scenarios that include high risks and emergencies, and
providing specific, tailored feedback to learners in authentic situations.
Simulations are linked to instructor modules, allowing assessment of student
progress and development of modified and novel scenarios. The project addresses
the immediate technical workforce need brought on by impending retirements of
wastewater operators. It is also providing an effective and scalable model for
training workers from rural settings and/or nontraditional educational pathways
that can ultimately be extended to other technical fields.