* 1361068
* CAREER:  Electric Field-Assisted Assembly and Characterization of Freestanding Films of Nanoparticles
* MPS,DMR
* 08/31/2013,05/31/2016
* James Dickerson, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Sokol
* 05/31/2016
* USD 212,909.00

****Technical Abstract*****

This CAREER award focuses on an investigation and optimization of
electrophoretic deposition conditions of nanoparticles in suspension and of
nanoparticle film-polymer film interactions to fabricate large surface area
freestanding nanoparticle films. The award also aims to characterize the
mechanical properties of the freestanding nanoparticle films, such as the
tensile strength and the Young's modulus, to probe how large the adhesion among
nanoparticles can extend in the macroscopic scale. For some of the nanoparticle
films, like the Fe3O4 nanocrystal films, the magnetic properties of the
ensemble, such as the magnetic dipolar coupling, can be probed. Characterization
of magnetic properties can provide substantial insight into the coupling between
such magnetic nanoparticles. This new class of materials is likely to stimulate
the development of wholly novel varieties of composite materials and device
applications, such as anti-corrosion and anti-fogging coatings and freestanding,
flexible video display devices. Diverse and underrepresented graduate and
undergraduate students, as well as high school students and secondary school
educators, will participate in this project thanks to existing programs, such as
the Fisk-Vanderbilt Masters-to-PhD Bridge Program.

****Non Technical Abstract****

This CAREER award focuses on a study of the assembly and the characteristics of
free-standing and transportable macroscopic materials formed from collections of
nanomaterials. The investigation seeks to optimize the conditions for
nanoparticles in a solution and for nanoparticles in film form, such that the
fabrication of films of nanomaterials in macroscopic sizes can be achieved. The
award also aims to characterize the mechanical properties of the freestanding
nanoparticle films, such as the tensile strength, to probe how strong these
nanostructured materials can be. Characterization of magnetic properties can
provide substantial insight into the coupling between magnetic nanoparticles.
This new class of materials is likely to stimulate wide ranging technical
developments and device applications, such as anti-corrosion and anti-fogging
coatings and freestanding, flexible video display devices. Diverse populations
of underrepresented graduate and undergraduate students, as well as high school
students and secondary school educators, will participate in this project thanks
to existing programs, such as the Fisk-Vanderbilt Masters-to-PhD Bridge Program.