* 1361296
* Multidimensional Parameterization in the Analysis of Selective Catalytic Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Matthew Sigman, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 08/31/2018
* USD 420,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Matthew Sigman of the Department of Chemistry at the
University of Utah explores the development of techniques to enhance the ability
to predict the outcomes of chemical reactions. Success in this endeavor has an
impact on any pursuit in which the synthesis of molecules and reaction
optimization is needed, such as the pharmaceutical, chemical, agricultural
industries and their biological and chemical research activities. In addition to
building an internationally recognized program, this project provides excellent
training of students, from pre-undergraduate to post-doctoral, including those
from groups historically underrepresented in the sciences. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The ability to predict the outcome of a chemical reaction
necessitates the construction of mathematical models relating to physical
organic chemical precepts (parameters describing steric and electronic effects)
in a limited number of well-designed initial experiments. The resultant models
are used to predict new examples of both catalyst and substrate performance for
a given catalytic reaction. To accomplish this, new physical organic parameters
and design concepts are to be developed. This work leads to novel ways to
interrogate reactions in terms of extrapolating the models to predict the
performance of new catalysts and substrates for a given reaction. Additionally,
the resulting models enhance our understanding of reaction mechanisms, since the
parameters are tied to physical organic concepts.