* 1361825
* Salish Sea Research Center: Transforming STEM Education in Native Environmental Sciences
* EDU,EES
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2018
* Andres Quesada, Northwest Indian College
* Standard Grant
* Jody Chase
* 03/31/2018
* USD 500,000.00

Northwest Indian College (NWIC) students will investigate the productivity
potential of traditional indigenous aquaculture using a growth increment
laboratory to compare the growth rate of modern harvested clams such as
Saxidomous gigantea, to clam shells from the archeological records. In addition,
students will conduct research on in-situ intertidal ecosystems using underwater
video systems, or will explore the impact of ocean acidification on culturally
and economically significant organisms such as clams and crabs, using SeaFET pH
sensors to better understand changes occurring in nearby oceanic ecosystems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These projects describe some of the ways that traditional
knowledge and cultural experience will be combined with place-based research to
enrich the Native Environmental Science degree and increase the relevance of
STEM programs and careers to tribal students. It has been widely shown that
undergraduate research experiences increase the success of students through STEM
academic programs and related careers. In addition to increasing the STEM course
offerings at NWIC, this project will promote the development of indigenous
scholars through the creation of a space and organizational structure for
student researchers, as well as capacity-building in the form of equipment to
promote student and staff research. This project will increase the American
Indian involvement in STEM measured through an increased achievement of Bachelor
of Science, and graduate persistence into STEM careers.