* 1361823
* Geometry of Measures
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Tatiana Toro, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Justin Holmer
* 06/30/2018
* USD 240,000.00

The title "Geometry of Measures" refers to the study of the regularity and the
structure of measures (think of length and area and volume as examples of this
concept). Problems both in smooth and fractal geometry, as well as questions
arising in partial differential equations, fit under this umbrella. Along these
lines, one of the projects the principal investigator studies concerns an energy
minimization problem, where noise is taken into account. This provides a more
realistic model for natural phenomena. The behavior one expects to verify is
that, up to first order approximation, energy minimizers in the noisy setting
behave exactly the same way as those in the noise-free environment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project illustrates the idea that mathematical
objects that can be well approximated by more regular ones inherit some of their
regularity properties. Several applications of this principle are presented.
Four main question are addressed in the project. The first concerns the
regularity of almost minimizers associated with free-boundary variational
problems involving Holder continuous Riemannian metrics, and the aim of studying
th question is to understand the structure of the corresponding free boundary.
New results concerning the free-boundary regularity for the minimizing problems
with free boundary that were studied earlier by Alt-Caffarelli and Alt-
Caffarelli-Friedman are expected. In this case the "good approximating objects"
are solutions to the Laplacian in the corresponding Riemannian metric. The
second question deals with the regularity of measures that are well approximated
by flat measures (i.e., constant multiples of Lebesgue measure on planes) in the
Wasserstein distance. Two distinct types of problems are considered, one
geometric in nature, another that ties in very closely to the theory of weights
in harmonic analysis. The third question concerns the existence of good
parameterizations for two different types of subsets of Euclidean space. The
fourth question ties in with an important branch of the principal investigator's
research, namely, the regularity of elliptic measures associated with
divergence-form elliptic operators on nonsmooth domains. The cross-pollination
between harmonic analysis and geometric measure theory is one of the pillars of
the proposed research.