* 1361172
* Experimental Particle Astrophysics with the Pierre Auger and HAWC Observatories
* MPS,PHY
* 08/31/2013,08/31/2015
* Miguel Mostafa, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Jean Allen
* 08/31/2015
* USD 332,742.00

This award will enable this particle astrophysics group to continue their
analysis of data from the Pierre Auger Observatory, and to participate in the
construction of the High Altitude Water Cherenkov (HAWC) Gamma Ray Observatory.
Ultra high energy cosmic rays carry information on the structure of matter at
its most fundamental level. Yet their origin and mechanisms of interaction with
the cosmic microwave background are unknown. The limitations to acquiring such
knowledge are related to the rarity of such particles intersecting the Earth's
upper atmosphere. The Auger Observatory is currently the world's leading
detector of ultra-high energy cosmic rays, and makes these kinds of measurements
possible. The analysis of data from the Auger Observatory has already yielded
interesting results toward the goal of solving the mystery of the highest energy
particles in nature. The group will continue their composition and anisotropy
studies at the highest energies where the Auger data are unique and of high
value and interest to the scientific community. A search for possible Galactic
sources is also part of the proposed work.

The HAWC Observatory will be a unique survey instrument for very-high energy
gamma ray astronomy, complementing Cherenkov telescopes. It is ideal for mapping
extended sources of gamma rays such as diffuse emission from the MilkyWay, and
for detecting bursting extragalactic (and galactic) sources. The CSU group will
contribute to the construction of HAWC with the fabrication of one of the key
components of the detector (the tank bladders).

The Broader Impacts will be to continue to reach out to the general public, and
to promote undergraduate research and education. The proposed work takes
advantage of the resources of the research program to strengthen the quality of
undergraduate education, providing a valuable undergraduate experience only
available at a research institution.