* 1361716
* Catalytic Metal-Mediated Small Molecule Fixation
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2017
* Lawrence Sita, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 06/30/2017
* USD 517,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Catalysis Program in the Chemistry Division is
funding Dr. Lawrence Sita from the University of Maryland to develop transition-
metal catalysts that can be used for the production of high-value specialty
chemicals from readily available, safe, and inexpensive starting materials, such
as nitrogen, carbon dioxide, carbon monoxide, and sulfur. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Advances in chemical technologies for the commercial production of
high-value, industrial chemicals must be made in the near term in order to meet
the increasing burdens placed on natural resources, energy, and the environment
as the global population is anticipated to expand by 3 to 4 billion people over
the next 50 years. In response to these needs, the primary objective of the
project is the development of transition-metal catalysts that can be used to
produce value-added, specialty chemicals from readily-available, inexpensive and
safe starting materials, such as nitrogen, carbon dioxide, carbon monoxide,
nitrous oxide and sulfur. The broader impact of this work is the potential
development of more atom-economical and energy-efficient, industrial-scale
chemical transformations that will be beneficial to the world economy, the
environment, and the society and that can reduce the health- and security-risk
of current technologies that require the generation, transportation, and on-site
storage of hazardous reagents and intermediates. The proposed work will further
provide an important vehicle by which future generations of undergraduates,
graduate students, and postdoctoral researchers are
trained.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of the research is the synthesis and
characterization of mid-valent, second- and third-row, group 5 (Nb, Ta) and 6
(Mo, W) metal complexes with cyclopentadienyl amidinate (CPAM) and
cyclopentadienyl guanidinate (CPGU) ligands. These complexes are suited for the
study of the coordination and "fixation" of small molecules possessing X-Y
multiple bonds (e.g., N2, O2, N2O, CO and CO2). The interaction between these
metal complexes and the small molecules leads to (1) X-Y multiple bond cleavage
compensated by the formation of strong M-X and M-Y bonding interactions, and (2)
pathways for atom-economical, X- and Y-transfers to a substrate, which complete
the catalytic cycle with respect to the starting metal complex. The CPAM and
CPGU, molecularly-discrete complexes will be fully characterized both in
solution using NMR, EPR, UV, and IR spectroscopies, electrospray mass
spectrometry, and electrochemistry, and in the solid state using single-crystal
X-ray analysis, elemental analyses, and IR and EPR spectroscopies.