* 1361697
* Radon transforms: geometric combinatorics, regularity, and applications
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2018
* Philip Gressman, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Justin Holmer
* 05/31/2018
* USD 360,582.00

The goal of this project is to address a series of interesting open questions in
the mathematical field of relating to what are known as geometric integral
transforms (like the Radon and X-ray transforms) and oscillatory integrals.
Stronger theoretical understanding of these and related objects is necessary,
for they have many applications in science, engineering, and technological
innovation. Imaging problems from medicine, including CT, SPECT, and NMR, as
well as RADAR and SONAR applications, all depend on a deep understanding of the
Radon transform. Optical-acoustic tomography, scattering theory, and even
motion-detection algorithms also rely heavily on the mathematics that will be
further developed as a part of this project. In addition, a major component of
this project will involve contributions to mathematical education and training
of graduate students at the grant institution. These students will take the
knowledge and skills developed as a part of this project with them into the
workforce to further advance the state of the art.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project has two major technical objectives. The first is to develop geometric
and combinatorial methods useful for proving uniform estimates for a class of
linear and multilinear operators generalizing Radon-like transforms, sublevel
set operators, and oscillatory integral operators. The approaches to be
developed trace their roots to work of Bourgain, Wolf, Christ, and many other
mathematicians. The problems to be studied here and related generalizations are
connected to some of the most important conjectures in modern mathematical
analysis, including the Kakeya conjecture, the Bochner-Riesz conjecture, the
Restriction conjecture, and Sogge's local smoothing conjecture. The second major
objective is the application of these ideas and results to important open
questions in the field of partial differential equations. Such applications have
already made significant contributions to the study of the Boltzmann equation
and the Gross-Pitaevskii hierarchy, and during this project, such work will be
continued and expanded to include new mathematical understandings of the
scattering theory of the Ablowitz-Kaup-Newell-Segur hierarchy and oscillatory
Riemann-Hilbert problems. Each of these problems can benefit greatly from the
tools to be developed in this project, which will replace traditional Fourier
methods with more robust, geometric tools and ideas.