* 1361425
* Bayesian Methods for Protein Fibrillization: Model Integration and Network Dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2020
* Carter Butts, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 09/30/2020
* USD 1,308,441.00

This project centers on the development of principled statistical methods for
understanding the formation and growth of amyloid fibrils, protein aggregates
with broad functional and disease-related biological relevance. Protein
fibrillization is a basic biophysical phenomenon that underlies problems of
immense social concern. These include diseases such as Alzheimer's, cataract,
and type II diabetes that are increasingly prevalent in our aging population, as
well as economic costs and food security concerns related to prion disease in
cattle and other non-human animals. The proposed research has the potential to
inform the search for solutions to these serious societal problems, resulting in
both economic savings and improvements in individual lives. By developing new
predictive and data analytic techniques and validating them with novel
experimental data, the project will advance our understanding of the factors
that enhance or inhibit protein fibrillization while also producing statistical
innovations that can be potentially applied to other problem domains. This
project will also provide a unique interdisciplinary training program for
graduate and undergraduate students, incorporating novel statistical methods,
programming, and experimental techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
project combines modeling techniques from the mathematical social sciences with
theoretical and experimental methods from biophysical chemistry, enabling us to
approach biological problems in novel ways. The technical innovations of this
project are focused on two areas. First, it will develop new approaches to
Bayesian model integration in which integrated predictions will be obtained from
multiple, potentially non-statistical models in cases with little or no test
data. Second, the project will develop novel model families for fibrillization
kinetics, extending methods originally developed for social networks to capture
interactions between individual proteins in solution over time scales of hours
to days. The modeling work will be validated by combination of existing
experimental data and by biophysical data collected by the research team. The
research will result in new Bayesian techniques for predicting phenomena related
to protein aggregation (especially in a high-throughput setting), and for
modeling the kinetics of fibrillization process itself. The proposed research
will also lead to novel methods for Bayesian integration of predictive models
for phenomena with complex dependence, new Bayesian inference, model selection,
and simulation techniques for large-scale dynamic network models, and a body of
biologically relevant empirical data on protein fibrillization.