* 1361856
* Some Analytical Aspects of the Theory of Integrable Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2018
* Alexander Its, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Justin Holmer
* 05/31/2018
* USD 341,958.00

The class of equations under study, called integrable systems, includes several
fundamental equations of nature. This is an old and venerable area of study
which goes back to classical works of Liouville, Gauss, and Poincare. Currently,
the theory of integrable systems has become an expanding area which plays an
increasingly important role as one of the principal sources of new ideas for
many branches of modern mathematics and theoretical physics. Simultaneously, it
provides an efficient analytical tool for the study of some of the fundamental
mathematical models arising in modern nonlinear science and technology. In
addition to the traditional domain of differential equations, integrable
techniques are becoming common in such diverse fields as string theory,
statistical mechanics, random processes, quantum informatics, and number theory.
Many of the problems considered in the project have direct connections with
these disciplines. Indeed, the concrete analytical questions addressed in the
project are primarily motivated by the needs of the analytical theory of quantum
entanglement - a phenomenon which is expected to play a key role in a practical
realization of quantum computing, and by the challenges of analytical
description of fundamental issue of phase transition in the quantum and
statistical mechanics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal
goal of this research project is to address various new analytical questions of
the theory of integrable systems which have emerged from recent developments in
random matrix theory and in the theory of exactly solvable quantum models. In
this project, the PI proposes to focus on three directions of research: the
asymptotic analysis of Toeplitz and Hankel determinants and the applications of
these determinants in random matrices and statistical mechanics, the study of
Fredholm determinants arising in random matrix theory, and the asymptotics of
the correlation functions of non-free fermionic quantum spin models. Each of
these directions is represented by a collection of concrete problems, and they
will be investigated within the same analytical framework, viz., the Riemann-
Hilbert method.