* 1361713
* Rational Design and Manufacturing of Ceramic-Polymer Composites for Solid State Cooling using the Electrocaloric Effect
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Qing Wang, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 08/31/2018
* USD 328,512.00

In the class of materials referred to as electrocaloric effect (ECE) materials,
flow of an electric current through the material can create a temperature
difference across the material. In other words, if one connects a battery to two
sides of an electrocaloric material, one side of the material will become warmer
and one side will become cooler. Because of this temperature difference across
the material, electrocaloric materials can be used to build cooling or heating
devices, but unlike conventional heating and air conditioning systems,
electrocaloric devices can be fabricated with no moving parts. One major
challenge to the ECE-based cooling technology is a lack of high-performance
electrocaloric materials that are easily handled and shaped during manufacturing
and that can be operated at room temperature using low amounts of power. This
award will support the development of polymer composite materials (i.e. polymers
that are mixed with other materials) as a new form of ECE materials to overcome
these challenges. This project will train graduate and undergraduate students
capable of working in the interdisciplinary field of functional materials. The
research outcomes will be incorporated into various outreach activities for
grades 9-12 teachers and high school students.

This aim of this research is the introduction of ceramic fillers into
ferroelectric polymers to improve room-temperature ECE responses. The structures
and compositions of the ferroelectric polymer and ceramics will be designed and
tuned to boost the ECE responses by optimizing the ferroelectric-paraelectric
phase transition and the dielectric properties. Control over the spatial
orientation of the fillers, and the effect of this orientation of performance,
will be investigated. Detailed and systematic characterization of the resulting
structures and properties will be carried out to gain fundamental insight into
key relationships between chemical structure, film morphology, polarization,
dielectric responses, and electrocaloric properties. Unique mechanisms in the
electroactive polymer nanocomposites such as the interfacial coupling effect
will be investigated. The success of this project will open a new direction in
the development of high-performance ECE materials and have implications for
development of novel polymer nanocomposites with new architectures and superior
coupled properties.