* 1361987
* Mechanochemistry of Bacterial Cell Wall Growth
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2018
* Charles Wolgemuth, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 05/31/2018
* USD 404,999.00

The research objective of this award is to use a combination of optical
microscopy, computational and micromanipulation tools to investigate the
mechanics of bacterial cell wall growth. This investigation will add
significantly to the understanding of the interplay between physics and
chemistry at the bacterial cell level and enhance our ability to manipulate cell
structure and function by revealing principles of bacterial shape and mechanics.
This research is at the interface of physics, chemistry, biology, and
engineering, thereby spanning a diverse and broad range of scientific
disciplines. The work will provide new avenues into biomechano-chemistry and may
also lead to new paradigms in nano-engineering. The educational plan will train
students to develop quantitative understandings of the role of solid mechanics
and chemical kinetics in microbial biology. In addition, this work will help
foster the partnership between the awardee's institution and a non-PhD-focused
physics program to provide underrepresented minorities with summer research
experience and act as a bridge to graduate school.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research project will develop and test a multiscale model for bacterial growth
and shape maintenance. The mechanisms underlying this process remain enigmatic,
even though many of the molecular players are now known. Bacterial shape is
considered to be important for the function of the bacteria. Therefore, this
project will explore the biophysics of an interesting material while also being
informative on the mechanisms that bacteria use to create and maintain their
shapes. Furthermore, this research will develop a multi-scale approach for
determining how molecular-level interactions produce bulk material properties.
Studies conducted under this award will use atomic force microscopy and optical
trapping techniques to apply prescribed forces to growing bacteria. The
consequences on the shape and growth rate will then be compared to the multi-
scale computational model that will be developed to determine how mechanical
forces affect the biochemistry of cell wall synthesis.