* 1361643
* STS Post Doctoral Fellowship: From Morphology to DNA: Metagenomics and its Impacts on Species-Based Conservation Science and Policy
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2013,07/31/2014
* Anne Pringle, University of Wisconsin-Oshkosh
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 07/31/2014
* USD 3,983.00

Description of research&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research generates a series of
observations about the work mycologists are doing to reconcile new and old
species concepts within biology and the larger biodiversity conservation
community. Mycologists are discovering new species that are only identified
through DNA sequencing. Using a mixed methods, multi-sited project approach,
this project follows scientists in the field, the laboratory, and at
international conference settings; as they encounter, process, package, name,
classify, and ultimately give biological value to the genetic sequences
determined to represent unique organisms and species. Examining the practices of
knowledge production simultaneously at multiple scales shows increasing points
of tension between the biological scientists and those focused on species
conservation as the biologists promote the idea of preserving fungal diversity..
Microbial conservation lags far behind floral and faunal conservation worldwide.
Is it worth preserving all or some of this rapidly increasing numbers of species
that are not observable to humans without the use of special technologies?.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact &lt;br/&gt;A constructivist approach to
microbial diversity has the potential to transform our understanding of the
roles of genetics, scientific nomenclature, and bioinformatics in biodiversity
conservation. Specifically, this research builds on an ongoing collaboration
across the natural and social sciences, and engages with and contributes to
three fields: mycology, science and technology studies, and geography. It will
(1) establish training guidelines for interdisciplinary scholars to work at the
interface of microbiology, conservation biology, and policy; (2) increase
interdisciplinary cross-talk and collaboration among disciplines of geography,
mycology, and conservation biology; (3) and generate policy recommendations
about how to use new kinds of statistical and genetic data in conservation
policy.