* 1361636
* CyberWatch West
* EHR,DUE
* 09/25/2013,09/30/2016
* Dan Manson, Whatcom Community College
* Continuing Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 09/30/2016
* USD 2,095,549.00

Mt. San Antonio College (Mt. SAC) and five educational partners [California
State Polytechnic University, Pomona, California State Universities at Dominguez
Hills and San Bernardino, and Whatcom Community College (WA)] are establishing
an ATE regional center for cybersecurity, CyberWatch West, serving California,
Washington, and Oregon. There are, at present, three other ATE regional centers
for cybersecurity education: CyberWatch at Prince George CC in Washington, DC,
metropolitan area; CSSIA based at Moraine Valley CC, near Chicago; and CSEC
based at the University of Tulsa, in Oklahoma.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overarching goal of CyberWatch West is to strengthen the cybersecurity workforce
in California and the Pacific Northwest. To accomplish this goal, CyberWatch
West is concentrating on the following four major areas: (1) student activities,
including meaningful internships and a cyber-defense league with weekly virtual
exercises; (2) assistance in curriculum development based on recognized
standards and creation of cybersecurity pathways from community colleges to
four-year institutions; (3) a faculty development and mentor program to help
infuse cybersecurity concepts into coursework; (4) outreach and partnership with
regional community colleges, universities, high schools, and industry to
determine and assist with regional needs in cybersecurity
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Each of the core partners has large minority
student enrollments and the project is targeting these underrepresented groups
in cybersecurity. In addition, the consortium includes 16 other postsecondary
institutions throughout the western United States and its outreach program is
reaching a large number of high schools. The dissemination efforts include a web
portal, presentations at national conferences, and an active participation in
the National Initiative for Cybersecurity Education (NICE).