* 1361809
* I/UCRC:  University of Arkansas Membrane Science, Engineering and Technology (MAST) Center Site Proposal
* ENG,EEC
* 03/01/2014,02/29/2020
* Ranil Wickramasinghe, University of Arkansas
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 02/29/2020
* USD 340,000.00

Membrane-based separations offer a number of advantages over conventional
processes. They are often more energy efficient, more environmentally friendly,
easy to scale-up and ?gentle? on the process streams. The new members that have
committed to initially join the Membrane Engineering Science and Technology
I/UCRC at the University of Arkansas represent a range of industries that
currently do not use membrane processes to meet their particular separation
needs. The new center Site will lead the development of new membrane separation
processes that will be tested under realistic and challenging conditions. The
knowledge gained will provide insights into other applications for these new
processes.

Water is a very valuable natural resource, and the development of new, cost-
effective ways to treat recycle and reuse water is of tremendous societal
importance. The research undertaken by the proposed site could have significant
engineering, economic, and health impact. One of the major challenges in
Arkansas is development of a trained workforce that will help attract new
industries to the state. The mission of the NSF I/UCRC program is completely
aligned with this need. The new Arkansas Site of the Membrane Engineering
Science and Technology I/UCRC will reach out to other businesses in the region
that could benefit from the technology and expertise within the MAST Center. One
of the new research projects that will be undertaken by the proposed new site
will address the needs of the aquaculture industry, which is a major component
of the Arkansas economy. The project will be developed in collaboration with the
University of Arkansas Pine Bluff (UAPB), a HBCU.