* 1361586
* Computational Chemistry of Clusters and Crystals
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2018
* So Hirata, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 05/31/2018
* USD 413,448.00

So Hirata of the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign is supported by an
award from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the
Chemistry Division, the Condensed Matter and Materials Theory program in the
Division of Material Research and the Computational and Data-enabled Science and
Engineering Program (CDS&E) to develop computational approaches and software for
the study of molecular crystals. Molecular crystals are a large, important class
of solids that consist of well-defined molecular units bound by weak
interactions. They include nature's most abundant and important solids such as
the ices of the atmospheric species of Earth and other planets. Synthetic
chemists can fashion molecules that aggregate into superstructures, which, if
crystalline, are also molecular crystals. Some explosives and many drugs fall
into this category. Some molecular crystals display optical and electronic
properties making them suitable for optoelectronic devices such as solar cells.
The goal of this project is to develop a general computational method for
molecular crystals and related ionic crystals as well as organic molecular
superconductors. The principal investigator and his coworkers develop software
to predict the structure, optical and thermal properties, and phase behavior of
organic crystalline solids with unprecedented accuracy and applications in high-
pressure chemistry, geochemistry, planetary science, and materials science. This
research activity involves innovative education in physical chemistry. A series
of physical chemistry lectures is recorded and made available online with a
matching set of problems, releasing all face-to-face classroom hours for problem
solving, student's explanations of solutions, and discussions.

The energy of a molecular crystal is approximated as a sum of the energies of
its constituent fragments embedded in the self-consistently determined
electrostatic environment of the crystal. The fragment energies are, in turn,
evaluated by sophisticated molecular ab initio electronic structure methods.
This allows an accurate calculation of a variety of properties of solids under
finite temperature and pressure (structure, equation of state, infrared, Raman,
inelastic neutron scattering spectra, heat capacity, enthalpy, Gibbs energy) at
such high levels of fidelity as second- and higher-order perturbation theory or
coupled-cluster theory. This project implements this method into robust and
well-documented software that exploits the method's natural parallelism and
makes it available for the broader scientific community. Furthermore, the
project extends this method to energy bands and ionic crystals as well as
organic molecular (super) conductors. The underlying idea that enables these
calculations is the linear-combination-of-molecular-orbital (LCAO) crystal-
orbital theory, a coarse-grained extension of the LCAO molecular-orbital
concept, which has dominated computational quantum chemistry since its
inception. By expanding the wave function of an organic molecular crystal, for
instance, as a linear combination of its charge configurations, which, in turn,
are treated by the aforementioned embedded-fragmentation scheme, this method
describes charge transfer between constituent molecular units in these solids
and thus charge density waves, spin density waves, and metallic as well as
possibly superconducting states.