* 1361448
* Collaborative Research: Flexible Multi-Scale Models of Transportation Network Service Recovery
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2018
* Laura Albert, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 04/30/2018
* USD 158,864.00

The objective of this award is to transform emergency response planning for
transportation service disruptions through the formulation and integration of
hierarchical multi-scale models: (i) network optimization and expected covering
models to evaluate strategies for allocating emergency responders across highway
networks, and (ii) an economic interdependency model to optimize the multi-
sector, multi-regional impacts of emergency response strategies on overarching
productivity objectives. In the first tier of the modeling hierarchy, the PIs
will formulate new transportation network optimization models to identify
optimal configurations of emergency responders and dispatching protocols for
resolving prioritized incidents based on utility and coverage metrics. In the
second tier of the modeling hierarchy, the PIs will formulate an economic
interdependency model to evaluate the efficacy of transportation network service
strategies in minimizing congestion and higher-level objectives such as
disruptions to workforce and commodity flows, economic loss, and sector
inoperability.

If successful, the results of this research will enhance the capability of
transportation planners and emergency managers through flexible models for
deploying emergency responders to resolve varying incident priorities, as well
as expanding the optimization focus to include large-scale interdependent
impacts due to disruptions in workforce and commodity flows. This research will
benefit society through an integrated framework for managing transportation
resources from tactical (response) to strategic (multi-sector, multi-region
impact) levels. The results have the potential to inform national guidelines for
managing disruptions to critical interdependent infrastructure systems. Broader
dissemination to the general public will be achieved via the creation of
Internet-based research blogs and videos to explain the role of optimization,
probability modeling, queuing, and regional economic analysis in modeling
important service enterprise and public safety applications.