* 1361779
* Developing Magnetic, Optical and Catalytic Applications of Metallacrowns
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Vincent Pecoraro, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 07/31/2017
* USD 549,114.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamic &amp; Mechanism B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Vincent L. Pecoraro of the
Department of Chemistry at the University of Michigan will develop new classes
of metal complexes known as metallacrowns (containing lanthanides, transition
and alkali earth metal ions) with interesting magnetic, luminescent and
catalytic properties. The goal of this research is to exploit the
characteristics of these metallacrowns to make complexes that will reduce the
volume necessary to store information magnetically, that may be used as in vivo
and in vitro luminescent agents for the imaging of chemical and biological
samples and to prepare new multimetallic catalysts for fine chemicals synthesis.
This work has been used for the development of laboratory undergraduate courses
and likely will engage both undergraduate and possibly high school student
participation. Also, this work is used as an example of creativity in
scholarship in an undergraduate course on this subject at the University of
Michigan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Metallacrowns (MC) are metallamacrocycles that
have since garnered considerable attention for their structural versatility and
metal-rich topology. Of particular interest is a vast series of 3d-4f
heterometallic MCs that contain a transition metal ion and a lanthanide
(Ln3+)ion. The main objectives of this proposal are to exploit the potential of
this type of MC for applications in 1) molecular recognition and catalysis, 2)
optical materials for luminescence and non-linear optics (NLO) and 3) molecular
magnetism. Materials produced in this work have great potential to find
commercial use. Substrate specific catalytic materials have potential to improve
synthetic processes in the chemical industry, while MC research on magnetic
materials has the potential to revolutionize data storage and enhance the
understanding of magnetic phenomena. Lumiphores based on MCs containing Zn(II)
or Ga(III) and Ln3+ ions are particularly promising for near-IR biological
imaging and long range fiber optic telecommunications while application as NLO
solids are also promising.