* 1361454
* NSF RAPID:  The 2013 Rim Fire: Survey of Potential Water Quality Impacts on the Hetch Hetchy Reservoir System
* GEO,EAR
* 11/15/2013,10/31/2015
* Richard Luthy, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 10/31/2015
* USD 49,799.00

Wildfires have a direct/immediate impact on physical and chemical processes in
watersheds including acute loss of vegetation and soil organic matter, decreased
soil cohesion, enhanced soil water repellency, ash layer deposition, decreased
infiltration and increased runoff. These changes greatly impact the magnitude
and timing of post-fire peak flows. Water quality is also impacted by fires
often resulting in increases in nutrients and suspended sediment. The goal of
this RAPID proposal is to collect immediate and essential field observations of
hydro-geochemical behavior within pristine mountain reservoir systems following
a catastrophic wildfire. The proposed work will address a significant gap in our
knowledge of the coupling of hydrologic flux and water quality in sub-alpine,
snow-dominated post-fire systems, especially with regards to trace metal
behavior after a catastrophic wildfire.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Rim Fire, which
has burned 255,858 acres, is the third largest fire in California?s history and
is one of the largest in the Sierra Nevada. Post-fire processes threaten water
supplies to the city of San Francisco as well as 29 other wholesale buyers.
Water supply from the Hetch Hetchy reservoir system (three lakes in total) is
unfiltered and therefore especially vulnerable to increased turbidity and
sediment loads as a consequence of the Rim Fire. Collected data will ultimately
be used to develop models and predictive tools to quantify short and long-term
impacts on water quantity, sediment flux and contaminant loads into Hetch Hetchy
and other regional lakes which encompass a nearly singular input to the SF water
supply system.