* 1361863
* Modeling Thermal Flows and Cold-air Pools in a Small Basin
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2016
* Charles Whiteman, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Edward L. Bensman
* 06/30/2016
* USD 138,421.00

The goal of this project is to advance the scientific understanding of (1)
thermally driven cross-basin flows and how they are modified by heterogeneous
vegetation and snow coverage and by larger-scale flows and of (2) nocturnal
inflows and outflows through gaps and saddles in the surrounding topography of
basins and how they interact with existing cold-air pools. This work has strong
potential to improve air quality forecast and transportation safety. This
research project will study selected aspects of thermally driven flows and cold-
air pools in the Gruenloch, a small Alpine basin. Numerical model simulations
are designed to answer questions that are yet poorly understood. The project
will be performed in collaboration with scientists at the University of Vienna,
Austria, who have been collecting data in the Gruenloch basin for the past 12
years and who plan another, more extensive field program. The topography of the
Gruenloch basin and its surroundings is ideally suited for this study. The
Gruenloch is known for the development of strong cold-air pools and extreme
minimum temperatures, holding the record for the lowest measured temperature in
central Europe. The complex topography of the surrounding Alps, including
several saddles in the ridgeline of the Gruenloch, allow the formation of
larger-scale daytime and nighttime flows that interact with the basin
atmosphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit :&lt;br/&gt;The results from
this study will advance the understanding of several aspects of thermally driven
flows and cold-air pools, which occur frequently in mountainous terrain. The
defined questions about the influence of surface conditions and flows induced by
the complex surrounding topography on cross-basin flows and the influence of
basin outflows and inflows on cold-air pools are yet poorly understood.
Observational data will be used to evaluate and improve high-resolution modeling
performance in this highly complex terrain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts
:&lt;br/&gt;The scientific findings from this study will advance knowledge on
thermally driven flows and cold-air pools that can contribute to improved
forecasting of these phenomena, which strongly affect air pollution transport
and dispersion, noise propagation, fire propagation, and fog formation in
mountainous terrain. Results will be made public through journal publications,
conference and invited seminar presentations, and websites. Findings will be
incorporated into classroom lectures.