* 1361690
* HRI: Collaborative Research: Establishing and Breaking Conceptual Pacts with Dialog Partners
* CSE,IIS
* 09/02/2013,09/30/2014
* Joy Hanna, Daemen College
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 09/30/2014
* USD 16,321.00

Dialog-based technologies play an ever-increasing role in our lives. The
interest in conversational interfaces stems not only from their importance for
universal access, but also because they can be used in settings in which
traditional hands-on interface devices are not practical. Efforts are underway
to extend the use of dialog systems into new roles, including: becoming
companions to help seniors remain independent; moving some aspects of healthcare
outside of the clinical setting; providing entertainment and interactive theater
experiences; and improving disaster response. In many of these systems, the
computer conversational partner is presented as a talking head or graphical
persona. Although designers of dialog systems aim to make them simple and
natural to use, major gaps in our understanding of human-computer interaction
create obstacles to achieving this goal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Some of these gaps
are likely to be filled by examining recent psycholinguistic models of human
conversational interaction. These models explore the time-course with which
information coming from the context of conversation affects language processing.
This context includes the shared information, or common ground, between
interlocutors, as well as the processes by which reference to items in common
ground is coordinated. One property of negotiated reference concerns the
establishment of conceptual pacts, which are a (usually implicit) agreement to
refer to an item in common ground from the same conceptual perspective. Recent
psycholinguistic findings have examined whether conceptual pacts in conversation
are speaker-specific, and how quickly this information is used during
comprehension. To the extent that speaker-specific conceptual pacts have
significant and immediate effects on the interpretation of reference in human-
human interaction, dialog systems utilizing computer-based partners should take
these characteristics into account in human-computer
interaction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;