* 1361939
* SusChEM: Energies of Adsorbed Catalytic Intermediates on Transition Metal Surfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Charles Campbell, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 07/31/2017
* USD 510,000.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Catalysis Program, Charles T. Campbell
of the University of Washington is developing better catalysts for use in the
production of bulk chemicals, fertilizers and fuels, for pollution cleanup, and
for the combustion of fuels. The work involves the controlled adsorption of
small groups of atoms that are often encountered in fuel cells or environmental
applications to metal surfaces that are commonly used as catalysts, such as
copper, nickel and platinum. When these small clusters of atoms, usually
containing only carbon, hydrogen and oxygen, adsorb to a metal surface, a
chemical bond is formed. The investigators are measuring the strength of these
chemical bonds using a well-known technique known as calorimetry. The
experimental measurements are stored in a database that is being made available
to computational scientists who will perform simulations of chemical reactions
that could potentially be occurring on these surfaces or in other settings. The
work is, thus, having a broad impact through the creation of a publicly
available resource that other scientists can take advantage of and use. It is
having a further broad impact by providing the basic understanding needed to
design better catalysts in order to carry out industrially important chemical
reactions with higher energy efficiency and less pollution. This work is aiding
the design of better batteries and fuel cells that can be integrated into solar
and wind energy systems.

This project is focused on calorimetric measurements of the energies of well-
defined catalytic reaction intermediates (specifically -OH, -OCH3, -OOCH, -CH3
and -CH) adsorbed on single-crystal Ni, Cu and Pt surfaces. These represent five
of the most common adsorbate classes evoked in catalytic reaction mechanisms,
and when combined, they provide the energetics of many elementary steps that
occur during energy-related and environmental catalysis. This, in turn,
elucidates the energetic basis for reaction mechanisms and structure-reactivity
correlations in catalysis. Campbell is collaborating with Jens Nørskov of
Stanford University to combine these measurements with prior literature to
create a benchmark database of reliable adsorption energies. This database will
help theoreticians develop computational methods for calculating the energetics
of reactions at surfaces with improved energy accuracy. While density functional
theory (DFT) with periodic boundary conditions has been extremely successful in
catalysis research, the method is still plagued by rather large errors in the
relative energies of the adsorbed intermediates. The construction of this
database is facilitating ongoing efforts in the theoretical and computational
chemistry community to improve the energy accuracy of these fast computational
methods. It is also aiding other researchers who seek to understand more fully
the energetic basis for reaction mechanisms and structure-activity correlations
in transition metal catalysis.