* 1361453
* Conference Support Funding for KAUST Electronic Devices, Materials and Systems for Sustainable Future Conference. To be Held at KAUST, Saudi Arabia in Winter 2014.
* ENG,ECCS
* 11/01/2013,04/30/2014
* Deji Akinwande, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* john zavada
* 04/30/2014
* USD 10,000.00

Objective:&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project is to support the Electronic Devices,
Materials and Systems for the Sustainable Future Conference to be held at KAUST,
Saudi Arabia in the Winter of 2014. This conference is focused on the topical
issue of advanced materials and devices for sustainable systems. The purpose of
the conference is to assemble the global scientific community to a common
platform to steer discussion towards scientific and engineering research
progress and opportunities focusing on sustainable
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;This Conference
will bring together leading researchers from around the world to discuss
scientific and engineering research progress and opportunities focusing on
sustainable future technology. Both fundamental and applied research will be
discussed in the areas of electronic devices, materials and systems for: Energy
efficiency (energy harvesting, energy storage, energy efficient utility); Energy
management (monitoring energy consumption, optimizing energy usage management);
and, Optimization of electronic resources towards a sustainable habitat
involving environment, food and water quality (quality monitoring using
electronic sensors, wide deployment of sensors and their network
management).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:&lt;br/&gt;This Conference
offers a special opportunity for the research community to share state-of-the-
art technological developments, to stimulate new ideas, and to explore/promote
new collaborations. Global participants will present progress on advanced
materials and systems, and participate in discussions that aim to identify
strategies to maximize technical and societal impact. The technical
outcome/proceedings of the conference will be submitted to IEEE for publication
as a review article.