* 1361881
* RUI:  The effects of three-dimensional fluid flows on front propagation
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2019
* Thomas Solomon, Bucknell University
* Standard Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 06/30/2019
* USD 208,673.00

Non-Technical abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fluid flows play a crucial role in
the behavior of many physical, chemical, geological, astrophysical and
biological processes. During the past ten years, the PI's research group has
done numerous experiments on the behavior of reaction fronts in simple, two-
dimensional (2D) fluid flows. Results from those experiments have led to
development of a theory that predicts the existence of "burning invariant
manifolds" (BIMs) in the flow that act as invisible barriers that block the
motion of reaction fronts. The experiments funded by this grant will extend
those studies to three-dimensional (3D) flows. In particular, we will explore
whether BIMs in 3D flows still act as barriers that impede the motion of
reaction fronts. Ultimately, these experiments may lead to a better
understanding of blooms of plankton in the oceans; more efficient chemical
reactors, especially in micro-scale devices; processes in plasma flows that
might lead to economical fusion-based electrical generation; the role of
cellular-scale flows in biological processes including morphogenesis in a
developing embryo; detonation of supernova explosions; and the effects of moving
populations on the spreading of a disease. This is an RUI (Research at
Undergraduate Institutions) grant; consequently, all of this research will be
done with undergraduate students who will play an active role in all aspects of
the studies, including experimental design, building and testing of the
apparatus, data collection and analysis, and publication and presentation of the
results. These will be the first real research experiences for most of these
students, and will play an important role in their development as
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
grant will fund experiments that will study the behavior of reaction fronts in
three-dimensional (3D) fluid flows. This is an issue with applications to a wide
range of front-producing systems in physics, chemistry, biology and geology. The
PI has extensive experience doing similar experiments (all with undergraduates)
in 2D flows. Results from those experiments led to the development of a theory
that identifies "burning invariant manifolds" (BIMs) in the flow that act as
barriers that block reaction fronts. The proposed experiments will extend those
studies to 3D flows composed of nested chains of vortices. Reaction fronts will
be produced by the excitable Belousov-Zhabotinsky chemical reaction which has
been shown to exhibit dynamics similar to those for a wide range of front-
producing systems. Questions addressed by this research will include: (a)
whether the BIM theory can be extended to the full 3D problem; (b) whether
barriers similar to the BIMs in the 2D flows still exist to front propagation in
3D flows; and (c) whether reaction barriers in 3D flows can be destroyed by weak
time dependence. This is an RUI (Research at Undergraduate Institutions) grant;
consequently, all of this research will be done with undergraduate students who
will play an active role in all aspects of the studies, including experimental
design, building and testing of the apparatus; data collection and analysis; and
publication and presentation of the results. These will be the first real
research experiences for most of these students, and will play an important role
in their development as scientists.