* 1361836
* Problems in geometric function theory
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2017
* Alexandre Eremenko, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Edward Taylor
* 05/31/2017
* USD 172,904.00

Analytic functions are objects with very nice properties that allow one to use a
multitude of techniques to explore them, and they constitute the most important
class of functions used in mathematics and its applications to science and
engineering. The choice of problems of the theory of analytic functions in this
proposal is motivated by their intrinsic mathematical interest, rather than
specific applications. The problems chosen for this proposal are old and
difficult, and the PI proposes to study them using a variety of new methods
recently developed by him and his collaborators, as well as by the other
research groups. Most of these problems arise in the previous research of the PI
funded by NSF. This previous research led to several significant results
relevant to applications of mathematics in control theory, physics and material
science. They also had impact on education: advanced mathematical courses on
graduate level, PhD theses supervised by the PI and training of postdoctoral
scholars. The present proposal is expected to have a similar impact.

The main topic of this proposal is the geometric problem of classification of
spherical polygons, and more generally, of metrics of constant positive
curvature with conical singularities. This is closely related to the study of
analytic functions defined by the Heun equation, the linear second order
differential equation with four regular singularities. These functions lie on
the boundary of the set of Special functions of Mathematical physics, but much
less is known about them in comparison with classical special functions which
are defined by equations with at most three singularities. The goal of this
research is to classify spherical quadrilaterals up to isometry. The methods
proposed are those used in the recent research of PI, A. Gabrielov, E. Mukhin,
V. Tarasov and A. Varchenko on the Shapiro conjecture in real algebraic
geometry.The second subject of proposed research is value distribution of
holomorphic curves in projective spaces, especially of Brody curves, and curves
defined by higher order linear differential equations. One specific goal is to
prove a recent conjecture of Duval and da Costa on the Second Main theorem for
Brody curves. The PI plans to use potential-theoretic methods developed in his
previous work. The third topic is investigation of a class of extremal problems
of new type for holomorphic functions in the unit disc that are inspired by
questions in Control theory, namely the question of stabilizability of several
systems by single output feedback control device. The proposed methods are those
employed in the previous research on this problem by PI, jointly with W.
Bergweiler.