* 1361572
* US-Australia Planning Visit: Sustainable Urban Water Management
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2014,05/31/2016
* Jon Hathaway, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 05/31/2016
* USD 32,020.00

This project supports the development of US-Australian collaborative research in
sustainable urban water management. The PI, Dr. Jon Hathaway of The University
of Tennessee (UT), proposes to collaborate with Australian researchers Dr. Tim
Fletcher (Dept. of Resource Management and Geography, University of Melbourne)
and Dr. David McCarthy (Dept. of Civil Engineering, Monash University,
Melbourne). Drs. Fletcher and McCarthy are developing and refining new models of
pollutant transport in urban streams, stormwater runoff, and stormwater
controls. Dr. Hathaway is an expert in field monitoring of stormwater systems
and processes related to pollutant removal in stormwater controls. This project
would pave the way for future US-Australian collaboration by using data
collected by UT in models developed in Australia and vice versa, enhancing
stormwater modeling capabilities at UT (and thus the United States). Our
ultimate goal of achieving calibrated modeling based on unit processes could
transform the field of stormwater management. This project will allow both US
and Australian researchers to conduct more specific and effective research in
the areas of fate and transport of contaminants in water, the availability of
high quality water supplies, and the environmental engineering implications of
energy and resource consumption.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Numerous streams and
rivers in the United States and across the world do not meet water quality
criteria for microbes due, in part, to contamination from urbanization.
Collaborative work on indicator bacteria and pathogen (and other toxic
pollutants) modeling in urban streams, runoff, and stormwater controls is
critical to public health. Economic impacts are also expected as a result of
advances in stormwater system modeling for pollutants. The researchers will
disseminate the knowledge gained in this research through hands-on training and
classroom discussions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded by the
Environmental Engineering Program, Division of Chemical, Bioengineering,
Environmental, and Transport.