* 1361516
* Molecular Radiative and Relaxation Processes
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Shaul Mukamel, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 06/30/2018
* USD 510,000.00

Shaul Mukamel of the University of California, Irvine is funded by the Chemical
Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Chemistry division for
research to develop techniques that are used to analyze the precise ways
molecules absorb and redistribute light. This type of process happens during
photosynthesis. Understanding the precise ways that solar energy is converted to
chemical energy can help in the design of new devices which artificially convert
light to more useful forms of energy. In addition, the detection of individual
photons, particles of light which have interacted with molecules, can reveal a
great deal of information about the structure and motion of the atoms which make
up those molecules. By applying a series of short light pulses to a molecule,
the investigators are finding ways to extract additional information about that
molecule's structure and function. Additional research explores the use of
entangled photons, a very promising tool for quantum computing, secure
communication methods and other possible applications. New imaging methods that
might be helpful in revealing the details of biological cells are also being
developed. All of these studies are carried out in collaboration with other
investigators who design equipment and experiments that are used to test the
insights revealed by these theoretical studies. The work has a broad impact on
the experimental science community through the development of new language and
concepts that help to guide scientist's understanding of the fundamental nature
of the process by which light interacts with matter. The investigators freely
share the software they develop through the web.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
response of complex molecules to sequences of ultrafast optical laser pulses
provides a multidimensional view of electronic and vibrational dynamics and of
correlations. Models and computational tools are developed for the design,
interpretation and analysis of these signals. Quantum properties of light, such
as photon entanglement, receive special consideration as tools for probing
molecules and chromophore aggregates. In another project, nonadiabatic dynamics
is studied by carefully designed coherent Raman signals. The interplay of
temporal and spectral resolution in stimulated Raman signals is being
investigated. New detection schemes that combine coincidence measurements of
individual photons and interferometry can then be predicted. Experimental
techniques involving novel pulse sequences are being designed, and theoretical
and computational tools for their analysis are developed and broadly applied.
Some of the applications are to complex molecules in the condensed phase, to
excitons in semiconductor quantum dots, and to the elementary charge and energy
migration processes in light harvesting in photosynthetic antennae and reaction
centers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In particular, superoperator Green's function
formalism is being developed that allows the computation of the response of
molecules to both quantum and stochastic light. New spectroscopic signals that
make use of entangled and squeezed photons offer temporal and spectral
resolutions not possible with classical light. These techniques are being
applied to the study of excitons in molecular aggregates. Measurements of the
effect of interactions with molecules on photon statistics are also explored as
a novel spectroscopic tool. Incoherent detection of coherent signals by
fluorescence which can allow the study of single molecules is being
investigated. A highly-intuitive loop diagram representation is developed for
the design of pulse sequences by utilizing pulse shaping, phase control and
molecular chirality. Generalized signals involving the combination of several
impulsive excitations and measurements that can probe both the response and
spontaneous fluctuations in classical and quantum systems at steady states are
predicted and connected to nonlinear fluctuation theorems. New many-body
approaches for describing and calculating excited states with multiple electron
and hole particles are being developed using a composite Boson (co-boson)
algebraic representation. The tedious explicit computation of multi-exciton
wavefunctions usually required for predicting nonlinear signals is, thus,
avoided with this new approach.