* 1361543
* I/UCRC:  Phase 2 - UMaine Membership in IUCRC Center for Advanced Forestry Systems
* ENG,EEC
* 04/15/2014,03/31/2020
* Aaron Weiskittel, University of Maine
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 03/31/2020
* USD 367,999.00

In Phase II operation, the University of Maine Site of the I/UCRC for Advanced
Forestry Systems (CAFS) intends to focus on optimizing the silvicultural and
genetic systems needed to produce high quality, raw materials thereby
contributing to the cooperative research of the center and making significant
progress in increasing forest productivity through forest genetics, site
manipulation, and better growth & yield modeling. Many of the problems and
opportunities facing the management of forests today bridge disciplinary and
regional boundaries. To achieve the technological advances needed for new 21st
century challenges, existing university/industry cooperatives must approach
research questions at multiple spatial (including the molecular, cellular,
individual-tree, stand, forest, and ecosystem levels) and temporal scales.

Research conducted by the University of Maine site of CAFS increases the
competitiveness of forest products industries and forest landowners. Industrial
members benefit by becoming knowledgeable about a wider range of technological
capabilities and technology transfer between CAFS scientists and member
personnel fosters rapid implementation of new technologies. Students trained via
CAFS research are unique in the forestry sciences because of their applied
problem-solving skills using interdisciplinary techniques across multiple
scales. Aggressive recruiting for graduate students among under-represented
groups will continue to be conducted, increasing the diversity of the workforce
for both academia and industry in this traditionally diversity-deficient
discipline. Opportunities will continue to be sought to involve undergraduate
students in CAFS research activities, exposing them to the excitement of forest
science and encouraging them to pursue graduate education.