* 1361783
* Collaborative Research: Developing the Foundations and Systems for Facilitating Geometric Interoperability
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2014,04/30/2018
* Christoph Hoffmann, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 04/30/2018
* USD 136,000.00

Geometric representations make up the digital DNA of modern manufacturing
systems broadly conceived. As such, geometric diversity and interoperability
often determine complexity, adaptability, trustworthiness, and resilience of the
whole manufacturing enterprise. Owing to the diversity of manufacturing tasks,
geometric representations have evolved into a multiplicity of abstract models,
data structures, and formats that are suitable and optimized for specific tasks.
Interoperability between such representations and systems emerged as a central
challenge in the design of manufacturing information systems that is costing the
US industry and economy billions while impeding major technological trends. This
research project aims to make broad advances in theory and practice of geometric
interoperability. Furthermore, this research will provide theoretical
foundations and algorithmic infrastructure for supporting major technological
trends, including web-enabled and cloud-supported manufacturing, democratization
of manufacturing, and long term preservation and archival of engineering data.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goal of this research project is to extend and
unify a formal semantics of extended geometric representations in support of
advanced manufacturing systems and applications. This semantics will be used to
formulate a rigorous algorithmic approach to interoperability in terms of a
hierarchy of computable queries, superseding and leapfrogging earlier limited
data-centric standardization efforts, and supporting diverse architectures for
coming generations of information system. Specifically, this project will show
the challenges of geometric interoperability may be overcome by (1) formulating
sound rigorous foundations for geometric interoperability, (2) developing
provable queries and algorithms based on the developed theory; and (3)
demonstrating the power and effectiveness of the proposed approach to geometric
interoperability