* 1361104
* Experimental and Theoretical Investigations of Organic Reaction Rates and Mechanisms
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Kendall Houk, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 07/31/2018
* USD 780,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamic & Mechanism B Program
of the Chemistry Division, Professor Kendall N. Houk of the Department of
Chemistry and Biochemistry of the University of California, Los Angeles, will
investigate many different aspects of chemical reactivity with the computational
methods and computational resources that have been developed in his laboratory.
New methods of theory and simulation will be demonstrated for the experimental
community, and benchmarks will be provided to guide the use of computations for
solutions of problems in chemistry and biochemistry. Theoretical support to
experimentalists throughout the country will be provided through collaborations,
leading to broadening the horizons of participating experimental and
computational scientists. Undergraduates, graduate students, and postdoctorals
will all be trained in the use of theory and computation as a companion to
experiment for the solutions of chemical problems.

Problems to be investigated in the next funding period center on organic
reactivity, organic materials, and devices. Specific examples include: (1) the
exploration of quantitative methods to understand and predict mechanisms and
reactivities in pericyclic reactions, especially cycloadditions, (2) dynamics of
cycloadditions, (3) characterization and design of novel gated hemicarceplex
host-guest complexes, (4) the computation of mechanisms of organometallic
reactions, and (5) new organic materials chemistry.