* 1361501
* Dilation theory, free semialgebraic geometry and matrix convex sets
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2014,05/31/2017
* Scott McCullough, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Edward Taylor
* 05/31/2017
* USD 122,411.00

Many problems in linear systems engineering and branches of mathematics both
pure and applied can be modeled by inequalities involving matrices. A given
matrix inequality is most useful in applications if it can be converted, through
algebraic means, to a new matrix inequality whose solution set has a
particularly simple form called "convex." The process of converting a matrix
inequality to a convex matrix inequality is currently done on a case-by-case
basis, and there is an extensive engineering literature on this subject with
successes in particular examples. Continuing work of the principal investigator
and his collaborators, a goal of this project is the development of a theory
(so-called free real algebraic geometry) to identify exactly those matrix
inequalities that can be reduced to obtain convexity and to automate this
process when it is possible. A further goal of this project is the development
of tools and techniques in the mathematical and scientific fields that underlie
the study of free real algebraic geometry. These include semidefinite
programming and linear matrix inequalities, subjects that find use in many
branches of science and engineering, as well as a branch of mathematics called
dilation theory.

A goal of this project is the development of a free (freely noncommutative)
analog of semialgebraic geometry with an emphasis on convexity. Semialgebraic
geometry is the study of polynomial inequalities. Its free version studies
matrix inequalities of the type that arise in engineering systems problems
governed by a signal flow diagram. The Riccati inequality is a ubiquitous
example. A desired long-term outcome of the project is a practical description
of matrix inequalities with, up to polynomial or rational change of variable,
convex solution sets. Many of the methods employed are of a functional analytic
nature, involving ideas and techniques from operator systems and spaces,
specifically. Techniques and results from classical semialgebraic geometry,
convex optimization, semidefinite programming, as well as several complex
variables, are also used. A further objective of this project is the
development, from the perspective of non-self-adjoint operator algebras, of
tools and techniques useful in the study of function algebras. The Hardy space
of bounded analytic functions on the unit disc is an example. In particular, an
outcome will be a deeper understanding of the representations and contractive
matrix-valued functions of such algebras. The techniques and methods employed
are a blend of function theory, harmonic analysis, Riemann surface theory,
operator theory, and the theory of operator algebras.