* 1361159
* FRG: Collaborative Research: Hodge Theory, Moduli, and Representation Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2019
* Patrick Brosnan, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 06/30/2019
* USD 464,000.00

The project will develop Hodge theory and apply it to problems in algebraic
geometry, number theory and representation theory. The researchers intend to
focus on four related topics: (1) Mumford-Tate (MT) domains, (2) moduli spaces,
(3) algebraic cycles and the Hodge conjecture, and (4) mixed Hodge modules. (1)
MT domains are classifying spaces of Hodge structures, and, roughly speaking,
the boundary components of Mumford-Tate domains parametrize degenerations of
Hodge structures. The PIs intend to advance number theory, representation theory
and algebraic geometry by studying Mumford-Tate domains and their boundary
components. For example, the PIs plan to extend work of Carayol, which seeks to
associate Galois representations to automorphic representations whose
archimedian component is a degenerate limit of discrete series. (2) The second
topic concerns the realization of moduli spaces of geometric objects as
quotients of discrete groups. An example of such a realization is the moduli
space of non-hyperelliptic genus 3 curves, which can be realized as a ball
quotient, where the 6 dimensional ball in question sits in the MT domain of K3
surfaces. However, there are not many examples of this type known. The PIs
intend to look for more. (3) The third topic involves the approach to the Hodge
conjecture via normal functions and their singularities due to Green and
Griffiths. The PIs will develop this approach in several directions. For
example, they will study the archimedean height function associated to a normal
function, and they intend to study the non-reductive MT groups associated to
normal functions. (4) Finally, the PIs will develop a flexible theory of complex
variations of mixed Hodge modules and apply it to questions arising in
representation theory. In particular, they would like to understand the
structure of conformal blocks viewed as complex mixed Hodge modules on the
moduli spaces of stable curves.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hodge theory is a central
area of algebraic geometry with roots in the the classical (19th century) theory
of special functions and period integrals. From a modern point of view, the goal
of Hodge theory is to relate topological invariants of algebraic varieties to
arithmetic and analytic invariants. The central notion is that of a Hodge
structure on the cohomology groups of an algebraic variety. While the cohomology
groups are purely topological, depending only on the shape of variety, the Hodge
structure is a much more sensitive invariant. Consequently, the Hodge structure
carries a great deal of important algebro-geometric and number-theoretical
information. The most famous unsolved problem in algebraic geometry is the Hodge
conjecture, a question about the relationship between the Hodge structure of the
cohomology groups of a variety and the existence of certain subvarieties. This
focus on the relationship between topological objects and finer analytic
invariants is typical of Hodge theory as a whole, and it is the main motivation
for the research supported by this FRG. This research will consequently impact
several areas of mathematics including number theory, algebraic geometry and
representation theory. Owing to the number of techniques involved, the PIs have
a diverse set of skills and points of view. An important component of the FRG
will be devoted to conferences, which will exchange ideas between the PIs and
train postdoctoral fellows and graduate students in a wide range of topics
having to do with Hodge theory.