* 1361424
* Fractals and Ergodic Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2015
* Boris Solomyak, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Edward Taylor
* 06/30/2015
* USD 100,179.00

This project is motivated by several interconnected areas of mathematics, with a
broad range of applications, and aims at discovering new phenomena and new
connections between different fields. Mathematical fractals are sets and
measures which exhibit intricate and complicated structure at infinitely many
scales - often with some form of self-similarity, and whose "dimension,"
appropriately defined, can be any number, not just an integer. They are widely
used in mathematics, physical sciences, and engineering to model random and
deterministic objects of complex nature. The mathematics of fractals uses
geometric measure theory, dynamical systems theory, and other fields with the
goal of understanding their fine structure in a rigorous way. Ergodic theory is
a branch of dynamical systems theory which studies measure-preserving
transformations. Such transformations can be visualized, for example, as the
process of kneading dough, or mixing an incompressible fluid. It is closely
related to many other fields, among them statistical physics, probability,
number theory, and combinatorics. In this project, the PI will investigate, in
particular, the fractal characteristics of certain classes of dynamical systems
that are of great current interest.

This award supports the PI's research on self-similar sets and measures and
their non-linear analogs, especially in cases of strong overlaps. These include
infinite Bernoulli convolutions, which have been studied for almost eighty
years, random continued fractions, and Furstenberg stationary measures. The
investigator intends to build on the recent progress by M. Hochman and P.
Shmerkin and apply the techniques and methods of additive combinatorics and
Fourier analysis in order to obtain sharp results on dimension, absolute
continuity, and properties of the density. Another research direction is
concerned with spectral properties of substitution dynamical systems and
suspension flows over them, with an emphasis on systems with continuous or mixed
spectrum. The PI will study when the spectral measures are purely singular, and
investigate their quantitative properties, in particular, dimensions and Hoelder
exponents. Recent collaboration with A. Bufetov revealed unexpected connections
of these problems with the theory of Bernoulli convolutions. An important goal
of this project is to extend the spectral study of substitutions to other
systems of current interest, in particular, to interval exchange transformations
and translation flows on surfaces of genus greater than one.