* 1361868
* A Multiscale Reliability Model for Brittle MEMS Materials and Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Ellad Tadmor, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 07/31/2018
* USD 384,173.00

Micro-electro-mechanical systems (MEMS) devices find wide used in the
automotive, biomedical, aerospace, energy and communication industries. To
ensure system reliability, it is desirable to design MEMS devices against a very
low failure probability, on the order of 0.0001 or lower. The pure experimental
determination of the target strength for such a low failure probability requires
the testing of tens of thousands of specimens, a cost-prohibitive effort.
Therefore, a fundamental understanding of the probabilistic failure of brittle
and quasi-brittle solids at small length-scales is of paramount importance. This
award supports fundamental research to develop a new mechanics-based
probabilistic model for understanding the failure statistics at small scales.
The model is based on material failure mechanisms at the atomistic scale. It
will enable the accurate determination of the reliability of small-scale
structures without the need to test a large number of specimens. The output of
this research will create fundamental knowledge on the probability of failure
for systems with small characteristic dimensions and will impact engineering
practice in reliability-based design and manufacturing of MEMS devices. A tight
integration with educational activities for high-school students, undergraduate
students and graduate students is planned. The educational plan includes
participation in the high-school summer program, recruitment of female and
minority research students, organizing workshops and symposiums at major
conferences and development of new undergraduate and graduate courses.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Classical Weibull distributions are based on the
assumption of extreme-value statistics. This assumption is not applicable at the
scales relevant to MEMS devices where the grain size is not negligible compared
to the characteristic structural dimensions. In this research, a continuum
nonlocal finite weakest link model will represent the failure statistics of
small-scale structures. This model will predict the effects of specimen size and
geometry on the strength distribution and mean strength. Simulations of atomic-
scale damage using a quasi-continuum method will determine the model statistical
parameters, accounting for random grain size, geometry and orientation. With the
quasi-continuum method a seamless coupling between atomistic and continuum
regions is enabled. The model will be validated by extensive strength histogram
testing on polycrystalline silicon specimens using a slack-chain test
configuration. Based on this model, the size effect curve of mean strength will
be explicitly related to the strength distribution. This relationship will
represent a new experimental method for the reliability analysis of brittle and
quasi-brittle structures at small length scales. This approach is expected to be
far more efficient and accurate than conventional histogram testing.