* 1361778
* Collaborative Research:  Geometric Mechanics for Locomoting Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Daniel Goldman, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Atul Kelkar
* 07/31/2017
* USD 150,000.00

This effort seeks to understand and develop strategies for effective movement in
biological and synthetic locomoting systems. Gaits are a fundamental aspect of
animal locomotion; examples include a horse's walking, a fish's strokes, and a
snake's slithering. In these motions, the animals undergo cyclic motions which
interact with the surrounding environment to gain a net displacement over each
cycle. The efficacy of such gaits suggests they form a core capability in
locomotion of mechanical systems. Understanding the principles of gait-based
locomotion offers two opportunities: to gain deep insight into biological
processes and to create sophisticated synthetic locomotors to send mechanical
systems into dangerous and dirty environments. To gain this insight, questions
arise: how to model locomotion, and with this model, how to both evaluate and
design gaits to achieve desired locomotive capabilities? In this project, the
focus will be on limbless locomotors, including snakes, slender lizards,
bacteria, spermatozoa and nematode worms. Limbless locomotor controllers for
confined space applications, such as search and rescue in collapsed buildings
and landslide debris, will be developed.

The investigators' preliminary work reveals that geometric mechanics allows
intuitive understanding of how and why gaits, produce successful locomotion.
Much of the prior work with geometric tools, however, provided computationally
burdensome approaches to design gaits: choose parameterized basis functions for
gaits, simulate the motion of the system and then optimize the input parameters
to find gaits that meet the design requirements. Such optimization with forward
simulation is computationally expensive. Moreover, existing geometric approaches
ignore real world considerations such as body-shape and granular (e.g., dirt)
interaction between the mechanism and the environment. Therefore, the
intellectual merit of this work is to advance the design and evaluation of gaits
for complex systems by representing complex shapes as a basis of curvature
functions, while all along empirically deriving from biological observation
linear relationships between these parameters and the resulting displacement in
granular media. Calculations will then take minutes rather than the days needed
for multi-particle discrete element method (DEM) simulation, mitigating the
challenges inherent in performing many experiments on real mechanical systems.
This work will contribute to a new understanding of biological locomotors as
well as help create life-life locomotion in mechanical systems.