* 1361929
* Graduate Student Topology and Geometry Conference
* MPS,DMS
* 03/01/2014,02/28/2015
* Cameron Gordon, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 02/28/2015
* USD 78,013.00

The twelfth annual Graduate Student Topology and Geometry Conference will be
held at the University of Texas at Austin, April 5 and 6, 2014. The conference
will bring together approximately 170 graduate students from mathematics
programs across the country. The topics discussed and presented will include a
wide range of subfields in geometry and topology including low-dimensional
topology, algebraic topology, algebraic geometry, symplectic geometry, and
differential geometry. There will be two plenary talks by distinguished faculty
members, Robion Kirby from the University of California Berkeley and Tony Pantev
from the University of Pennsylvania, to expose graduate students to
groundbreaking research. There will also be six talks by young faculty members
who will present new avenues of research and important open questions. The
majority of the talks (at least 24) will be given by graduate student
participants. They will have the opportunity to explain their studies and
original research to their peers in the field. The conference will provide
sufficient time in between talks for participants to ask questions, discuss
their perspectives on open problems, exchange ideas, and build friendships with
a network of future coworkers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The twelfth
annual Graduate Student Topology and Geometry Conference is one of the largest
meetings aimed specifically at graduate students. It provides a valuable
training experience for graduate students to present their work to a large
audience which includes specialists in that field, beginners eager to learn, and
specialists in related fields. Listening to talks by faculty and graduate
students exposes participants to ideas from a wide range of perspectives and
informs them of progress being made on problems by mathematicians outside of
their home university. Discussions with fellow students about common
mathematical interests precedes joint research in the future. The Graduate
Student Geometry and Topology Conference provides the groundwork for a
connected, communicative, new generation of US mathematicians in a range of
interrelated fields.&lt;br/&gt;More information about the conference can be
found at: http://ma.utexas.edu/conferences/gstgc14/.