* 1362841
* Novel Polyfluoroalkylated Building Blocks
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Gary Molander, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Tarek Sammakia
* 06/30/2018
* USD 450,000.00

Through this award, the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Division of Chemistry
supports work by Professor Gary Molander of the University of Pennsylvania in
developing synthetic approaches to a class of fluorinated organic compounds. The
presence of fluorine in organic molecules is known to have profound effects upon
bioavailability and/or stability. Families of versatile, stable, perfluoroalkyl-
substituted building blocks are being constructed that can be installed in large
fragments through the development of a variety of carbon-carbon and carbon-
heteroatom protocols. Success in these regimes will provide methods for the
synthesis of organic molecules with extensive fluorination, expanding and
creating novel chemical space by methods that increase molecular complexity in
highly convergent yet modular synthetic processes. These highly flexible,
prefabricated subunits thus provide a platform around which to build libraries
of molecules for investigation of their properties within the context of the
pharmaceutical or agrochemical industries, for example, facilitating the
discovery of novel compounds with unique properties and providing these
industries new tools to bring innovative molecules to the market more
efficiently and at lower cost.

The importance of embedding fluorine atoms within organic molecules to alter
their physicochemical and biological properties has been firmly established, and
thus the selective introduction of trifluoromethyl groups, as well as
polyfluorinated alkyl groups, has consequently been of high interest to the
synthesis community. Most of these efforts have supported the installation of
fluoro- or trifluoromethyl groups onto aromatic systems. By contrast, general
methods for the incorporation of functionalized, perfluorinated subunits into
alkyl systems, particularly in an enantioselective manner, is much less well
developed, yet increasingly more important in terms of structural diversity and
expanding chemical space. The research to be carried out will allow the
development of operationally simple and effective routes to borylated
organofluorine materials. The first subgoal of the investigations is to develop
convenient syntheses of a diverse family of stable, polyfluorinated alkylboron
reagents to be used for the incorporation of perfluoroalkyl units into alkyl
substructures.