* 1362211
* Real space electrostatics and non-equilibrium molecular dynamics for nanoscale transport
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* J. Daniel Gezelter, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 06/30/2018
* USD 447,121.00

J. Daniel Gezelter of the Uninversity of Notre Dame is supported by an award
from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods (CTMC) program and
the Computational and Data-Enabled Science and Engineering (CDS&E) program
focused onunderstanding of metallic nanoparticles (small particles a few
billionths of a meter in diameter) that are in contact with water and other
solvents. Dr. Gezelter is developing computational methods and software to study
heat transfer at the surfaces of the particles in the important case that they
are protected by attached molecules. This topic is of significant interest in
the areas of energy, materials research, and the health sciences, particularly
for the particles that have been proposed for use in photothermal therapies
where laser light is used to cause very localized heating. The details of the
solvent structure and dynamics at this interface determine how energy flows away
from the metal particles. In order to make these particles medically useful, it
is important to determine the mechanism for the increase of the temperature in
the surrounding environment following laser heating. This allows the
computational methods to predict heat conductance at the surface, which can be
difficult to determine experimentally. The goals of this proposal are to
develop: (1) algorithms to efficiently model the transfer of energy across
nanoparticle surfaces, and (2) methods to very efficiently model molecules like
water that are polar, i.e., have positive and negative charges dominate at
opposite ends. All of the algorithms and software supported by this project will
be released to the public and other researchers under a permissive open source
license. The PI organizes the OpenScience Project, a website which highlights
and makes available examples of useful scientific tools and research codes as
well as tools that can be used by a broader audience (scientifically-inclined
but non-expert).

Two significant method-development projects for molecular simulation are part of
this work. This project expands efficient real-space electrostatic models to
cover point-multipoles, and the real-space models are compared with established
(but more expensive) simulation techniques. These models use two distinct
approaches to truncated Taylor series approximations to the electrostatic kernel
at a real-space cutoff radius. Coarse-grained models for proteins, lipids, and
liquids are all expected to benefit from the efficiency gains of a real-space
approach. The work also involves algorithmic development of non-equilibrium
techniques to study interfacial properties like thermal conductance and
interfacial friction at the curved interfaces of nanoparticles. These quantities
are dynamic properties of interfaces, and are responses to non-equilibrium
conditions or very rare fluctuations away from equilibrium behavior. Because of
this, they are nearly impossible to measure using standard equilibrium molecular
dynamics or Monte Carlo methods. To study interfacial transport, methods that
create heat or angular momentum fluxes between materials are necessary. The
combination of algorithmic development and application of these algorithms to
realistic models for nanoparticles will provide insight into problems of intense
scientific interest.