* 1362336
* Algebraic Combinatorics and its Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2018
* Alexander Postnikov, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 08/31/2018
* USD 200,000.00

Combinatorics is the area of mathematics dedicated to the study of discrete
structures, such as diagrams, graphs, various combinations, polytopes, etc. A
typical combinatorial question is ``How to count these structures?''
Combinatorial problems appear in various areas of pure and applied mathematics,
physics, and other sciences. Several problems in this research project are
related to the latest advances in the fundamental physics. This study will lead
to a better understanding of the fundamental processes of the nature:
interactions between elementary particles. A unique feature of combinatorics is
that combinatorial objects are quite visual and easy to understand. Many
combinatorial problems can be explained to a high-school student. The PI and RAs
will disseminate research results among various audiences. The PI will encourage
graduate, undergraduate, and high-school students to work on the combinatorial
problems. He will support MIT PRIMES "Program for Research in Mathematics,
Engineering and Science for High School Students". This project will promote
public knowledge of combinatorics and mathematics in general.

This research project is devoted to the study of several problems in algebraic
combinatorics and their applications. Many of the problems are related to the
positive Grassmannian, a beautiful geometrical object with a rich combinatorial
structure. The combinatorial structures and techniques that were developed in
the study of the positive Grassmannian also surface in other areas: inverse
boundary problems, matroid theory, convex geometry, toric geometry, statistical
mechanics, theory of solitons, Fomin-Zelevinsky's cluster algebras, symmetric
functions, affine Schubert calculus, Lusztig's canonical bases, matrix
completion problems, Schur positivity problems, as well as the study of
scattering amplitudes of elementary particles - one of the most fundamental
field in physics. Several problems are related to power ideals, which are
objects from commutative algebra linked with graphs, hyperplane arrangements,
parking functions, matroids, and other combinatorial structures. The project
involves problems on generalized permutohedra, which are certain convex
polytopes, whose volumes and numbers of integer lattice points express many
classical combinatorial sequences: the Eulerian numbers, the Catalan numbers,
the numbers of trees and forests, and their generalizations. They have links
with low-dimensional topology and tropical oriented matroids, and concern a
interesting new analogue of the Tutte polynomial. The project also contains
problems on several classes of convex polytopes: root polytopes, alcoved
polytopes, and flow polytopes.