* 1362916
* Defect Chemistry of Metal Oxides for Catalytic Reactive Oxygen Species Generation
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Wai-Ning Mei, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 07/31/2018
* USD 406,283.00

With this award, the Chemical Catalysis Program is funding Chin Li Cheung of the
University of Nebraska at Lincoln and Wai-Ning Mei of the University of Nebraska
at Omaha for research to investigate how certain industrially important
catalysts function. The specific focus of this project seeks to understand how
defects in tiny metal oxide particles lead to their ability to function as
catalysts. One of oxides being studied, a substance known as cerium oxide, is
used extensively as a catalyst in automobile catalytic converters, as a key
component in petroleum refining, and in a wide variety of chemical manufacturing
applications. Despite its widespread use and importance to industry, the
mechanism for cerium oxide's catalytic activity is still not well understood. To
investigate this in more detail, the group is preparing small particles of
cerium oxide with imperfections, or defects, on their surfaces. These small
particles are also being prepared in such a way that they contain foreign
metals, or dopants, also thought to be related to their catalytic activity. The
ability of these carefully prepared particles to catalyze chemical reactions is
determined and, then, correlated with the defects and dopants that are present.
The group is using computer modeling to more fully understand the reactions that
may be taking place during catalysis. With this combined experimental and
theoretical approach, the investigators are able to more completely control the
catalytic activity of these small particles and more fully understand how they
function. The work is having a broad impact on industry and technology, and may
lead to improved catalysts for a wide variety of technological applications. The
work is having a further broad impact through the engagement of students at both
the undergraduate and high school level. Even younger students are being
included in the work through an innovative summer camp program for middle school
and home-schooled students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop a
fundamental understanding of the role of surface-subsurface defect interactions
on the chemical activity of surface binding sites that are involved in molecular
adsorption in metal oxide systems of reduced dimension. Such knowledge is
expected to yield catalytic pathways for reactive oxygen species (ROS)
generation and annihilation with reducible metal oxide in the environment and in
industrial processes. Ceria nanoparticles with different shapes, facets and
chemical impurity content are being synthesized by hydrothermal methods. The
kinetics of the catalytic reactions of these particles with hydrogen peroxide to
generate ROS are being determined. Analysis of the kinetic data coupled with DFT
modeling are used to identify the effect of subsurface defects on the molecular
adsorption energies at the surface binding sites and to determine potential
molecular reaction pathways.