* 1362524
* Complex role of solvation in protein structure and dynamics in micelles and membranes
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* John Straub, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 07/31/2017
* USD 510,000.00

One of the great challenges in biological chemistry is to develop a fundamental
understanding of how protein structure informs function. By encapsulating
proteins in surfactant micelles (nanoscale molecular aggregates, such as a
droplet in a colloidal system), experimental studies have shown that critical
insights can be gained into protein structure, dynamics, and function.
Currently, however, no one knows how the micelle environment influences the
structure and dynamics of the encapsulated proteins. In this project, funded by
the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods Program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor John Straub of Boston University leads a computational study
to develop a fundamental understanding of the nature and potential applications
of protein encapsulation in micelles.

The project involves a systematic computational study of the effect of varying
surfactant properties on the structure and dynamics of micelle encapsulated
proteins. Through a novel multiscale computational approach, the influence of
surfactant (anionic, cationic, and mixtures) and relative impact of generic
(confinement geometry, spatially-dependent pressure profile) and surfactant
specific contributions, on properties such as association equilibria, hydration
dynamics, and channel function, will be explored. Novel and traditional
approaches will be employed to analyze structure, dynamics, and function for
comparison with observables from NMR and vibrational spectroscopy. The broader
impact of the study is the promotion of graduate education in computational
biophysics through the development of a summer school for graduate training in
state-of-the-art computational and experimental methods in the field of
biomolecular structure and dynamics. Participating students will be selected to
provide a balance of experimentalists and theorists, women and men, with a
strong involvement of underrepresented minorities.