* 1362120
* Heterogeneous Catalysis on Plasmonic Metallic Nanostructures: Selective Catalytic Conversion at Lower Temperatures co-Driven by Solar and Thermal Energy
* MPS,CHE
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2018
* Suljo Linic, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 09/30/2018
* USD 420,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Catalysis program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Suljo Linic of The University of Michigan (Ann Arbor) is
developing a new generation of photocatalysts that use solar energy to drive
chemical transformation. These new photocatalysts are small nanoparticles of
silver, copper and gold, which are on one hand characterized by their strong
interaction with solar light (i.e., these concentrate the solar energy) and on
the other hand by their high chemical activity (i.e., activate a number of
desired chemical transformations). This new generation of photocatalysts will
complement semiconductor photocatalysts, which are traditionally used in this
field. An outreach program developed by Professor Linic to area high schools is
allowing local high school students the opportunity to participate in this
research and to learn about sustainable energy transformations. The broader
impacts of this work include potential societal benefits from the discovery of
new generation of photocatalysts as well as the development of training
opportunities for students and teachers. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;It was
demonstrated recently that when illuminated with low intensity light, plasmonic
metal nanoparticles can activate electron-driven chemical reactions at
meaningful rates. The characteristic of plasmonic nanostructures (Ag, Au, and Cu
were used) that makes them fundamentally different than extended metal surfaces
(metal bulk), is their strong resonant interaction with UV-vis light through the
excitation of localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR). While these initial
studies led to a very vibrant field of photochemistry on plasmonic metals, there
are many unanswered critical issues. The project focuses on a number of these
issues, including identification of: (i) the mechanism by which plasmons
transfer energetic electrons to the adsorbates and in doing so induce chemical
transformations, (ii) the mechanisms responsible for the reported non-linear
dependency between reaction rate and light intensity, and (iii) the nature of
the active sites responsible for the observed photochemistry on plasmonic metal
nanoparticles. Addressing these issues is critical for the development of
predictive relationships between optical properties of metal nanoparticles,
their geometric structure (at the single particle and a cluster level), and
their photocatalytic activity. This is important for our understanding of the
surface photo-chemistry taking place on these materials, the extent to which
these processes can be controlled, and the parameters that influence the design
of optimal photo-catalytic systems.