* 1362381
* QUANTUM SIMULATION OF CHEMICAL DYNAMICS IN CONDENSED PHASES
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2014,05/31/2016
* Peter Rossky, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 05/31/2016
* USD 450,000.00

Peter Rossky from the University of Texas at Austin is supported by the Chemical
Theory, Models and Computational Methods Program in research focused on
understanding, at the level of atoms, the molecular arrangements and time-
dependent processes that occur when chemical changes take place in liquid
solutions or in unstructured solid materials. These include the changes that
occur in biological materials, in semiconductor materials, and in plastics.
Although computational modeling is increasingly able to describe these
processes, serious challenges remain. For example, it is very important to be
able to understand what happens to the energy that is deposited in molecules
through the absorption of light. Such knowledge is a critical element for our
understanding of the degradation of materials, of the functioning of solar
cells, and of biological processes such as photosynthesis. The specific
objective of the present studies is the development of new, generally
applicable, theoretical and computational models and methods that can fully
describe chemistry involving very light atoms and electrons, where quantum
mechanics must be invoked. The algorithms being developed can be directly
applied as computational tools for the design of advanced materials,
pharmaceutical discovery, and nanoscale engineering. They can also impact
critical practical issues, including affordable solar energy capture for
sustainable energy and a sustainable climate. Outreach activities stemming from
this work contribute to the future stability of the scientific workforce, as
well as to the public's ability to participate in science
policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research efforts are developing new simulation
algorithms for the quantum mechanical description of nuclear motion that go
beyond presently available practical methods in key respects. The novel method
is based on the dynamics of Wigner transform variables and is a rather direct
generalization of an earlier linearized path integral ("classical Wigner")
approach. The new approach retains the ability to directly evaluate the dynamics
of non-linear operators (e.g., in inelastic X-ray scattering) and describes
vibrational dynamics without unphysical components associated with the
simulation algorithm. Further, since the new method directly propagates the
phase space points (in contrast to path-integral based approaches), there is
good reason to believe that it can be integrated into a non-adiabatic electronic
dynamics protocol. Applications to relatively well-characterized molecular
systems are being used to test the capability of new methods. The molecular-
scale insight needed to guide us to new materials with desired functions or
insight into Nature's solutions will follow from the implementation of advanced
computational science, coordinated with revealing experimental probes. The
resulting capabilities form the basis for what may be the routine modeling
methods of the future, just as the basic research of the last 50 years routinely
provides for today's experimental researcher. Project efforts enhance education
at all levels, including the professional development of graduate and
postdoctoral students as researchers and educators with timely skills in the
computational solution of physical problems.