* 1362431
* Synthesis of Luminescent Group 14 Compounds
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2020
* Janet Braddock-Wilking, University of Missouri-Saint Louis
* Standard Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 08/31/2020
* USD 240,000.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Janet Braddock-Wilking of the University of Missouri-St.
Louis is developing synthetic strategies for the preparation of fluorescent
molecules containing silicon (Si) and germanium (Ge). These molecules have
structural features that promote strong light emission in the solid state.
Modification of the structure of these compounds allows for the development of
air-stable molecules that emit blue, green, or red light for solid-state
applications, for example, as components for screen displays (organic light
emitting diodes) and solar cells.

This project focuses on the synthetic pathways for the preparation of cyclic
compounds containing silicon and germanium centers incorporated into five- and
six-membered carbon-based ring structures of Si and Ge derivatives of
metallaloles, dibenzometalloles, and fluorescein. The unique optoelectronic
properties of the molecules are associated with their structures and are fine-
tuned by incorporating a variety of conjugated peripheral groups attached to the
ring structure. The new molecules are being characterized by multinuclear NMR
and IR spectroscopies, mass spectrometry, UV-Vis and fluorescence
spectroscopies, elemental analysis, cyclic voltammetry, and X-ray
crystallography, when possible. Professor Braddock-Wilking continues to devote
efforts to train and mentor female undergraduate and graduate students. In
addition, she is currently the co-chair of the St. Louis ACS Section Women
Chemists Committee. The broader impacts of this work include societal benefits
resulting from the discovery of stable and efficient luminescent compounds for
components in electroluminescent solid-state applications as well as the
training of undergraduate and graduate students on the synthetic and
characteristic techniques utilized in the preparation of the luminescent
silicon- and germanium-containing cyclic compounds.