* 1362662
* Factors Influencing Coordinated Ni(II) Cysteinate Basicity and Redox Potentials
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Jason Shearer, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 08/31/2017
* USD 260,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamic & Mechanism B Program
of the NSF Division of Chemistry, Professor Jason Shearer of the Department of
Chemistry at the University of Nevada, Reno will pursue research aimed at
understanding how thiolate ligated transition metal centers facilitate proton
coupled electron transfer (PCET) reactions. PCET reactions involve the net
transfer of a hydrogen atom, and are of fundamental importance in chemistry and
biology. Despite their importance, the details of such reactions are still a
subject of intense debate and study. This project focuses on understanding the
role of protonated thiolate ligands coordinated to reduced late first-row
transition metal centers (R-S(H+)-M) in such reactions. Reactions supported by
the R-S(H+)-M moiety have potential importance in many biological systems
ranging from those that facilitate hydrogen production to long-range electron
transfer to substrate reduction. As such, this subset of PCET reactions have
potential applications in the development of new bioinspired technologies with
relevance to the hydrogen economy and industrial catalysis (substrate redox
chemistry). In addition to the design and production of small molecule systems
that can facilitate R-S(H+)-M mediated PCET reactions, the project will also
examine how the fundamental physical properties of these systems contribute to
the overall PCET reaction. Student training and the development of new
scientific techniques that will be applicable beyond the specific research
pursued under this initiative are fundamental aspects of this project.

The near simultaneous transfer of a proton and an electron is a fundamentally
important chemical process. There is strong evidence that protonated thiolate
ligands coordinated to late first-row transition metals in low oxidation states
(R-S(H+)-M; M = Fe - Ni) can reduce substrates through PCET processes. The
overall goals of this project are to a) understand how general such reactions
are, and b) explore their applicability to important biological and chemical
processes (i.e. hydrogen production, long range electron transfer, and substrate
reduction). Specifically, this research seeks to understand the fundamental
aspects of R-S(H+)-Ni mediated reduction reactions using reduced thiolate
ligated Ni(II) and Ni(I) containing complexes and metallopeptides. Special
emphasis will be given to understanding the metalloenzyme nickel superoxide
dismutase, which likely utilizes a Cys-S(H+)-Ni moiety to facilitate oxygen
anion reduction. The geometric structure, physical properties (R-S(H+)-Ni
acidity, redox potentials), and electronic structure of protonated nickel-
thiolate complexes with their ability to perform PCET reactions will be
correlated. Attention will also be given to the fundamental details of the
overall PCET process (i.e. distinguishing between concerted vs. sequential PCET
vs. hydrogen atom transfer reactions).