* 1362264
* Organic Chemistry in Harsh Reaction Environments
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Robert McMahon, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 07/31/2018
* USD 545,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics & Mechanism B Program
of the Chemistry Division, Professor Robert J. McMahon of the Department of
Chemistry at the University of Wisconsin-Madison will investigate the behavior
of organic compounds under harsh conditions of temperature, pressure, or
radiation. These conditions, which are similar to the conditions found in flames
(combustion) or in space, cause the degradation of organic compounds and
generate a complex mixture of highly reactive products. The proposed research
will explore the chemical properties and chemical reactions of these reactive
molecules. This research provides a foundation for understanding two very
different problems: one involving combustion and another involving the chemistry
of space. Combustion of organic fuels is central to our nation's energy supply
and national economy. A fundamental understanding of combustion offers the
possibility of enhancing the energy efficiency of fuel combustion and minimizing
pollutants (soot) that arise from incomplete combustion. In interstellar space,
it is now known that hundreds of different organic compounds exist throughout
the galaxy in environments that are harsh because they are so hot (near stars)
or because they are so cold (far from stars). Studying these environments is a
crucial step in understanding the distribution of organic material in the
universe and identifying molecules that could be precursors to life. Professor
McMahon and his coworkers will also continue their engagement in a variety of
science education and outreach activities.

The fundamental chemical studies proposed herein would not have been possible
only a few years ago. Tremendous advances in both experimental and computational
techniques now permit the analysis and interpretation of the experimental
spectra obtained from complex mixtures of reactive species. Direct studies of
these species are challenging because these molecules typically exhibit high
reactivity. Nevertheless, it is the reaction chemistry of these ephemeral
intermediates that governs the chemical behavior of the system. In combustion
chemistry, the determination of accurate equilibrium structures of reactive
intermediates will provide important benchmarks for prototypical molecules, and
theory can be further used to establish thermodynamic parameters that are
important for modeling. In astrochemistry, the Atacama Large Millimeter / sub-
millimeter Array (ALMA), an astronomical interferometer of radio telescopes in
the Atacama Desert of northern Chile completed in 2013, is generating a deluge
of new radio-astronomical data. These data can be interpreted only by comparison
with laboratory spectra of the type that will be obtained through the proposed
studies.