* 1362502
* Development of Divergent Cascade Annulation Reactions for the Synthesis of Malagashanine and Akuamilline Alkaloids
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2018
* Simon Blakey, Emory University
* Continuing Grant
* Tarek Sammakia
* 06/30/2018
* USD 375,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Synthesis program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Simon Blakey of Emory University is developing new reactions
that will allow the synthesis of two novel families of bioactive molecules. The
development of new methodology, and the demonstrated ability to access multiple
classes of natural products that were previously inaccessible, will set the
stage for further understanding of the basic biological activities of these
molecules. This fundamental research will pave the way for the development of
the therapeutic properties implied in ethnomedicine studies that serve as the
inspiration for this project, furthering our understanding of malarial
resistance to common drug treatments, and potentially providing a road map to
new clinical entities.

An outreach program is exploring the narrative of the malagashanine story
through a collaboration between the sciences and the arts. The combination
illustrates the interplay between disciplines to inform a public audience on
cutting edge science and ethical questions arising from the discoveries.
Professor Blakey will deliver public lectures at the Atlanta Botanical Garden,
and ultimately to broad audiences as part of the Atlanta Science Festival.

The unusual structures of these molecules render them difficult to synthesize
with existing methods. To date, no members of either family have been
synthesized. To meet the challenge posed by these molecules, and provide
significant quantities for further biological study, new reactions and new
catalysts to control these reactions are under development. Specifically, a
series of stereospecific iminium ion initiated cascade reactions, and novel
chiral disulfonamide catalysts will be developed and studied, providing
solutions to the synthetic problem posed by the malagashanine and akuamma
alkaloids. These studies are expected to culminate in the syntheses of
representative molecules from both families.