* 1362113
* EAGER: Developing Optically Triggered Protein Actuators in Living Organisms
* MPS,CHE
* 04/15/2014,03/31/2016
* Khalid Salaita, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 03/31/2016
* USD 298,997.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program of the Chemistry
Division and the Cellular Dynamics and Function Cluster of the Division of
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences are funding Prof. Khalid Salaita from Emory
University to develop and characterize a new class of genetically-encoded
proteins that exert a mechanical force when optically excited. Despite the
importance of mechanotransduction, the molecular details relating the magnitude,
timing, and location of forces to specific biochemical pathways remain poorly
understood. This is due, in part, to the inability to control mechanical tension
within individual proteins. Therefore the precise role of mechanics in
regulating biochemical pathways remains difficult to test. The research program
led by Prof. Salaita aims to address this limitation and to aid in the
integration of the growing fields of optogenetics, mechanobiology, and
biophysics. To maximize the dissemination of the research results and to
increase adoption of the new tools by researchers in the area of mechanobiology,
the methods describing the optimization and biophysical response of force
actuator module variants are made available through publication in scientific
journals and will be also made public in a session dedicated to opto-mechanics
at an upcoming regional molecular and cellular biophysics meeting. The project
provides highly multidisciplinary, hands-on training for graduate and
undergraduate students.

The proposed research focuses on the development of a new class of genetically-
encoded proteins that exert a mechanical force when illuminated. Upon
illumination, these "force actuators" are expected to collapse and apply a
tension of specific magnitude with high spatial and temporal resolution and in a
site-selective and non-invasive manner. The opto-mechanical properties of the
fluorescently-tagged force actuators are characterized by steady-state and time-
resolved spectroscopic methods. For initial in-vitro studies, the force actuator
modules are introduced between the head and tailpiece of vinculin. Vinculin was
chosen because it is a core protein within focal adhesion complexes and the
tension across vinculin regulates a range of processes such as cell protrusion
and migration.