* 1362219
* Neutron scattering studies of spin dynamics in iron-based high-temperature superconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2017
* Pengcheng Dai, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 06/30/2017
* USD 436,000.00

NON TECHNICAL ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award from the Condensed Matter
Physics program of the Division of Materials Research supports a project
addressing the fundamental physical processes that give rise to novel phenomena
such as high-transition temperature superconductivity. Superconductivity is a
phenomenon of exactly zero electrical resistance and expulsion of magnetic
fields occurring in certain materials when cooled below a characteristic
critical temperature. Understanding of superconductivity and related properties
will not only enhance our knowledge of basic science, but also gives us the
ability to design materials with novel and predictable properties. The
investigators conduct neutron scattering experiments performed mostly at the
high-flux isotope reactor (HFIR) and Spallation Neutron Source (SNS) at the Oak
Ridge National Laboratory. The project also utilizes other world-class
facilities in the U.S. and Europe when similar capabilities are unavailable at
HFIR and SNS. The impact of this research program will include the training of
the next generation of neutron scattering experts and elucidating the nature of
the special properties of the correlated electron
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award from the Condensed Matter Physics program of the Division of Materials
Research supports an experimental program integrating neutron scattering
experiments with laboratory-based materials efforts, aimed at the fundamental
understanding of spin excitations and their relationship with superconductivity
in iron-based high-transition-temperature (high-Tc) superconductors. The
objective of the project is to explore and understand the microscopic origins of
various phases in iron-based superconductors, specifically the iron arsenide
superconductors BaFe2-xNixAs2, (B, K) Fe2A2, and BaFe2As2-xPx. The program has
two components: initial materials characterization and neutron scattering.
Single crystals of these materials are grown at the William Marsh Rice
University where the initial characterization of will be performed. Neutron
scattering, the core part of this research program, will be used to study the
spin dynamical properties of these materials. Experiments will be performed at
the High-Flux Isotope Reactor and the Spallation Neutron Source at Oak Ridge
National Laboratory and the NIST Center for Neutron Research in Maryland. In
addition, other world-class neutron scattering facilities in Europe will also be
utilized when similar capabilities are unavailable in the US. The impact of this
research program will include the training of the next generation of neutron
scattering experts and elucidating the nature of the special properties of the
correlated electron materials.