* 1362467
* Aspects of well-possedeness and long time behavior for non-linear PDEs
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2017
* Vladimir Sverak, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Edward Taylor
* 06/30/2017
* USD 323,995.00

Mathematical description of fluid flows is mostly based on partial differential
equations. These equations express well-known physical laws in the context of
fluids and describe how quantities characterizing the flow, such as the velocity
and the pressure will change in time and space. It turns out the equations are
difficult to solve, even with the help of large computers. One reason for the
difficulties comes from the highly non-trivial behavior exhibited by the
solutions, which includes the emergence of complicated small-scale structures
and fast oscillations in time. This is a result of the non-linearity in the
equations, which can transfer energy between various scales. The fluid motion
can be complicated, but the practical questions are in some sense simple: will a
tornado form? At which speed will a plane stall? Open theoretical questions
about the equations can also be formulated in a relatively simple language: do
the equations give a self-consistent description of the fluid evolution, in the
sense that they can uniquely predict the future state of the fluid based on a
known current state? This is one of the well-known open mathematical problems
surrounding the equations, closely related to the possible development of
singularities in the solutions. Our mathematical understanding of the equations
is currently incomplete. The research at both theoretical and practical aspects
of the equation has ultimately the same goal: to find some relatively simple set
of parameters which control the solutions. One hopes that by identifying the
right quantities, one will be able to give a good description of the flow and
sufficiently characterize its important features. The main effort of this
research project is aimed at several open mathematical problems surrounding
these issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At a more technical level, the proposed
topics include:&lt;br/&gt;1. Well-posedness, ill-posedness and uniqueness for
the Navier-Stokes equation and related equations, questions such as: Is the
Navier-Stokes equation well-posed in the natural energy space? Based on recent
work concerning scale-invariant solutions, the PI expects that the answer to
this questions is negative, but significant work is still needed to confirm
this. (The question is also related to the open problem of uniqueness of the
Leray-Hopf weak solutions with initial date of finite energy, but not
necessarily smooth.) The proposed methods should also work for the surface
quasi-geostrophic equation, where similar questions are open. The Euler equation
also presents a number of open problem concerning well-posedness and stability,
some of which will be addressed. Many issues are not clear even at the
linearized level. These are in some sense more subtle than in the Navier-Stokes
case (due to the strong role of continuous spectra), but should provide valuable
insights into low-viscosity flows.&lt;br/&gt;2. Singularities and possible non-
uniqueness for the complex Ginzburg-Landau equation. This equation has the same
energy estimates and the same scaling symmetry as the Navier-Stokes equation.
There is strong evidence that solution can develop singularities even when
starting from smooth initial conditions. One can develop a theory of global weak
solutions, but it remains open whether these uniquely predict the behavior of
the system. The question of uniqueness is important for assessing the predictive
power of the equation.&lt;br/&gt;3. Long-time behavior of solutions for the 2d
Euler equation and PDE problems associated with models used in that connection.
The long-time behavior of 2d flows (relevant for example for modelling of
meteorological phenomena and making predictions concerning climate) exhibits
some striking features whose mathematical understanding remains incomplete.
There are strong connections to Statistical Mechanics and other infinite-
dimensional Hamiltonian PDEs. The research will address some of the open PDE
problems arising in this context, such as the properties of invariant measures
in flows with stochastic forcing and properties of steady-states arising from
statistical theories. Other Hamiltonian PDEs which can serve as good models for
these questions will also be studied.