* 1362812
* Mechanistic Studies of Halenium-Alkene Additions for Chemical Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2020
* James Jackson, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 07/31/2020
* USD 405,000.00

This award, funded by the Chemistry Division Chemical Catalysis program in the
Division of Chemistry to Professor Babak Borhan at Michigan State University,
enables mechanistic analysis and discovery of asymmetric halofunctionalizations.
By probing the mechanistic nuances of these processes, this research will
expedite design and discovery of new halogenation reactions, improved catalysts,
and efficient routes to complex structures. The project's interdisciplinary
combination of organic syntheses, spectroscopic techniques, isotopic analyses,
and quantum chemical models offers an excellent opportunity for doctoral
students to be trained at the interface of analytical, organic, and physical
chemistry. Working with PIs of very different backgrounds, the chemistry
graduate, undergraduate (UG), and summer high school (HS) students who perform
the research learn critical thinking and communications skills, besides the
multiple lab techniques they must master.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor
Borhan's discovery that organocatalyst (DHQD)2PHAL promotes chiral delivery of
halogens to alkenes and related substrates opens the door to reactions analogous
in generality and utility to recent asymmetric epoxidations, dihydroxylations,
and hydrogenations, landmark tools of organic synthesis. These novel
stereocontrolled halocyclizations give rapid access to complex structures of
biological and pharmaceutical importance. Mechanistic studies employ kinetic
analyses; solvent effect surveys; isotopic labeling both to trace
stereochemistry and to identify key rate- and product-determining steps via
kinetic isotope effects; design and synthesis of electronically adjustable
substrates and halogenating agents; multinuclear and multidimensional NMR
techniques to probe molecular interactions; and detailed quantum chemical
simulations to guide and interpret experiments. Molecular modeling and
mechanistic explorations also benefit from the involvement of Professor James
Jackson, a physical organic chemist with substantial experience in
computational, catalytic, and green chemistry areas, who serves as a Co-PI on
this grant.