* 1362118
* Synthesis of d- and p-Block Element Molecules, Reagents, and Precursors
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Christopher Cummins, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 07/31/2017
* USD 624,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Christopher Cummins of MIT will develop new methods
(recipes) that will enable the production of next-generation electronic
materials. Professor Cummins and coworkers are also aiming to optimize and
simplify the recipes so they can be broadly adopted and commercialized. The
efforts to synthesize value-added compounds directly from elemental phosphorus
are relevant to ongoing developments in the chemical industry, a specific
example being the Monsanto synthesis of the herbicide glyphosate. Results from
gas-phase studies are relevant to the chemical evolution of the cosmos and
useful in providing fundamental constants crucial to the detection and
identification of species such as cis-diazene in the interstellar medium. In
addition, Professor Cummins and his students are actively disseminating the
results of their innovative synthetic chemistry via YouTube videos, which serve
as an educational resource and help students understand chemical synthesis. They
are also engaged in outreach to introduce methods of molecular modeling and
concepts of chemical bonding to students at East Boston Public HS.

The proposed research explores novel transition-metal complexes and their small-
molecule activation chemistry with an emphasis on reactions of molecular
nitrogen and phosphorus (N2 and P4) and the generation of metal-ligand multiple
bonds. A key direction of the project is the synthesis of molecular precursors
to reactive intermediates. In the case of phosphorus, the PI and coworkers have
designed reagents capable of undergoing retro [4+2] cyclization reactions to
transfer diatomic P2 either in solution or into the gas phase. The same system
that functions with release of anthracene as a thermodynamic driving force
provides opportunity to study generation of the P2O molecule, with both organic
and transition-metal systems being targeted as thermal precursors to PN, HCP,
HCAs, vinylidene, and cis-diazene.