* 1362322
* Conferences in the Mathematical Sciences -- Permutation Patterns 2014, July 7-11, 2014
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2015
* Anant Godbole, East Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* Qing Xiang
* 03/31/2015
* USD 21,600.00

This award is providing funds to support the conference "Permutation Patterns
2014" (http://www.etsu.edu/cas/math/pp2014), which will be held July 7-11, 2014
at East Tennessee State University. Permutation Patterns is a subject that has
become an established branch of Combinatorics over the last two decades. Much of
the research in the area has centered on classes of permutations that are
avoiding, i.e., each permutation in such a class avoids certain sets of
subsequences. It turns out that pattern avoidance arises naturally in
theoretical computer science to characterize the set of possible outputs of many
natural sorting devices, such as stacks; in fact Knuth's result that a list is
one-stack sortable if and only it avoids the pattern 231 is considered to be one
of the cornerstones of the rich theory of permutation patterns. Current new
research involves areas such as complexity theory and theoretical computer
science. The conference series "Permutation Patterns" has been held annually
since 2003, and has attracted a community of researchers in enumerative,
analytic, algebraic and probabilistic combinatorics, all with common interest in
research questions that revolve around pattern avoidance or containment in
permutations or words.

The numbers of women, undergraduate and graduate students, and early career
faculty who attend this conference have increased steadily over the years.
Indeed, nurturing and mentoring of such mathematicians has been a significant
part of the conference mission. Eight students from the PI's summer Research
Experiences for Undergraduates program will attend the conference in 2014, as
might past participants from the program. Award funds are dedicated to
supporting participation of US citizens and permanent residents.