* 1362886
* Novel Dynamic Paradigms for Wave Sensing Inspired by Bat Biosonar
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,12/31/2018
* Rolf Mueller, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 12/31/2018
* USD 360,000.00

Current technical sonar and radar technology follows an approach that appears to
be fundamentally different from what can be observed in bat biosonar: Whereas
engineered systems rely on large numbers of emitter and receiver elements that
each have rather simple characteristics, bat biosonar operates with a very small
number of intricate emitters and receivers. Bats emit their ultrasonic pulses
and receive the echoes using baffle shapes that can be compared to megaphones
and horn antennas to a first approximation. However, these shapes are not only
geometrically much more complicated than their technical peers, they can also
have a unique dynamic dimension in that they change their shapes on time scales
that are similar to the duration of the animals' ultrasonic pulses. At the same
time, bat biosonar appears to be far superior to engineered systems in dealing
with structure-rich natural environments. Hence, developing an understanding of
the role that the dynamic dimension plays in bat biosonar could lead to novel
dynamic sensing paradigms that could improve the performance of sonar, radar,
and related technical sensing modalities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
will reproduce and investigate dynamic features seen in biosonar the biosonar
system of certain bat species in a biomimetic prototype sonar. The principal
underlying hypotheses to be tested is that the deformations of these baffle
shapes add a dynamic dimension to this biological sensing system that could be
used to (i) enlarge the system's general coding capacity for sensory
information, (ii) enhance the encoding of certain salient features, (iii) adapt
the system to different sensing scenarios. If this is the case, the unusual
dynamic dimension of bat biosonar could be a key factor behind the superior
ability of bats to meet the sensory needs for navigation in complex natural
environments based on a very parsimonious sensory input. This hypothesis will be
investigated by constructing a biomimetic sonar system that will employ baffle
shape for emission as well as reception that can change their shapes in
synchrony with the respective diffraction processes. The biomimetic sensory
system will be used to investigate the dynamic encoding of sensory information
in natural biosonar sensing tasks. The results of these experiments will be
analyzed using numerical simulations and information-theoretic methods to deal
with the random nature of natural biosonar scenes and the resulting echo
signals.