* 1362039
* Sulfate Attack Mechanisms in Geopolymers: Measurements and Modeling  at the Nanoscale
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Claire White, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 06/30/2018
* USD 299,933.00

One of the main contributors to anthropogenic carbon dioxide emissions is
ordinary Portland cement production, accounting for approximately 8 percent of
total emissions. With Portland cement production forecast to double in the next
30 years it is imperative that low-carbon alternatives are successfully
implemented in industry. Geopolymer cements have emerged as viable alternatives
to Portland cement-based systems, however, there is the explicit need to be able
to accurately predict the long-term durability performance of these cements for
the successful implementation in the built environment. Nevertheless, as is the
case for conventional cement systems, the exact chemical and physical processes
controlling durability are not fully understood. Degradation of concrete exposed
to sulfates is a serious durability concern for both conventional concrete and
sustainable alternatives. Hence, the development of sulfate resistant concrete
is extremely important for a wide range of infrastructure applications including
sewer pipes, storm-water drainage systems, coastal structures and foundations.
The outcome of this project will be the creation of sustainable cements with
superior resistance to sulfate attack, which will benefit society by reducing
costs associated with repair and maintenance of concrete structures exposed to
sulfates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate the atomic
structure and morphology of sustainable geopolymer cements to improve our
understanding of (i) cement formation mechanisms and (ii) chemical degradation
processes caused by sulfate attack. The objective is firstly to discover the
atomic processes that occur during formation of fly ash-slag-metakaolin
geopolymer cement mixes by creating a geopolymer-specific atomistic modeling
methodology utilizing quantum chemistry and molecular dynamics. Key
characterization techniques will be employed to ensure experimental validity of
the model, specifically in situ atomic analysis techniques at synchrotron and
neutron user facilities, and Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy. The
structural models will be used to identify the key chemical mechanisms
controlling geopolymer cement formation together with the influence of precursor
chemistry on these mechanisms. The second objective of this project is to
uncover and control the atomistic degradation mechanisms that occur during
exposure to sulfate solutions. By exploiting the stability of the atomic
structures most resilient to sulfate attack, mix designs will be engineered with
improved sulfate resistance characteristics at the atomic level. The modeling
methodology developed during the first part of the project will be extended to
enable simulation of the chemical processes that occur when different sulfate
salts are exposed to the geopolymer cement surfaces. In situ degradation
experiments will be conducted to provide experimental validation of the models.