* 1362999
* UNIQUE ADVANTAGES OF ORGANOMETALLIC SUPPORTING LIGANDS FOR METAL COMPLEXES
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2014,09/30/2017
* Paula Diaconescu, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 09/30/2017
* USD 440,188.00

Innocent ligands, such as phosphines and cyclopentadienyl derivatives, impart
electronic and steric properties once coordinated to the metal center but the
ligands themselves are not modified during the course of a chemical
transformation. In contrast, non-innocent ligands cooperate with the metal
during its reactions. The distinction between these two classes of ligands is
becoming blurry and the research team led by Professor Paula Diaconescu at the
University of California-Los Angeles seeks to identify and exploit the effect of
non-innocent ligands on reactivity, particularly carbon-hydrogen (C-H) bond
activation, aromaticity, single molecular magnets and metal-metal interactions.
The experimental research team at UCLA collaborates with theoretical and
computational scientists at other universities forming an interdisciplinary
group focused on tuning the reactivity of the synthesized metal complexes,
observing their resultant reactivity patterns, and incorporating unreactive
molecules into value-added compounds. The diverse work environment allows for
the integration of women and underrepresented minority students while expanding
the representation from different ethnic and cultural backgrounds in the
scientific enterprise. Professor Diaconescu collaborates with a number of high
school students, enabling them to learn advanced experimental techniques as well
as to gain an understanding of molecular and materials synthesis and catalysis.
Professor Diaconescu continues to work with the California NanoSystems
Institute, particularly the High School Nanoscience Program, in partnership with
the Los Angeles Unified School District.

This award from the NSF Chemical Synthesis Program supports the research efforts
of Professor Paula Diaconescu at the University of California-Los Angeles, in
examining the role of ancillary groups as they participate in reactions at rare
earth metal centers. The research group is focused on ferrocene-based chelating
ligands because they possess unique electronic characteristics that make them
especially versatile in supporting the reactivity of the metal centers,
especially in relation to (1) the reductive cleavage of C-H/C-fluorine (F) bonds
by rare earth metals, (2) aromaticity in arene-bridged rare-earth complexes, (3)
inverse sandwiches of arene-bridged paramagnetic lanthanides, and (4) the
importance of organometallic supporting ligands.