* 1362583
* GOALI: Computational Multibody Dynamics: Addressing Modeling and Simulation Limitations in Problems with Friction and Contact
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2018
* Dan Negrut, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 05/31/2018
* USD 370,000.00

This Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) Program
project brings together a research group from the University of Wisconsin-
Madison and a team of engineers from Caterpillar in a joint effort that aims at
investigating and experimentally validating modeling and numerical solution
methods capable of predicting through computer simulation the time evolution of
large dynamic systems. The proposed research, development, and validation effort
will increase the role that computer simulation plays in investigating processes
such as transporting, mixing, and compacting discrete material (powders, grains,
gravel, rocks). Although these processes are relevant in a broad spectrum of
industries: e.g., manufacturing, construction, farming, food and drug, their
investigation through computer modeling and simulation provides limited benefit
today unless the problem size and/or duration of the analysis are drastically
curtailed, often below practically useful limits. Better understanding the
dynamics of large multibody systems is important since after water, discrete
media are manipulated in industry the most. Moreover, about 50% of all traded
products worldwide are in granular form and their manufacturing, transport,
processing, packing and mixing pose challenging problems in which the outcomes
of this research is anticipated to provide valuable insights.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The granular systems to be investigated have millions to billions of
components whose collective behavior is dominated by frictional contact
interactions between individual elements. The research effort will concentrate
on (1) investigating two classes of solutions methods; i.e., Krylov-subspace and
Primal-Dual Interior Point methods, to address current numerical solution
limitations that stem from the multiscale aspect of practical applications; (2)
investigate augmented Lagrangian formulations to understand whether they can
enhance the modeling role that complementarity approaches play in multibody
dynamics; and (3) compare two classes of solution methods; i.e., penalty-based
and complementarity-based, in terms of accuracy, robustness and scalability in
order to compile a factual body of evidence that summarizes the advantages and
disadvantages of each approach.