* 1362385
* Effect of composition and partical size in oxidation catalysis by metal oxide solid solution nanoparticles
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2018
* Marjorie Langell, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Rauchfuss
* 05/31/2018
* USD 560,358.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Catalysis program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Marjorie Langell of the University of Nebraska at Lincoln is
investigating methods of tailoring nanometer-sized, heterogeneous catalysts by
their chemical composition and crystallite size. The project targets the
improvement of catalytic efficiency and selectivity, which would be important
for the chemical manufacturing sector and sustainable growth. The catalysts are
suitable for use in the energy sector in natural gas power generators, solid-
state fuel cells, and petrochemical cracking. There are also applications in
pollution abatement and in photochemical (solar) chemistry. For broader impacts
on human capital, the project trains graduate and undergraduate students, and
includes national laboratory experience for these researchers. The project also
involves outreach to encourage high school students to pursue undergraduate
chemistry degrees and to increase understanding of catalysis and nanoscience by
demonstrations and activities readily available to the general public.

The bimetallic oxide catalysts are being synthesized in nanoscale form by
combinatorial hydrothermal-solvothermal methods and characterized by x-ray
diffraction (XRD), transmission electron microscopy (TEM), and x-ray absorption
fine structure (XAFS). The materials are being evaluated for reactivity in the
water gas shift reaction, carbon monoxide (CO) oxidation, and the oxidative
dehydrogenation of methanol. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and
secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS) measure possible surface segregation and
identify adsorbate species, and temperature programmed desorption (TPD)
determines the activation energies and helps in identifying reaction mechanisms.
Atmospheric pressure studies, performed in a catalyst characterization system,
follow the catalytic reactions with products detected by gas chromatography-mass
spectrometry (GC-MS).