* 1362548
* Investigating Novel Reactivities of Transition Metal Complexes and Pathways in the Formation of Microelectronic Materials
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2014,02/28/2017
* Ziling Xue, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 02/28/2017
* USD 200,000.00

The Chemical Synthesis Program of the NSF Division of Chemistry supports the
research of Professor Ziling (Ben) Xue of the University of Tennessee Knoxville
for the investigation of metal oxide materials that are used in
microelectronics. New materials, such as metal oxides which are used in the
replacement silicon oxide in gate materials, are of intense current interest as
they allow further device miniaturization. Metal oxide materials are synthesized
from early transition metal complexes using chemical vapor deposition (CVD) or
atomic layer deposition (ALD) processes. While these materials can be very
useful, it is often not clear how they are formed from reactions of precursor
compounds with water or oxygen. The in-depth studies included in this project
seek to understand the reactions of oxygen and water and thus indicate possible
synthetic pathways to better commercial manufacturing of microelectronics
devices. This research provides a good opportunity to train students to become
future scientists in interdisciplinary areas of chemical synthesis and
mechanistic studies. Female and underrepresented minority students, as well as
high school students from areas of Tennessee with high poverty rates, are
encouraged to participate in the research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Oxygen is a
diradical. Many of its reactions are radical (one electron) in nature and are
challenging to investigate especially with regard to reactions of oxygen and
early transition metal complexes where ligand oxidation often occurs. This
research probes the pathways for the formation of unusual zirconium peroxo
complexes, investigates the reactivities of the peroxo complexes, and studies
the reactions of other early transition metal complexes with oxygen. The
complexes under study contain ligands with different electronic and steric
properties. This research enhances the understanding of how metal complexes
react with oxygen. The studies of the reactions between water and the complexes
reveal the mechanistic pathways in the conversion of the complexes to metal
oxides. The research also aids in the development new CVD/ALD precursors and
processes for use in the synthesis of microelectronic materials.