* 1362103
* I/UCRC:  Proposal to add North Carolina State University as a center site for the existing I/UCRC "Center for Lasers and Plasmas in Advanced Manufacturing"
* ENG,EEC
* 03/01/2014,09/30/2016
* Steven Shannon, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 09/30/2016
* USD 120,000.00

The proposed new site of the Laser and Plasma for Advanced Manufacturing (LPAM)
I/UCRC at North Carolina State University (NCSU) intends to deepen the
understanding of plasma systems and how they interact with their environment,
address critical areas such as new source design, validation of predictive
models for virtual design, dynamic chemistry control for non-equilibrium
processes, and enable advanced diagnostics. These challenges will be addressed
by focusing on the basic science behind three critical areas: 1) interaction
between plasmas and applied fields, 2) interaction between plasmas and surfaces,
and 3) the underlying science that enable advanced diagnostics. This integrated
effort will complement the current activities of the Lasers and Plasmas for
Advanced Manufacturing I/UCRC and broaden the scope of the center to include a
class of plasma systems poised to make substantial contributions to future
manufacturing efforts.

Low temperature plasma (LTP) science provides a base technology on which many
modern industries exist. The NCSU site of LPAM?s research efforts target
expansion of needed application inspired fundamental research in this area to
support industry competitiveness. Industries that utilize LTPs for manufacturing
are experiencing a shortfall in manpower for the design, development, and
operation of these devices. As plasma process expands into new growth industries
this demand will increase. By providing an environment that focuses on
fundamental understanding of these systems, combined with industry engagement
through collaborative research, industry residencies, and co-operative
opportunities, we will fill a manpower void and accelerate the growth of low
cost, repeatable manufacturing solutions for the domestic high-tech industry.