* 1362735
* SusChEM:  Polymers as Solvents and Ligands in Sustainable Homogeneous Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2014,11/30/2018
* David Bergbreiter, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 11/30/2018
* USD 475,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Catalysis program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor David Bergbreiter of the Department of Chemistry at Texas
A&M University is exploring new ways to more efficiently carry out homogeneously
catalyzed reactions. Strategies that combine the solubility of polymer-bound
precious metal catalysts and ligands and that use recyclable polymeric solvents
will be developed leading to more practical and sustainable ways to carry out
common synthetic reactions widely used in industry. This work--where
undergraduate and graduate students in Professor Bergbreiter's group develop
greener solvents and new ways to make reactions faster, more selective and more
sustainable--will train students in catalysis and green chemistry, afford
students the opportunity to collaborate with other groups in industry or at
institutions here and outside the U.S., and potentially lead to more
environmentally benign ways to carry out important catalytic reactions. This
project focuses on designing new ways to use polymers to facilitate catalytic
processes. First, polymers will be designed to serve as solubility control
elements for transition metal and organocatalysts to minimize side reactions or
to simplify catalyst/product separations and catalyst/ligand recycling. Second,
polymer phase handles will be used to alter catalyst solubility to enable
reactions to occur faster or to enhance catalyst reactivity in alternative
solvents. Third, low molecular weight non-viscous functional polymers will be
used in place of toxic volatile organic solvents to afford recyclable greener
solvent alternatives. Finally, functional oligomers will be used as antileaching
agents along with soluble polymer bound catalysts to minimize catalyst losses
typically seen in physical separations of catalysts from products at the end of
a reaction.