* 1362454
* Nitrogen-Centered Radicals
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Andrzej Rajca, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 06/30/2018
* USD 463,278.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamic &amp; Mechanism B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Andrzej Rajca of the Department of
Chemistry at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln will investigate structure and
property relationships of organic molecules and macromolecules that are relevant
to the development of novel magnetic and optical technology. The goal of this
research is to synthesize and study high-spin nitrogen-centered radicals
(aminyls) and chiral helical radical cations. The aminyls with strong through-
bond ferromagnetic coupling and with persistence at room temperature are
important to the development of lightweight, soft organic magnets. In addition,
such organic radicals could benefit the development of metal-free paramagnetic
contrast agents for magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), agents for paramagnetic
relaxation enhancement nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy, as well as
materials for spintronics. The helical radical cations, which possess an
unpaired electron confined to a helix, could facilitate the discovery of new
organic magneto-optic materials and devices. This interdisciplinary research
project involves multi-step organic synthesis, diverse physical characterization
of organic molecules, and computations, and is therefore well suited to the
education of scientists at all levels, with exceptional opportunities to gain a
broad education as well as to develop a wide range of skills. This group is also
well-positioned to provide the highest level of education and training for
students underrepresented in science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed aminyls
are high-spin radicals based upon annelated pi-systems of nitrogen-centered
radicals that are made persistent by steric shielding of radical centers and
isotopic substitution to prevent decay of radicals. The proposed radicals will
be prepared by modern organic synthetic methodologies and characterized by
electron spin resonance (EPR) spectroscopy, superconducting quantum interference
device (SQUID) magnetometry, as well as computations. Aminyl diradicals with
very strong pairwise ferromagnetic coupling between electron spins and
persistence at room temperature, with half-life that would permit isolation of
the radicals, will be investigated and compared to analogous nitroxide
diradicals, to provide an insight into the degree of spin delocalization in the
pi-system. Aminyl triradical will be prepared and extended to the synthesis of
aminyl polyradical polymers with very large magnetic moment. The proposed chiral
helical radical cations are based on nitrogen-centered radical cations of
helical pi-systems, which would be configurationally persistent at room
temperature. Helical radical cations are intriguing molecules with a combination
of chiral pi-systems and paramagnetism. Helical, ladder-type pi-systems of n
ortho-annelated aromatic rings, such as [n]helicenes, are among molecules with
the strongest chiral properties. Paramagnetism of radical cations within the
three-dimensional helical pi-system would render unique properties, a
combination of helicene chirality and delocalized electronic spin, for
development of novel paramagnetic materials with inherently strong chiral
properties. Radical cations of aza-thio-[7]helicene and conjoined [5]helicene
will be prepared and studied by electrochemistry, UV-vis-NIR, circular dichroism
(CD), EPR spectroscopies, as well as computations.