* 1362825
* Surface-enhanced linear and nonlinear vibrational spectroscopy from first-principles
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2019
* Lasse Jensen, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 05/31/2019
* USD 406,588.00

Lasse Jensen from the Pennsylvania State University is supported by an award
from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program to develop
new theoretical tools for analyzing and predicting spectroscopy of molecules
near nanoparticles or nanostructured interfaces with surface plasmons. These may
be, for example, particles of gold that are several nanometers (billionths of a
meter) in size. Surface plasmons are collective electronic motions that strongly
absorb and scatter incoming light of particular color ranges. This project aims
at developing and distributing computational tools to analyze and understand
exactly how molecules and light interact in such circumstances. Particular
attention is paid to the unique situation that light scattering is triggered by
two incoming photons of light instead of the usual circumstance of a single
incoming photon. The resulting computational tools will be important for many
applications in catalysis of chemical reactions, conversion of light to energy,
and biological imaging. They will be disseminated to a broad scientific
community through incorporation into available chemical compuational software
packages. An interactive Nano-Optics Simulator visualization module will be
integrated into summer research experiences for high school students and made
available to a larger audience through the nanoHub, a central web portal for
nanoscience. Undergraduate students are trained in cutting-edge science by
participating in this research. Graduate students gain research expertise,
mentoring experiences, and collaborative skills through their participation in
both research and educational activities.

Understanding multi-photon properties at nano-interfaces is of great importance
for applications in all-optical switching, energy-up conversion, heterogeneous
catalysis and biological imaging. Surface-enhanced Raman scattering (SERS) and
its nonlinear analogue surface-enhanced hyper-Raman scattering (SEHRS) can be
used to provide detailed information about molecular excited state properties
down to the single-molecule level. This research addresses the main challenges
in understanding SERS and SEHRS by developing accurate and efficient methods to
directly simulate the spectra from first principles. These methods are being
used to 1) understand the enhancement mechanisms, 2) establish limits on the
possible enhancements, and 3) design plasmonic substrates that are targeted for
SEHRS applications. Dissemination is planned through incorporation into sofware
packages such as ADF and NWChem. Ultimately, this research is aimed at a
detailed molecular level understanding of nonlinear optical properties in novel
materials.