* 1362931
* Exploratory Synthesis and Reactivity of Volatile Transition Metal Complexes and Use as Molecular Precursors
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Gregory Girolami, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Tarek Sammakia
* 07/31/2018
* USD 390,000.00

With this award from the Chemical Synthesis (SYN) Program of the Chemistry
Division of NSF, Professor Gregory S. Girolami of the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign will develop new and better molecular precursors for the
chemical vapor deposition (CVD) and atomic layer deposition (ALD) of thin films.
The current work will develop new classes of transition metal compounds,
especially as they relate to the use of such molecules as precursors for the
deposition of metal diborides, metal nitrides, and metal oxides. The work will
enhance already existing interactions between Professor Girolami's group and
leading companies in microelectronics development. The research will lead to
deeper understandings of the chemistry of volatile transition metal compounds,
and could lead to better ways to deposit the wires and insulators that are key
components of modern-day computer chips. In addition, the award will contribute
to the education of a diverse group of undergraduate and graduate students, and
allow Professor Girolami to maintain his involvement in various services and
outreach activities, such as library exhibits of rare books illustrating the
history and advancement of science.

The proposed activity is aimed toward the synthesis of new volatile compounds
(especially of the transition metals), investigations of their chemical
reactivities, and studies of their volatilities and utilities as thin film
precursors. Some of the specific objectives of the current project are synthesis
of new two-coordinate complexes of the late transition elements, and the
chemical tuning of ligands to change the volatility, reducing power, and
deposition activation energies of their complexes in a systematic way. In
parallel, investigations of the use of these new CVD precursors for the chemical
vapor deposition (CVD) and atomic layer deposition (ALD) will be carried out
collaboratively with experts in these techniques.