* 1362144
* Infrared Imaging for Quantitative Defect Detection in Composite Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Francesco Lanza di Scalea, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 07/31/2018
* USD 300,000.00

Due to their superior mechanical performance, light-weight and resistance to
corrosion, composite materials are used in a variety of structural components in
the civil and military sectors. Parts made of composite materials are found in
modern aircraft (e.g., Boeing 787 and Airbus A380), ships, cars, wind turbines,
sporting goods and many other high performance structures. Unfortunately,
defects in these materials, caused by either manufacturing or operational
conditions, can greatly reduce the ultimate performance of the structure, and
even impact human safety in the case of catastrophic failures. In order to
guarantee structural performance and safety, engineers need to know the
presence, size and position of the flaws (in much the same manner that an
oncologist doctor needs to know the extent of a tumor in a patient to best cure
it). The technique of Infrared Thermography offers unique advantages for defect
detection in composite structures, including broad coverage, speed of inspection
and easily-interpretable diagnostic images. This project will advance the state-
of-the-art in Infrared Thermography by improving the determination of the size
and the position of a flaw in the composite material. This capability will allow
maintenance engineers and structures' owners to make informed decisions on
remedial steps following a damage detection event, ultimately increasing the
reliability and the safety of the structure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
goal of this project is to advance the known technique of Infrared Thermography
for the Non-Destructive Testing (NDT) of composite structures by enabling
quantitative defect detection. Current Thermographic capabilities allow for
qualitative defect detection, with quantitative predictions only based on
simplistic and unrealistic 1-D heat diffusion models. This research will develop
realistic 3-D heat diffusion models for composite materials based on a novel
concept of "Virtual Heat Source" (VHS) to simulate the excess surface heat
produced by an internal defect in the structure following active heating. A
Green's function solution to the 3-D heat diffusion problem will be also sought
to account for the most general defect cases (e.g. non-planar defects). The
models will predict the temperature field in the test object as a function of
quantifiable defect features, including (1) defect depth, (2) defect size, and
(3) defect orientation. The theoretical models will be validated and iterated by
a series of experimental thermographic tests conducted on existing specimens at
UCSD, including a unique, 9-m long composite wind turbine blade (CX-100 blade)
containing 45 well-documented defects, and several panels representative of
composite aircraft construction.