* 1362547
* Collaborative Research: Project Smart-Recon: Smart Device-Enabled Reconnaissance after Earthquakes
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2019
* Sherif El-Tawil, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Caglar Oskay
* 05/31/2019
* USD 220,876.00

Whenever a catastrophic event occurs, reconnaissance teams are deployed within
the affected areas to conduct visual inspections of buildings. The teams tag the
buildings red, yellow or green to indicate their probable condition and
permitted use. This function often takes weeks. The central premise of this work
is that widespread citizen ownership of smartphones and devices can be leveraged
to automate and significantly accelerate this first reconnaissance effort. Under
this project, research will be conducted on how to integrate measurements
performed by sensors that are typically part of most modern smart devices (e.g.
accelerometers, gyroscopes, etc.) to infer information about their motion during
a seismic event. By increasing the speed and accuracy with which building damage
may be assessed in the aftermath of natural disasters, the proposed
reconnaissance technology will reduce potential hazards and hardships to
citizens and will provide enormous cost savings. Knowing this information will
also enable first responders to optimize their response and physical inspection
teams to prioritize their efforts, thereby minimizing confusion in the aftermath
of a disaster. On the educational front, this project will have a substantial
impact on the development of human resources. By bridging civil and electrical
engineering, the students who will work on this project will attain a multi-
disciplinary education at the intersection of both
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To attain the project's objectives, new
algorithms will be developed to permit smart devices to sense (or learn) the
type of surface they are on and use that knowledge to infer information about
their motion during a seismic event. Since the motion of each device may be
contaminated by secondary motion, e.g. sliding on a surface, signal processing
techniques will be employed to investigate how ensemble observations across
multiple sensors that experience correlated motion can be used to yield highly
accurate estimates of floor motion. Studies will also be conducted to explore
the necessary level of accuracy required for device location within a building
and device-measured parameters to ensure a meaningful assessment of seismic
structural demands. The automated first reconnaissance effort will be enabled
through computation of interstory drift ratios and comparing those ratios to
known damage limits. As such, it is possible to electronically tag buildings for
their level of damage within minutes of a seismic event.