* 1362172
* Design of Mechanism and Control Strategies for Assistive Systems to Remedy the Decrease in Physical Strength of the Aged and the Disabled
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Masayoshi Tomizuka, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Robert Landers
* 07/31/2019
* USD 307,074.00

Many statistics show a growing aging population, as well as a decrease in the
strength capabilities of individuals comprising the aging population. This
research will explore control strategies for assistive exoskeletons to help
remedy the loss of strength in aging individuals' upper-extremities, allowing
this growing segment of the population (as well as the infirm and handicapped)
to live more self-sufficient, productive lives. Most human assistive
applications involve distinct phases, each with their own unique dynamics and
certain/uncertain transitions between these phases. The device that is the
subject of this research will be designed to allow for active changing of the
mechanical dynamic characteristics. In addition, it will be integrated with an
intelligent control strategy that adapts to each phase in order to ensure the
performance and safety of the combined human-device system. Results from this
research will transform the way assistive devices behave. This research involves
several disciplines including mechanical design, control theory, and
bioengineering. The multi-disciplinary nature will help develop leadership
skills of the participants in the research and positively impact engineering
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Integration of design and control of human
assistive systems is emphasized in this research. The control problem will be
formulated from the viewpoint of a hybrid system. The research encompasses the
segmentation of the dynamics of the human assistive system, the identification
of transitions, and the development of control structures appropriate for each
segment. With this research, the following knowledge will be transformed or
advanced: 1) human musculoskeletal modeling, hybrid system modeling, and mode
(phase) identification of variable dynamics in typical upper-extremity tasks; 2)
design principles for assistive devices with variable dynamic characteristics
suitable for sensing of and reactions to mode changes, including impulse-like
dynamic changes; and 3) principles and means for synthesis and analysis of
hybrid switching policies (guards) for assistive systems to ensure safety of the
user. The integration of the hybrid system theory with practical assistive
systems will be the key to advancing our understanding of dynamics in such
physical human-robot interactions.