* 1362046
* I/UCRC:  S2ERC at Georgetown University
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2020
* Ophir Frieder, Georgetown University
* Continuing Grant
* Behrooz Shirazi
* 03/31/2020
* USD 1,023,810.00

Georgetown University will be joining as a full site the Security and Software
Engineering Research Center (S2ERC) I/UCRC. S2ERC is a multi-university center
comprised of Ball State University (lead institution), Iowa State University,
and Virginia Polytechnic University. The proposed Georgetown site will bring
complimentary capabilities in forensics, advanced cryptography, privacy,
provenance, security, and governance to the S2ERC. Particular programs include
cyber threat intelligence exchange; secure network interoperability; tailored
trustworthy spaces for secure communications; social, behavioral, and economic
impediments to inter-enterprise communication; law and inter-enterprise
communication; novel architectures and algorithms of zero-knowledge action on
secret information; novel key distribution and access algorithms; and
technologies for cyber threat intelligence sharing. Information sharing is a key
focus for the technologies developed by the Georgetown site. Information sharing
compliments the software engineering work and the use of software engineering
for the development of secure software systems by Ball State and Iowa State as
well as the low-level hardware, radio security, and computer engineering work
done by Virginia Tech. Technology contributions from the center will include:
(i) Trust negotiation tools and data trust models to support the negotiation of
policy, (ii) Data protection tools, access control management, monitoring and
compliance verification mechanisms to allow for informed trust of the entire
transaction path, and (iii) Resource and cost analysis tools.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Some of the affiliates of Georgetown site are product
companies which are expected to directly benefit from the results of the
proposed research projects. This will make them more competitive and position
them well in the global marketplace. Some of the proposed research, particularly
in cyber security, will result in new educational curriculum and the training of
much needed security specialists. The PI's will make effort to involve students
from other disciplines, especially those that traditionally have a better track
record at attracting non-traditional student demographics, and expose them to
certain elements of the Computer Science. This will facilitate the engagement of
larger student population with computer science discipline. All the students
engaged in the program will benefit from the industry exposure and technology
transfer. The Georgetown site currently engages female and minority professors,
researchers, and students, as well as students from K-12. This engagement will
be further strengthened by the formation of the I/UCRC site.