* 1362959
* Azaxylylenes and Quinomethanes in Photoassisted DOS: Experimental and Theoretical Study
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Andrei Kutateladze, University of Denver
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 08/31/2017
* USD 300,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms B
program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Andrei Kutateladze of the
University of Denver is developing novel photoassisted synthetic pathways to
complex heterocycles. Underutilized by the synthetic community, photochemical
reactions hold unparalleled promise for building prohibitively strained
carbocyclic and heterocyclic scaffolds, offering expeditious access to difficult
synthetic targets not accessible via ground state chemistry. This project aims
to fill this void, developing new photoassisted methodology for the synthetic
chemist's toolbox. Photochemistry constitutes a greener chemistry because it
uses light as a key reagent. UV LED irradiators will be combined with high
throughput synthetic instrumentation to enhance the modern infrastructure for
synthesis. This program provides broad and extensive training for graduate and
undergraduate research students, combining demanding synthetic work,
photochemical and photophysical experiments, and computer-assisted molecular
modeling. The project focuses on the development of a new photoassisted
synthetic methodology which will yield topologically diverse polyheterocyclic
scaffolds decorated by various functional groups and carbo/heterocyclic pendants
rigidly or semi-rigidly held in a unique spatial configuration by these novel
core frameworks. Topologically diverse scaffolds are realized via key
photochemical steps, most prominently the intramolecular cycloaddition reactions
of azaxylylenes and quinomethanes generated via excited state intramolecular
proton transfer. An experimental and theoretical mechanistic study will be
carried out to assess the involvement of azaxylylene triplet species.