* 1362879
* Vortices, phase boundaries and defects arising in nonlinear PDE and variational models
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Peter Sternberg, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Justin Holmer
* 07/31/2018
* USD 179,999.00

In this project the PI will investigate a collection of mathematical models for
important phenomena related to continuum mechanics. These include the study of
certain energy-conserving flows, in the plane or on a curved surface such as a
sphere, that contain vortices-points on the surface around which the flow
rotates. A second project involves a model for nematic liquid crystals. These
are rod-like molecules that behave in part like a liquid and in other ways like
solid crystals. Recently there has been much activity in the materials science
community aimed at designing liquid crystals to take on desirable material
properties when deposited on a curved surface and the PI will explore how to
adapt the known models for nematics to this relatively unexplored setting of
liquid crystals on surfaces. A final project concerns a geometric problem that
stands as a paradigm for periodic pattern formation, that is for physical
systems where one expects two different states of matter to be separated by
interfaces that on the one hand tend to minimize interfacial surface area (like
a soap bubble does) and on the other hand tend to develop patterns that
replicate themselves on a small scale throughout a large
sample.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal concerns the study of nonlinear
partial differential equations and variational problems drawn from continuum
mechanics and related fields. These include the Gross-Pitaevskii system, the
Landau-deGennes model for nematic liquid crystals and a nonlocal variant of the
classic isoperimetric problem related to models for diblock co-polymers. The
goal in these investigations is to describe the behavior of solutions to these
systems in terms of lower-dimensional objects--vortices, defects or phase
boundaries within appropriate asymptotic regimes for the parameters arising in
the models. A major theme is to analyze how solutions to some of these models
behave when posed on curved surfaces. These objects--vortices, defects or phase
boundaries--largely characterize the state of the overall system. For the
project on Gross-Pitaevskii, an additional purpose is to draw a deeper
connection between this important nonlinear Schrodinger equation and the very
well-studied point-vortex problem. The point-vortex problem is more commonly
associated with incompressible Euler flow in the context of fluid mechanics but
here, focusing on periodic solutions, we intend to strengthen a bridge to a
setting in quantum mechanics. For the problem of nematics on surfaces, we hope
to give rigorous mathematical support to the growing body of work by materials
scientists studying liquid crystals deposited on curved surfaces. For the
nonlocal isoperimetric problem our goal is in part to illuminate how fine scale
periodic structures emerge as the strength of the nonlocality grows. The methods
to be employed in this program include a combination of constrained minimization
techniques, Gamma-convergence and geometric measure theory. The educational
component will include the involvement of doctoral students on many of the
projects.