* 1362208
* Orthogonal Polynomials and Random Matrices
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2018
* Doron Lubinsky, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Justin Holmer
* 06/30/2018
* USD 240,000.00

It was the physicist Eugene Wigner who in the 1950's first used eigenvalues of
random matrices to model the interactions of neutrons for heavy nuclei. Random
matrices have since become a major research area with connections to
mathematical physics, probability theory, number theory, numerical analysis, and
orthogonal polynomials. Indeed, there is a well known anecdote about an
interaction in the early 1970's between the physicist Freeman Dyson, and number
theorist Hugh Montgomery, at Princeton, where their discussions led to the
realization that there is a link between random matrices and the Riemann Zeta
function of number theory. The PI's focus is on "universal" behavior of these
random matrices: certain features seem to be independent of almost any
underlying assumption, and consequently hold very generally. This has been known
for a long time, and has been explored by both mathematical physicists and pure
mathematicians. The techniques that have been developed to study this
"universality" have been useful in many other areas of mathematics. This
proposal will develop appropriate tools from orthogonal polynomials and
classical analysis, and use these to establish "universal" features in as great
a generality as possible. There will be also be an educational component to the
project, involving collaboration with other researchers, organization of
conferences, editorial duties, and supervision of undergraduate and/or graduate
students.

The specific goals of the project include investigating the ramifications and
generalizations of a variational property recently established by the PI. It is
hoped that this will enable one to establish universality limits for Hermitian
ensembles under minimal conditions on measures with compact support, and also
for varying measures. Monotonicity in the measure, and techniques of orthogonal
polynomials are key tools in this approach. Somewhat more ambitious is the goal
of extending the variational principle to beta-ensembles. This will include
asymptotics of generalized Christoffel functions involving alternating
polynomials in several variables. Discrete analogues will also be studied.
Another major goal is developing the theory of Dirichlet orthogonal polynomials,
and investigating their application to the Lindelof hypothesis for the Riemann
Zeta function. Additional goals include investigating biorthogonal polynomials,
and related numerical quadratures; orthogonal polynomials on curves in the
plane, and Pade approximations.