* 1362357
* Collaborative Research: Assessing the Reliability of Levees in Changing Geologic Conditions
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Christopher Meehan, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 06/30/2018
* USD 85,000.00

This award is to investigate methods of assessing the risk of levee failure as a
result of variable geologic conditions along the length of the levee. As levees
are loaded during floods, water will begin to seep through both the levee and
through the levee foundation. At low flow velocities the water will pass through
the soil matrix without significantly affecting it. However, as the river water
rises, the amount of seepage increases and the velocity of the seeping water
and/or the pressure of the seeping water increases in response. This increases
the potential for erosion of soil from within the levee or its foundation, a
phenomenon known as internal erosion. If allowed to continue, internal erosion
can lead to instability and eventual failure of the levee. Current levee
evaluation methods assume relatively uniform subsurface conditions for assessing
seepage behavior. However, buried geologic structures in the near-surface soils
left behind by prehistoric creek or river channels often have a huge effect on
the seepage behavior in the levee foundation, often to the point where these
structures control the reliability of the levee with respect to internal
erosion. This award supports research to provide needed knowledge for the
development of a method for assessing the underseepage risk to levee reaches
that have variable geologic features in their foundation. The new assessment
procedures takes into account the three-dimensional aspects of the seepage flow
into these features and assesses the probability of developing seepage
conditions where internal erosion is likely to initiate. By mapping where these
features occur along a long levee reach and evaluating the risk each of these
features poses to the levee, we can evaluate the reliability of the entire levee
reach by combining the risks of the various geologic features located along
their alignment. The results of this research will assist engineers in assessing
where levees present unacceptable risk to the land they protect. Because there
are thousands of miles of levees in the United States needing evaluation and
mitigation for underseepage, this methodology has the potential to greatly
improve the efficiency at which available funds are spent to increase the
reliability of this critical aspect of our nation's
infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project transforms the analysis
strategy and methodology for assessing risk to linear geotechnical projects
constructed over varied geologic conditions. The project is formulated
specifically for levees but the methods developed will also be applicable to
other linear structures or projects. The analysis framework consists of robust
reliability analyses (response surface Monte Carlo analyses) that are applied to
individual geomorphic features to estimate the probability of key hydraulic
parameters reaching levels where the initiation of internal erosion is likely.
These probabilities will then be combined with the likelihood of other steps in
the internal erosion failure process occurring to obtain the probability of
failure due to each geomorphic feature along the project alignment. The
resulting probabilities will then be statistically combined to obtain the total
risk to the project due to the failure mechanisms considered. This methodology
provides a robust means for assessing the total risk to linear structures in a
way that accounts for length effects and the geologic hazards located along
their alignment.