* 1362126
* GOALI/Collaborative Research: Improving the Performance of Electrical Connectors Using Extremely Thin Sheets of Graphene Sandwiched Between Metal Layers
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Robert Jackson, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 07/31/2018
* USD 155,361.00

Electrical connectors are among the most critical links of any electronic and
power system, as they are needed for providing a disconnectable path for
electronic signals and/or power connections. Although connectors are being
increasingly used in today's electronic society, they can succumb to corrosion
which will lead to degraded performance if not designed and fabricated properly.
Coatings of noble metals such as gold or silver reduce the occurrence of
corrosion, but are obviously very expensive. Therefore the current work will
investigate the use of graphene, an extremely thin sheet of carbon, as a
sandwiched interlayer that will improve the reliability of the device while
minimizing the possibility of corrosion. Graphene is exclusively suited for this
use because it is a material that is mechanically strong, electrically
conductive, and impermeable to gases. This Grant Opportunity for Academic
Liaison with Industry (GOALI) collaborative research project will therefore
study the mechanical implications of graphene in electrical connectors, which
will potentially lead to the development of low-cost, high-performance
connectors for next-generation electronic and power systems. The use of graphene
as a sandwiched layer is also important for the benefit of other flourishing
applications such as flexible electronics and bendable solar cells.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigation will use both theoretical and
experimental tools in a collaborative academic and industrial environment to
research the use of graphene in multilayered systems such as electrical
connectors. As such, it will explore unresolved questions regarding the
mechanical behavior of a 2D material in a multilayered lamellar composite.
Relatively little is known about the interfacial stresses and slip that may
arise when a large-area graphene-containing lamellar system is subject to
mechanical and/or thermal loads. A classical laminate analysis approach for this
study is not applicable since (1) graphene exhibits nonlinear elastic behavior,
(2) finite adhesion (as opposed to perfect bonding) exists between graphene and
its contacting films, and (3) the atomic thinness of graphene precludes it from
accommodating strain across its thickness. To investigate graphene interlayer
mechanics, this study will combine a series of simple, robust adhesion
measurements with experimentally-validated finite element analysis (FEA)
simulations to determine the lamellar system response when exposed to tensile,
bending, and thermal loads. System-level contact resistance and fatigue analysis
will then be conducted to determine and optimize device performance. This work
will serve as a notable contribution to the field of graphene mechanics and aid
in the overall understanding of the mechanics of 2D materials. A novel
multiscale approach will be taken to translate the atomistic strain response and
nanoscale adhesion to the continuum level, which can be used as a framework for
gaining a macroscopic understanding of atomic-scale material behavior. Finally,
the development of a robust nanoscratch method to determine the adhesive energy
between graphene and arbitrary substrates can lead to increased understanding of
the factors that govern adhesion of sp2-bonded carbon structures.