* 1362234
* Renewable and Compostable Fungus Based Plastics - Establishing the Structure/Property/Processing Relationships to Facilitate Commercialization
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2018
* Robert Linhardt, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 05/31/2018
* USD 483,630.00

Renewable and biodegradable materials are a key element to a sustainable planet.
Ecovative Design, LLC (Ecovative) has created new compostable mycelium-based
(fungus) bioplastic/biocomposite materials. The material is grown at room
temperature in the dark (thus requiring little energy for processing) and
heated/dried to drive off water and inactivate the fungus. These new
biodegradable and renewable materials are being sold commercially as
replacements for expanded polystyrene and polyethylene foams that are petroleum-
based and difficult to recycle or reuse. These fungus-based biopolymers have the
potential to be used in additional markets such as transportation and recreation
that currently use petroleum-based plastics. To meet that potential, however,
the structure/property/processing relationships need to be understood. This
award supports fundamental research to provide needed knowledge on how to
optimize and tailor the properties of these new materials. The impact of this
project, which is a collaboration between Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute,
Union College, and Ecovative, will be to expand the range of applications where
highly renewable, compostable, and inexpensive materials can replace petroleum-
derived products. Ecovative's bioplastic / biocomposite materials are created
from a mixture of agricultural waste, feedstock, nutrients, and fungal
inoculant. The resulting biopolymer/biocomposites consist of a self-assembled
filamentous mass of hyphae (the filament cellular building block of mycelium
fungi) grown around and securely anchoring the agriwaste. Thus, the
biopolymer/biocomposite properties are strongly dependent on the agriwaste
morphology, the hyphae alignment, density of the biocomposites, and degree of
colonization. As in all materials development, structure/property/processing
relationships are key to optimizing physical performance. To tailor the
structure, we will explore processing techniques (electrospinning of model
growth substrate, aligned cellulose fiber substrate, growth of hyphae under
pressure, and freeze drying) that can potentially control hyphae alignment and
hyphae strength as well as biopolymer density. We will use imaging techniques
and image analysis to characterize the morphologies that develop. A range of
mechanical properties will be measured from the scale of individual hyphae and
progressing up through the bulk. The results will be compared to continuum level
composite models as a starting point to evaluate the applicability of current
models.