* 1362479
* Computational Methodologies and Strategies for the Heavy Elements
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2014,03/31/2016
* Angela Wilson, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 03/31/2016
* USD 454,212.00

Angela Wilson, of the University of North Texas, is supported by an award from
the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Chemistry
Division and the Computational and Data-Enabled Science and Engineering Program
(CDS&E) to develop a group of accurate, efficient, and easily usable quantum
mechanical computational approaches to study the heavy elements, those elements
at the bottom of the periodic table. The Division of Advanced Cyber
Infrastructure contributes funding for this award. The need for environmental
sustainability offers both opportunities and challenges for computational
chemistry research. Examples of problems that need to be addressed are the
design of environmentally benign materials and processes, the development of
alternative or renewable energy sources, the design of new, more efficient
catalysts and the replacement of often expensive critical resources that are in
short-supply. To address these major scientific challenges, information
regarding the relative energies of molecular species is often critical for the
rational analysis and design of molecular species and materials. However, one of
the long-standing challenges in computational chemistry is in achieving
chemically accurate energetics, due to the extensive computational requirements
(computer time, memory, and disk space) of the methods required, severely
limiting the size of molecules that can be studied routinely with high accuracy.
The challenges become even more substantial for heavy elements, where the
evolution of practical, high accuracy approaches has been much less developed.
The computational tools that the Wilson group develops are designed lead to new,
more accessible, and improved chemical predictions. The software and data base
implemented in this project will be widely available to the research community.

In this project, Wilson and her research group have the following goals: (1)
Developing ab initio composite schemes tailored for 4f species, whose chemistry
has received increasing scrutiny due to sustainability concerns. The composite
schemes are being implemented within freely available computational chemistry
software packages to enable dissemination to the broader scientific community.
(2) Developing and utilizing databases for gauging theoretical methodologies for
the transition metals. These datasets and databases will be made available
publicly. (3) Applying these computational tools to chemical species and
processes of relevance to environmental sustainability, including alternative
strategies for rare earth elements.