* 1362334
* Theoretical Studies of Non-Valence Correlation-Bound Anions and of Positron-Molecule Complexes
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2017
* Kenneth Jordan, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 04/30/2017
* USD 468,000.00

Kenneth Jordan, of the University of Pittsburg is supported by an award from the
Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Method program in the Chemistry
division to develop computational approaches for studying the binding of extra
electrons to molecules and clusters of molecules. Moving electrons from one
location to another is the key to processes as diverse as photosynthesis, the
operation of transistors, and corrosion. In spite of the importance of excess
electrons in biology, chemistry, and physics, how they interact with their
surroundings is still not well understood. Professor Jordan and coworkers
develop and apply new computational methods to accurately characterize
interactions between molecules and of molecules with surfaces. The project
provides training of young researchers (students and postdoctoral fellows) in
the area of computer modeling.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is
to provide a detailed understanding of the relative importance of electrostatics
and long-range correlation effects in the binding of excess electrons and
positrons by molecules and clusters. Due to its scalability on highly parallel
computer systems and its potential for giving accurate interaction energies, the
diffusion Monte Carlo method is being increasingly applied to chemical problems.
However, the diffusion Monte Carlo method requires the use of a trial wave
function to fix the nodal surface, and little is known about the magnitude of
the associated errors. This research project is designed to address this
problem, with particular emphasis on establishing the flexibility in the trial
functions for accurate prediction of interaction energies of water with
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, with the goal of extrapolating to the graphene
limit. The projects are ideally suited to provide the participating students and
postdoctoral researchers a broad background in theoretical chemistry and
computer simulations. This is a skill set that is in high demand in the
workforce. Efforts are planned to recruit more undergraduates, especially women
and members of underrepresented minorities, into the group.