* 1362975
* Post-Earthquake Aerial Reconnaissance of Geotechnical Engineering Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Dimitrios Zekkos, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 07/31/2018
* USD 389,845.00

The Tohoku (2011), Christchurch (2011), and Canterbury (2010) Earthquakes
affected two nations known for their pioneering advances in earthquake
engineering; yet both nations experienced extreme levels of destruction. These
events are poignant reminders that many lessons are yet to be learned to ensure
we can engineer truly resilient communities. Post-earthquake reconnaissance
missions are absolutely vital to the experience-based learning process required
to advance our understanding of natural hazards and their impact on geotechnical
systems. While post-earthquake reconnaissance has provided a wealth of learning
experiences, current practices suffer from drawbacks due to inefficiencies in
manual collection of large perishable datasets, high costs associated with
deployment of teams, accessibility limitations, and safety considerations.
Unmanned Autonomous Aerial Vehicles (UAAVs), using the latest technological and
computational tools available, will enable engineers to collect higher quality,
more objective, and more extensive perishable datasets on the performance of
geotechnical systems during reconnaissance missions. This project paves the way
for the use of UAAV technology for extreme-event reconnaissance of geotechnical
systems. The societal benefits associated with UAAV-based post-event
reconnaissance are significant and include more effective learning from
disasters abroad before they hit our nation, more efficient post-event responses
leading to more resilient civil infrastructure systems, and quicker economic
recovery of affected regions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A transformative framework
for post-event reconnaissance and decision making is planned based on the use of
highly-mobile and sensor-rich UAAVs. Adoption of UAAV technology represents a
paradigm shift in post-event reconnaissance because it allows geotechnical
engineers to more efficiently collect large, higher quality, and more objective
reconnaissance data. The platform will have the ability to also process large
collected datasets to (a) automatically detect and map damage features at a
regional scale; and (b) generate more accurate 3D maps of surface deformations
and geometry using LIDAR-enhanced imagery. In addition, the UAAV's ability to
communicate with field-deployed wireless sensors and collect additional site
characterization data will be investigated. Towards this end, the project aims
to prove that the UAAV and a network of wireless geophones can execute surface
wave measurements to estimate shear wave velocity using weights dropped by the
UAAV and characterize conditions to greater depths than currently feasible by
reconnaissance teams. The UAAV communication platform will also efficiently
disseminate geo-referenced data to a community of experts who can analyze the
data and provide expert advice to ground-based reconnaissance teams.