* 1362550
* SusChEM:  Fluorinated Alkoxide Complexes of Copper for C-X Bond Forming Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Linda Doerrer, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 07/31/2018
* USD 403,803.00

This Research award in the Sustainable Chemistry, Engineering, and Materials
program supports work by Professor Linda Doerrer at Boston University to develop
new C-X bond forming reactions with the earth-abundant metal copper. The local
impact of funding this proposal will increase the number of well-trained young
scientists that can pursue education and careers in STEM fields with a
particular focus on recruiting and retaining women. A new bilingual outreach
program is being designed which can potentially impact many young students
outside the Boston area. A wide impact on the chemical community is envisaged as
this work uses Cu, an abundant and environmentally sustainable metal, to break
C-H bonds, with and without O2, and make a variety of new bonds. The strategy
uses copper to replace the expensive and more toxic metals currently used for
these chemistries. Developing new reactions for chemical bond formation requires
considering not only the desired product, but all the products formed, the
energy balance of the process, as well as the overall environmental cost. Earth-
abundant metals are excellent candidates for new bond forming processes. In
previous work, a new family of molecules with the sustainable metals Fe, Co, Ni,
and Cu was extensively developed. The metals contained ligands that are
effectively teflon-coated with fluorinated groups that make them highly
resistant to decomposition reactions that non-fluorinated molecules can be prey
to. Two unexpected and exciting discoveries made with Cu provide an
understanding for common reactions forming C-C, C-O, and C-N bonds that are
being pursued. The overall impact of this work is to provide an improved
understanding of materials and methods for synthesizing high value carbon-based
compounds for use in numerous processes of societal relevance.