* 1362305
* Axion Dark Matter Experiment at High Frequency (ADMX-HF)
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Steven Lamoreaux, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 08/31/2017
* USD 846,036.00

Astrophysical and cosmological data point convincingly to a large component of
cold dark matter in the Universe, but the nature of that dark matter is still
unknown. Axions are possible dark matter candidates. This award will support the
Axion Dark Matter eXperiment - High Frequency (ADMX-HF), which searches for
Axions in the galactic halo. ADMX-HF extends the range of the ADMX experiment to
the higher frequency band that probes both Axions with trace mass and Axions
with sufficient mass to account for all the matter density in the Universe.
ADMX-HF is therefore a uniquely powerful probe of Axion dark matter. Several new
technologies have been developed in support of ADMX-HF. These have potential
applications for high-precision measurements in other fields. The group has a
history of employing undergraduates in the research, which provides training and
experience in the areas of experimental control and data analysis software,
mechanical and electronic assembly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Axions in the galactic
halo can be converted into a narrow-band microwave signal by an apparatus
consisting of a microwave-cavity resonator permeated by a magnetic field. ADMX-
HF is a small microwave cavity experiment that serves as both a pathfinder to
take first data in the 10 to 100 micro-electronvolt range and as a test-bed for
developing new cavities and quantum-limited photon detection schemes that could
be migrated to the larger ADMX platform. All major systems have been constructed
and are being integrated into the experiment with full commissioning to begin
soon. During this award period ADMX-HF should transition to routine data-taking
operation and probe the 16.5 to 66 micro-electronvolt range, bracketing the mass
of the axion that corresponds to saturation of the matter density of the
universe.