* 1362493
* RUI: Investigations of hydrogen ion solvation in acidic ionic liquids - approach to high proton conductivity in ionic liquid electrolytes
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Timothy Vaden, Rowan University
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 06/30/2018
* USD 250,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics & Mechanisms B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professors Lei Yu and Timothy Vaden of the
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at Rowan University will study the
hydrogen ion ionization, solvation, transportation, and reduction in acidic
ionic liquid solutions. These solutions can be used in fuel cells, which receive
significant attention in chemistry and engineering as they can provide
efficient, clean, and renewable energy. The application of acidic ionic liquid
solutions can potentially improve the high temperature performance of the fuel
cells, which is important in many applications. The research plan is well
integrated with an educational plan. The project will involve undergraduate
students heavily and high school students will be included in summer research
activities. The principal investigators also plan to develop curricula for
undergraduate students on batteries and fuel cells.

Nafion, a perfluorosulfonic acid membrane, is widely used as the proton exchange
membrane in fuel cells due to its excellent thermal and chemical stability,
proton conductivity, and mechanical strength. However, Nafion provides high
proton conductivity only when it is fully hydrated. At temperatures close to or
above 100 degree, fast water evaporation results in significant reduction of
proton conductivity, usually ending in cell failure. However, working at around
100 - 150 degree is desirable because higher temperature reduces catalyst
poisoning and increases fuel cell efficiency. Ionic liquids with high proton
conductivity could improve the high temperature performance and life span of the
proton exchange membrane. In this project, hydrogen ion solvation,
transportation, and reduction in ionic liquids will be studied. A series of
strong and weak acids such as bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide, boric acid,
sulfonic acids, carboxylic acids and their mixtures in imidazolium ionic liquids
will be investigated using conductivity and viscosity measurements, vibrational
spectroscopy, calorimetry, electrochemistry, and computational simulation.