* 1362641
* Synthesis, Properties and Dynamics of Near-IR BODIPY Fluorophores
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Maria Vicente, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 07/31/2018
* USD 390,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamic &amp; Mechanism B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Maria da Gra√ßa H. Vicente of the
Department of Chemistry at Louisiana State University, in collaboration with
Associate Professor Petia Bobadova-Parvanova of the Department of Chemistry at
Rockhurst University, will develop a new class of fluorescent dyes for use in
biological applications, such as in bioimaging, biosensing, and bioanalyses. The
goal of this research is to design, synthesize and then investigate the
photophysical and cellular properties of the new dyes toward the development of
near-infrared absorbing and emitting fluorophores that can be conjugated with
proteins and other biomolecules. The project involves both computational and
experimental methods to design, synthesize and evaluate the new fluorescent dyes
and their conjugates, involving organic and inorganic chemistry, spectroscopy,
chemical kinetics, computational modeling, cell and molecular biology, molecular
recognition, and biomedical imaging, and is therefore well suited to the
education of scientists at all levels. This group is also well-positioned to
provide the highest level of education and training for students
underrepresented in science. Outreach activities involving K-12 students will
also be part of the funded project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Boron dipyrromethene
(BODIPY) dyes display a rich array of photophysical and optoelectronic
properties, including intense absorption and emission profiles, high molar
extinction coefficients, high fluorescence quantum yields and long fluorescence
lifetimes; reactions of the basic BODIPY core can be used for the tuning of the
absorption and emission wavelengths, Stokes' shifts, photostability, quantum
yields, water-solubility, and for introduction of functionality for conjugation.
The proposed syntheses will afford pi-extended, beta, beta'-benzo-fuzed and
8-substituted BODIPYs. In this project, the main strategies are 1) to develop
the use of benzo-annelation at the beta, beta'-pyrrolic positions of the BODIPY,
as well as functionalizations of the 3,5-positions to increase the conjugated
pi-system, rigidity, and water-solubility of the BODIPY core, 2) to investigate
the introduction of a nitrogen atom at the 8-position via computational modeling
and the synthesis of aza-BODIPYs, and 3) investigate the functionalization at
the boron center via substitutions using various nucleophiles. The project takes
advantage of computational methods to assist the target design and to model
BODIPY mechanisms and properties, and explores new methodologies for the
synthesis and functionalizations of BODIPYs and aza-BODIPYs.