* 1362167
* I/UCRC:  IT-Enabled Design and Realization of Engineered Products and Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2014,12/31/2020
* Robert Stone, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Behrooz Shirazi
* 12/31/2020
* USD 300,000.00

Oregon State University (OSU) will be joining the Center for e-Design IUCRC as a
full university member research site. The mission and vision of the existing NSF
Center for e-Design is to research and develop methods and tools that support
the realization of a new design paradigm that can be used to develop new
engineered products and systems. This new paradigm allows design and product
realization to be customer driven in a collaborative e-design environment that
supports transparent analysis, as well as virtual simulation and prototyping.
This new design paradigm encompasses consideration of the entire life cycle of
the product or system under development. The Center researches and develops a
number of enabling technologies to support the proposed e-design paradigm. OSU
has faculty and student researchers working in areas that are synergistic with
the mission and vision of the existing Center for e-Design. The team is
interdisciplinary, including 24 researchers from seven schools and departments
across and several university colleges and institutes. Research activities of
the OSU team will especially strengthen the Centers efforts in the area of
process, product, and complex system design, analysis, and optimization. The
specific needs within the Center to be met by the OSU team are focused in the
following areas: 1) System Design Analysis and Optimization, 2) Decision
Analysis; 3) Computational Design and Innovation. The addition of OSU
strengthens the Center for e-Design and its role as a significant national
resource capable of the following results: 1) inclusion of a multi-disciplinary
viewpoint needed to ensure the development of a new paradigm of excellence in
the design of engineered products and/or systems; 2) realization of conceptual
modeling tools aimed at reducing design cycle time and ensuring maximum
achievement of design goals for human use; 3) realization of an environment for
economic and supply chain design optimization; 4) establishment of a critical
mass of expertise focused on the development of an e-Design modeling and
simulation software platform and virtual prototyping tools, as well as
strategies for achieving simulation based acquisition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed effort will contribute significantly to the successful development and
preparation of graduate and undergraduate students across seven schools and
departments. Results of this research effort will be integrated into the
educational curriculum to enrich the student learning experiences in design,
modeling and simulation, decision analysis, rapid prototyping, manufacturing,
and simulation based acquisition courses. Students associated with the Center
for e-Design will receive career development opportunities, to include
laboratory and field studies, attendance and presentations at interdisciplinary
conferences and workshops, a design colloquium series, participation in
interdisciplinary activities and journal publications, as well as training in
the ethical conduct of research. The addition of OSU to the Center contributes
to the diversity of the Center. One the co-PIs as well as over 25% of the
participating faculty are women, typically underrepresented in engineering. The
PI and other OSU faculty will emphasize involvement of women and minority
graduate and undergraduate students. Research and educational findings will be
shared with the industry and the center will work towards the technology
transfer.