* 1362529
* Collaborative Research: Online Monitoring of High-Dimensional Streaming Data Using Adaptive Order Shrinkage
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Kaibo Liu, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 07/31/2018
* USD 155,729.00

Modern manufacturing machines and systems incorporate sensors to monitor process
conditions, but the massive amount of data coming from them is often difficult
to interpret. This project investigates a new method for extracting useful
information from such data. The method potentially can reduce computational cost
and improve confidence in the predictions that are made by adapting statistical
process control (SPC) methodologies specifically for online monitoring of high-
dimensional streaming data. While this work focuses on monitoring the Chemical
Mechanical Planarization (CMP) process, the methods can also be applied to other
manufacturing applications, such as rolling, forging and casting processes. The
impacts of the methodologies will go beyond manufacturing, including but not
limited to disease surveillance in epidemiology, network traffic control,
intrusion detection and surveillance video. The success of the implementation of
the research methods will not only generate significant economic impacts to the
nation, but also prevent consequent damages through quick detection of abnormal
events. In addition, the education plan will make broad impacts on the workforce
training through curriculum and lab developments, teaching innovations, and
other outreach activities.

The objective of this collaborative research is to develop scalable and adaptive
methodologies for online monitoring of high-dimensional streaming data. In
particular, three interrelated research tasks are planned in the methodology
development: (1) Efficient scalable schemes via adaptive order shrinkage with
full observations, and the key novel idea is to first monitor each data stream
locally through some classical, computationally simple, but efficient local
detection statistics, and then combine these local procedures ?smartly? to
produce a single global monitoring scheme; (2) Adaptive sampling strategies over
the spatial domain, rather than the conventional time domain, such that the most
informative data streams are actively selected/sampled to maximize the
sensitivity and effectiveness for change detection with consideration of
resources constraints; and, (3) The engineering knowledge enhanced monitoring
scheme that integrates domain knowledge with local detection statistics
development and adaptive sampling strategy to further improve performance. The
success of this research will advance the state of the art in statistical
process control and contribute to the science base of quality improvement for
manufacturing systems.