* 1362754
* Investigating the Dynamics and Control of Electromechanical Networks with Semiresonant Latches
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Jeffrey Scruggs, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 08/31/2018
* USD 260,000.00

Many engineering technologies comprise networks of passive components, which are
subjected to unpredictable dynamic loads. Examples include engineering
structures and power-electronic circuits. For such technologies, a central
design challenge is to control their dynamic behavior in the face of random
dynamic loads or disturbances. Often, there are restrictions on the energy
available for this purpose, and the focus of this project is to investigate the
use of low-power controllable electromechanical switching devices called Semi-
Resonant Latches (SRLs). Their fundamental advantage is that they harness the
energy of external disturbances to dramatically alter the way energy flows
through an electromechanical network, while requiring very little power to
operate. Target applications include: (i) Vibration control of flexible
structures in both civil and aerospace systems; (ii) Power transmission
optimization in power-electronic networks for renewable energy technologies;
(iii) Flexible truss structures capable of adapting their shape by capturing and
re-directing disturbance energy; (iv) Structures that similarly adapt their
stiffness properties through disturbance-driven pre-stress. This work will
investigate energy-efficient techniques for effective control in such
applications. Meanwhile, research results will be integrated into a rigorous new
systems-oriented graduate curriculum in Civil and Environmental Engineering at
the University of Michigan, as well as a summer outreach program focused on
providing undergraduate research experiences to students from underrepresented
demographics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SRLs have emerged independently in several
disparate engineering applications. Electrical SRLs are built around
transistors, while mechanical SRLs employ clutches. They have the ability to
instigate near-instantaneous jumps in the voltages and currents of an electrical
network, and in the forces and velocities of a mechanical network, in response
to sensor feedback. Existing control techniques for these technologies are
mostly ad hoc design approaches, and there is considerable ambiguity regarding
the optimal use of these devices, as well as the limits on the performance they
can achieve. The primary outcome of this work will be a general and abstract
theory for optimal control of SRLs, which is applicable across the wide array of
applications in which they are used, and which exploits recent results in hybrid
control theory. A central focus will be to cultivate a solid mathematical
foundation for analysis of general SRL systems in stochastic dynamic response.
At present, such a theory only exists in very special cases. In addition to
general theoretical contributions, concepts from this work will result in a
fundamentally new class of high-performance engineering structure, capable of
disturbance-driven shape adaptation, as well as stiffness adaptation.