* 1362519
* High Energy Routes to Strained Molecules and Reactive Intermediates
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2020
* Richard Johnson, University of New Hampshire
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 07/31/2020
* USD 535,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamic &amp; Mechanism B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Richard Johnson and his students at
the University of New Hampshire Department of Chemistry will investigate the
chemistry of highly energetic intermediates, which are generated either by
protonation in superacids, hydrogen atom addition, thermolysis or electron
transfer. One important goal is to explore the cationic and free-radical
isomerization of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons. These are substances of broad
importance across science - from interstellar chemistry to materials for
molecular electronics. This project includes a high level of synergy between
theory and experiment. The proposed research represents an intellectually rich
and diverse series of computational and experimental experiences, which will
serve as effective training for graduate and undergraduate students at the
University of New Hampshire, including women and minorities. Outreach activities
will focus on the development of new undergraduate laboratory experiments which
are based on NSF-funded research across the field of chemistry.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research continues previous NSF-funded
studies. The major focus will be on rearrangements, cyclizations and coupling
reactions of aromatic compounds. Proposed superacid-catalyzed chemistry will
utilize a microwave reactor to extend the range of cationic chemistry to include
new higher energy processes. Building on recent group discoveries, which include
both superacid and free-radical catalyzed skeletal isomerizations of polycyclic
aromatic hydrocarbons, the principal investigator and his students will combine
theory and experiment to seek mechanistic understanding of these reactions. One
important goal is to demonstrate that hydrogen atoms are universal catalysts in
high temperature chemistry, just as the proton catalyzes reactions in solution.
A second major emphasis will be on methodology development and new applications
of the electron transfer model for polar bimolecular reactions which was
developed at the University of New Hampshire. This model treats all polar
bimolecular reactions as single electron transfer processes, using spin density
maps to successfully predict regiochemistry and stereochemistry in a broad array
of chemical reactions.