* 1362127
* SusChEM: Applying Redox Noninnocence:  Tetrazine-Assisted Reduction of N2
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2017
* Kenneth Caulton, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 05/31/2017
* USD 497,001.00

This project, funded by the NSF Chemical Synthesis Program, supports the
research of Professor Kenneth Caulton of Indiana University to design and
prepare new ligand structures that will wrap around low cost and sustainbable
metal centers. The resultant complexes are used in the unusual catalytic
conversion of poorly-reactive, thermodynamically-stable molecular nitrogen into
value-added products. The new ligands contains imine functionalities, which
makes them readily reducible so that they can temporarily store electrons to
favor both the capture and reduction of nitrogen. Desirable nitrogen-containing
products are formed using either organic trapping reagents or protons. The
Caulton group employs low cost elements such as iron and vanadium in their
catalysts making the materials more sustainable that those using precious metal
catalysts. This project also systematizes and utilizes new ligand connectivities
and electronic structures. Postdoctoral, graduate, and undergraduate researchers
are actively involved in both the experimental and theoretical aspects of the
project. The students receive excellent training in multiple characterizational
techniques including electron paramagnetic resonance and x-ray photoelectron
spectroscopies. Professor Caulton is active in the local chemistry community
often lecturing on Nobel Prize-winning research to diverse
audiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project focuses on the design and
experimental investigation of a new tridentate, redox-active ligand,
bis(tetrazinyl) pyridine (btzp), which acts in supporting metal-centered, multi-
electron reduction processes such as the reduction of molecular nitrogen using
the first row transition metals iron and vanadium. The imine-rich btzp ligand
serves as electron reservoir, promoting redox reactions within a very narrow
potential range. The availability of a number of nitrogen sites on the pincer
ligand leads to novel reactivity including proton-coupled electron transfer or
hydrogen atom transfer processes. The pincer nitrogens are directed outward and
have a demonstrated ability to shuttle hydrogens, which converts the bound
nitrogen to ammonia and amines; these products are commercially important
chemicals. The conversion of molecular nitrogen into value-added products is of
particular interest as it uses environmentally-friendly and low cost metals in
the active catalyst.