* 1362500
* Coarse-Graining of Complex Liquids: Structure and Dynamics
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2019
* Marina Guenza, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 06/30/2019
* USD 316,868.00

Marina Guenza at the University of Oregon Eugene is supported by an award from
the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program focusing on
understanding the relation between molecular structure and macroscopic
properties of synthetic polymeric materials and large biological molecules.
Computer simulations are useful to provide information about the microscopic
molecular structure of a liquid, but describing the macroscopic properties that
are measured experimentally exceeds the computational capabilities of
traditional simulations. New computational strategies are being developed here
to accelerate simulations and connect the molecular structure to the macroscopic
properties for different temperatures and other thermodynamic conditions. This
provides an important tool to study the properties of novel materials and
biological molecules such as proteins, DNAs, and RNAs.

This project uses a coarse-graining theory with the desirable property that
structural and thermodynamic consistency are maintained throughout coarse-
graining. Novel applications include the search for macromolecular structures
that self-assmble in a soft crystal lattice of desired geometry. An original
approach is used for the coarse-grained dynamics of biological macromolecules,
specifically protein, DNA, and RNA, that is based on the Langevin equation for
the dynamics of macromolecules in solution. This method also accounts for the
presence of local conformational barriers and for internal hydrophobic regions.
Theoretical predictions are compared to experimental data from collaborators at
the University of Oregon.