* 1362926
* Development of next generation quantum master equation and generalized master equation approaches
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2014,10/31/2017
* Seogjoo Jang, CUNY Queens College
* Standard Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 10/31/2017
* USD 402,616.00

Seogjoo Jang of CUNY Queens College is supported by an award from the Chemical
Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Chemistry division to
develop new classes of quantum master equation (QME) and generalized master
equation (GME) that can bridge molecular level quantum dynamics with larger
length and longer time scale dynamics. This is achieved by extending the
recently developed polaronic QME (PQME) for a broader regime of parameters, and
by developing new coarse-grained QME/GME approaches that can incorporate highly
accurate calculation at small length scales into efficient calculation for
larger length scales. Another objective of the research is to enhance the
reliability and capability of QME/GME approaches. Jang and his coworkers are
also developing a new kind of QME that can utilize information on adiabatic
electronic states and their derivative couplings directly. Atomistic molecular
dynamics simulations are being conducted to examine and modify the conventional
form of the exciton-bath Hamiltonian for the photosynthetic light harvesting
complex 2 (LH2) of purple bacteria.

The methods developed in this research, quantum and generalized master equation
approaches, offer natural frameworks for studying exciton and charge carrier
dynamics in complex molecular environments, such as natural light harvesting
complexes and organic photovoltaic devices. Jang and his research group are
taking these approaches to a new level so that they can be applied in a more
accurate and realistic manner without relying on simple model systems. The
result -- unified and reliable descriptions of quantum relaxation and transport
dynamics across a wide range of length/time -- will help elucidate the quantum
effects hidden in what appears to be the purely classical behavior of large
scale exciton and charge transport dynamics in complex molecular systems.