* 1362899
* Advanced Manufacturing Project-Learning in Focused Innovation (AMPLiFI)
* EDU,DUE
* 02/15/2014,01/31/2017
* Marc Madou, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 01/31/2017
* USD 300,000.00

This project is creating a flexible technician education framework that draws on
the experience of the National Network Manufacturing Institutes (NNMIs) to
prepare the workforce for the advanced manufacturing technical occupations of
the future. The framework is being developed and piloted for curricular
materials focused on Additive Manufacturing (AM) in a manner that is broadly
applicable to technician education programs in other technical areas to be
determined under the NNMI program. In addition the framework and associated
knowledge, skills and competencies are being built around broadly accepted
national and international standards (e.g. ASTM, ISO) in order to ensure broad
industry recognition and acceptance. A series of workshops centered on deploying
6 modules across a variety of existing courses in AM are being held, and these
are serving as the baseline for evaluating the efficacy of the
framework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit :&lt;br/&gt;Emerging advanced
manufacturing educational efforts traditionally lag behind the required
technician competencies in the industrial sector, which increases the shortage
of qualified technicians and slows the adoption of new advanced manufacturing
technologies. This project is establishing a system for the creation of
educational support materials that can be accelerated into the educational
marketplace. It is anticipated that this model can be replicated and utilized to
seamlessly integrate and align technician education to new emerging technologies
that mature out of the NNMI efforts. This project is providing a framework to
structure the technical educational elements and streamline the delivery format
for technical education while addressing the needs of an industry driven
technically competent workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts
:&lt;br/&gt;The materials utilize components of deeper learning to engage
students from a broad variety of cultural and socio-economic demographics.
Students solve complex engineering related issues through a process that fosters
a sense of ownership as well as responsibility. Project personnel work closely
with an Industry Advisory Council (IAC) comprised of industry stakeholders to
identify appropriate content, and the IAC is providing ideas that capture the
regional applications of advanced manufacturing. The flexible framework model is
maximizing integration into existing curriculum materials by creating modules.