* 1362284
* Realizing 3-D Printing and Patterning of Metals at Room Temperature
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2014,02/28/2019
* Jacob Jones, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Steve Schmid
* 02/28/2019
* USD 315,001.00

This award supports fundamental research on processing-structure-property
relationships of conductive inks for 3D printing of metals at or near room
temperature. The basis for this work is the recent discovery and demonstration
that liquid metals can be printed into free-standing structures that are
stabilized mechanically by a surface oxide. The research will focus on new
conductive inks that can be dispensed at modest temperatures but solidify into
solid, mechanically robust metallic structures after the structures are printed.
The research team will study the formulation, dispensing, and solidification of
these inks using a number of characterization techniques to elucidate the
solidification process. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research results will provide
the knowledge and understanding necessary to meet a critical need to develop
metallic components for additive manufacturing (3D printing). Additive
manufacturing enables users to directly design, prototype, and print objects on
demand. It is considered a transformative technology that is championed by
President Obama to help keep America competitive in the manufacturing sector.
Although metals are important materials for electronics, optics, and structural
materials, current technologies to 3D print metals are expensive and rely on
high temperatures. The research will enable for the first time 3D printing of
metals at or near room temperature. In addition to supporting a graduate
student, the project will involve undergraduate researchers recruited from a
diverse group of engineering students at North Carolina State (NC State). The
research team will partner with the NC State Hunt Library and the NC State
Laboratory for Additive Manufacturing and Logistics to contribute to a number of
integrated outreach activities designed to expose a broader audience to the
science and technology of 3D printing.