* 1362136
* Role of Bismuth Promoters in Heterogeneous Pt-Bi and Pd-Bi Catalysts: Computational Insights into Main Group Promotion
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Jordan Schmidt, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 08/31/2018
* USD 407,769.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Catalysis program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor J. R. Schmidt of the University of Wisconsin-Madison is
examining the role of "promoter" additives in metal surface catalytic reactions.
Promoters are elements or compounds that are added to catalysts to enhance the
efficiency (both in terms of energy and the use of materials) of a wide variety
of chemical transformations. Although such promoters are used broadly within the
chemical industry, their detailed roles are often poorly understood. This
project is using computer-based modeling to identify the molecular level
mechanisms by which promoters influence chemical reactions, and to exploit this
insight to advance the development of novel and efficient chemical
transformations. Such work could lead to new and more energy efficient
industrial chemical synthesis processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this
study focuses on the role of bismuth and other p-block promoters in platinum-
group metal catalyzed aerobic alcohol oxidation. Using a combination of density
functional theory and kinetic modeling, several hypotheses of promotion are
being critically evaluated. These results are unified to develop validated
"theories" for p-block promotion in order to facilitate the discovery of novel
selective oxidation reactions and to optimize existing catalytic oxidation
processes. An outreach program, developed by Professor Schmidt, is exposing
undergraduate students to computational chemistry methods using a web-based
software package, with an emphasis on catalysis. The broader impacts of this
work thus include both the potential for optimization of platinum-group metal
catalysts for a wide variety of industrially-relevant chemical transformations,
as well as the training of undergraduate and graduate students, both at
University of Wisconsin and around the country, in modern computational methods.