* 1362696
* Performance of Buildings on Liquefiable Soils:  Evaluation and Mitigation
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2018
* Abbie Liel, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 05/31/2018
* USD 363,492.00

The primary objective of this award is to study the seismic response of
buildings on liquefiable ground, and the effectiveness of liquefaction
mitigation strategies in the context of building performance. Earthquake-induced
liquefaction can cause substantial damage to buildings and infrastructure
systems. Successful mitigation of this risk requires a reliable assessment of
the liquefaction hazard and its consequences. This study combines physical and
numerical modeling in geotechnical and structural engineering. Centrifuge
experiments will be conducted to simulate realistic loading conditions on scaled
models. The data from these tests serve two purposes: first, to improve
understanding of the interaction between the liquefiable soil, foundation, and
superstructure; and second, to calibrate and validate numerical models that are
used in engineering practice. This research sets the groundwork for a
performance-based liquefaction mitigation design methodology, thereby
contributing to the earthquake resilience of urban areas in the U.S. and
internationally. Through collaboration with the Colorado Alliance for Graduate
Education and the Professoriate, outstanding students from underrepresented
groups in engineering will be recruited. The project will also launch a new
collaboration between the University of Colorado and Cambridge University,
England, which will enhance the scope of the investigation and create a
coordinated international effort to reduce liquefaction risk.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study constitutes a fundamental evaluation of the
seismic performance of shallow founded structures on softened ground and the
effectiveness of remediation strategies. A primary goal is to evaluate the
potential tradeoffs of liquefaction mitigation, which, on the one hand, reduce
pore pressure generation and settlements but, on the other hand, increase ground
shaking intensity, possibly resulting in structural nonlinearity and damage. To
accomplish this goal, a series of centrifuge tests will be conducted to study
the performance of inelastic, moment-resisting structures, with and without
mitigation, on liquefiable sand. Numerical simulations of the experiments will
assess and improve the capabilities of existing predictive tools in capturing
soil-foundation-structure-interaction and the influence of the properties of
soil, structure, ground motion, and mitigation technique on buildings
engineering demand parameters. For the first time, building nonlinearities and
damage potential will be considered in evaluating liquefaction hazard,
consequences, and mitigation. The development of well-calibrated predictive
tools will transform the ability of our profession to reliably evaluate building
response on softened ground and will build a strong foundation for the eventual
development of performance-based mitigation design methodologies. The team will
organize web-based seminars examining liquefaction from soil, structural, and
societal perspectives to share knowledge with engineers and researchers.