* 1362535
* Assembly and spectroscopic interrogation of large atomic and molecular clusters in helium droplets
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Andrey Vilesov, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 07/31/2017
* USD 511,565.00

In this award, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms A
(CSDM-A) Program of the Division of Chemistry, Professor Andrey Vilesov of the
University of Southern California and his graduate student researchers are
conducting experiments to study the behavior of atoms and molecules in the
unique environment of liquid helium droplets. The results from these experiments
are of fundamental interest to the physical chemistry and condensed matter
physics communities. Graduate students working on this project will receive
training in high vacuum science, cryogenics and laser science. Prof. Vilesov is
active in educational innovation on his campus, and he mentors a diverse group
of young scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prof. Vilesov and his research group
are continuing work on atomic and molecular properties of species isolated in
the unique environment of helium nanodroplets. Prof. Vilesov and his group will:
(1) conduct single droplet ionization experiments; (2) study heat transfer in He
droplets; (3) image very large He droplets (using x-ray scattering at SLAC); (4)
study the structure, properties and formation of metal clusters confined to He
droplets; (5) investigate the formation of so-called foam of Mg in He droplets;
(6) study the magnetic properties of species confined to He droplets; and (7)
investigate the ability of He nanodroplets to gently deposit unusual species
onto surfaces. The young researchers working in the group of Prof. Vilesov will
receive training in experimental physical chemistry.