* 1362111
* Reactivity and Selectivity in Radical Polar Crossover Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Gregory Friestad, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Tarek Sammakia
* 07/31/2018
* USD 420,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Synthesis program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Gregory K. Friestad of the University of Iowa is
establishing a series of new carbon-carbon bond construction reactions for
synthesizing biologically active compounds. This effort involves fundamental
reactivity studies in reactions which proceed via both radical and polar
reactions, so-called "radical-polar crossover reactions," and their application
to prepare complex nitrogen-containing compounds. A broader impact of this work
is the application of free radical reactions to many subdisciplines of
chemistry. The types of compounds that can be prepared through the new reactions
have broader impacts on health sciences research, particularly in drug
discovery, thereby improving the well-being of individuals in society. Combining
radical and ionic transformations into one operation saves time, energy, and
materials, with broader impact upon sustainability of chemical synthesis. The
project is also developing more diverse personnel resources, which assists in
the economic growth of industries dependent upon science and technology
education and training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is expanding the
versatility of stereoselective radical additions to imino compounds, so that
heterocyclic groups may be present in the precursors, producing structures
bearing chiral amines in combination with heterocycles. These developments are
being used in synthesis of biologically active compounds of importance in
medicinal chemistry. Additional studies are developing reactions in which the
oxygen- or nitrogen-containing heterocyclic structural units are formed during
the new reactions, using combinations of radical and ionic bond constructions in
a single operation. Professor Friestad is also developing approaches to increase
outreach between the university and neighboring communities with significant
populations of minorities, which are traditionally underrepresented in physical
sciences with the goal of building science interests and experiences among
people of more diverse backgrounds.