* 1362006
* Theory and models for electronic dynamics in organic type II semiconductors
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Eric Bittner, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 08/31/2018
* USD 420,000.00

Eric Bittner from the University of Houston is supported in an award by the
Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Division of
Chemistry and by the Condensed Matter and Materials Theory program in the
Division of Materials Research to conduct research in charge and energy
transport in photo-excited materials of interest for solar energy conversion.
The goal of this work is to understand the behavior of electrons, nuclei, and
light interacting in organic polymers, particularly those where the repeating
parts of the polymers have small defects or are strongly disordered or come into
contact with other materials. This work is to gain insight and advance materials
design in energy applications and devices, e.g., plastic devices that generate
electricity from sunlight. While quantum mechanical processes in these systems
occur on an ultra short (10^-15 s) time scale, they directly influence device
behavior emerging on longer time scales (mesoscales). However, lack of detailed
understanding and control of these mesoscale processes has thus far prevented
researchers from fully exploiting these effects. To this end, this research
seeks understanding of how emergent phenomena arise due to interactions beyond
on longer time and length scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Bittner group's work
in this field is the development of advanced theoretical methods for studying
charge and energy transfer processes initiated by the absorption of photons. The
electronic and optical properties of conjugated macromolecules are due to the
delocalized pi-electron systems involving strong electron correlations and
coupling of electrons to molecular structure in oorganic semiconductors. This
project explores how quantum coherence and quantum entanglement both impact the
initial charge separation following photoexcitation and help to suppress
subsequent recombination of charges once they have formed. The theoretical
approach combines the use of lattice models to describe the mesoscale structure
of polymer/fullerene bulk heterojunction interafaces -- parameterized using ab
initio and experimental data -- and time-convolutionless master equation methods
to describe non-adiabatic interstate electronic transition as driven by phonons.
This approach is being benchmarked against a series of model donor-bridge-
acceptor molecules originally studied by Closs and Miller in their classic work
that confirmed the Marcus inverted regime. Other components include developing
theoretical models for excitons/phonon polaritons in organic aggregates. Work is
continuing in polariton Bose Condensation in J-aggregatea, especially in light
of recent experiments by Bulovic's group at MIT. An additional aspect of the
work is in the photophysics of excitons in confined geometries, where one can
exploit the Purcell effect to prepare states that are otherwise inaccessible to
experimental probes.