* 1362663
* Meeting: Broadening Participation at the Society for Integrative and Organismal Biology in Austin Texas In January 2014
* BIO,IOS
* 12/15/2013,11/30/2014
* Brian Tsukimura, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 11/30/2014
* USD 25,000.00

The goal of the Broadening Participation Committee (BPC) of the Society for
Integrative and Comparative Biology (SICB) is to increase participation and
membership of individuals from underrepresented groups (URGs), and to expand
their capabilities as future researchers. The BPC has succeeded in measurably
increasing participation of URG at annual meetings of SICB over the last four
years. These efforts are aimed at promoting dialogue among SICB members about
the benefits of having a diverse society and working together to build an
inclusive community of integrative and comparative biologists. The success of
these efforts is due in part by the BPC recognizing a need for, and implementing
a series of professional development workshops, and by the society providing
travel funds for individuals from URG to attend the annual meetings and
participate in these workshops. This award will provide partial travel support
for more than 40 members of URG plus six workshop organizers to attend the
annual meeting of SICB to be held in Austin, TX, January 3-7, 2014. Two
professional development workshops, "Recruitment strategies to obtain a diverse
and thriving lab and department," and "Writing grants and manuscripts in a
timely manner," are on the meeting agenda and open to all members of the
society. These topics for professional development were identified by members
from URG who attended previous annual meetings of SICB. Individuals from URG who
receive a travel award will attend both workshops. The workshop organizers were
selected to represent academic diversity (including liberal arts, MA degree and
doctoral degree institutions; and assistant professors) and diversity across
URG. The BPC succeeded in securing the participation of six women, and three
individuals from URG (an African American, a Hispanic, and an Alaskan Native).
This level of diversity for BPC activities is equal to or higher than that of
typical scientific professional organizations. The workshops will address best
practices to increase recruitment of individuals from URG, and increase the
productivity of URG postdoctoral and junior faculty members. The second workshop
on timely grant writing is aimed specifically at retention of postdoctoral
researchers and assistant professors by investing in their success as
independent researchers. The BPC has identified retention of these relatively
junior scientists from URG as a particular challenge. These workshops and other
activities of the BPC will increase recruitment and retention of URG at annual
meetings as well as at the academic institutions of SICB members. These
professional development activities will serve to publicize the benefits of
belonging to a diverse and culturally aware scientific society, and will enable
future participation of URG in leadership roles, and build community within the
society. The impact of SICB BPC activities over the past four years will be
published online and submitted to "Integrative and Comparative Biology", the
journal of the Society for Integrative and Comparative Biology, thereby
disseminating results of these efforts to the scientific community and the
general public.