* 1362942
* Collaborative Research: Investigating Structural Dynamic Coherences of Transition Metal Complexes in Photochemical Processes
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2014,12/31/2017
* Felix Castellano, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 12/31/2017
* USD 180,000.00

In this project funded by Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms program of
Chemistry Division, Professors Lin Chen of Northwestern University and Felix
Castellano of North Carolina State University are developing spectroscopic and
synthetic methods to investigate how multiple metal centers in transition metal
complexes (TMCs) act cooperatively to convert and accumulate energy from
sunlight to multiple electronic potentials that ultimately will drive catalytic
reactions for generating fuels. The proposed research is in line with the NSF
Strategic and Performance Goals to transform the frontiers and innovate for
society. The knowledge obtained through the proposed studies could be
transformative for the chemical sciences and will greatly enhance our ability to
rationally design chemical materials/devices for catalysis, optoelectronics and
energy sustainability. The research activity engages university graduate
students to use the advanced laser facility for characterization and advanced
chemistry lab facilities for materials synthesis, providing them with a unique
training ground for the development of multidisciplinary expertise. Such
training is urgently needed for the next generation STEM workforce in order to
explore the frontier of chemical science and to keep the US globally competitive
at the frontiers of knowledge. The proposed research/education activities are
integrated with public outreach and mentoring aimed at young scientists,
including undergraduate students inside and outside of the University
(especially female, minority, and underrepresented local college students)
through collaborative training, summer school and education focused symposiums.

This work aims at controlling materials processes at the level of electrons by
engineering structural factors to influence intramolecular electronic
interactions and system-bath interactions on the time scale of coherent
electronic and atomic motions The mechanistic details enabling multiple-electron
conversion will be investigated by newly developed two-dimensional electronic
spectroscopy (2DES) and optical anisotropy spectroscopy applied to new molecular
architectures. The proposed work aims at understanding intrinsic electronic
couplings between the multiple metal centers TMCs and their influence on
photochemical reactions. The work will engineer intrinsic coherent motions in a
series of di-platinum complexes via systematically varying structural factors,
such as the inter-platinum distances as well as the steric
hindrance/energetics/size/conjugation of the ligands, resulting in systematic
changes of the energy levels of the molecular orbitals. The researchers will use
external perturbations, i.e. laser pulses, to shift electron density on a time
scale faster than the period of the ground state Pt-Pt stretch, and follow with
systematic investigations of dipole correlations by transient optical
anisotropy, electronic couplings by two-dimensional electronic spectroscopy.
They will further investigate the implications of these coherent motions in
chemical and photochemical processes.