* 1362214
* Cross-conjugated 3d and 4d Metal-alkynyl Frameworks: Synthesis and Properties
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Tong Ren, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Tarek Sammakia
* 08/31/2018
* USD 472,000.00

Non Technical Summary The new compounds developed in this project serve several
purposes. They can be further incorporated into electronic and opto-electronic
materials that are of interest to the semiconductor industry. Exquisite details
about how electrons move around within these molecules will enable scientists to
develop better electrochemical catalysts for processes closely related to
renewable energy such as hydrogen production and carbon dioxide fixation. In
addition, Professor Ren and his students will develop new teaching modules that
reflect the heightened interest in sustainable chemistry for Purdue's Science
Express program, which delivers laboratory equipment sets to high schools in the
rural areas that lack resources.

Technical Summary In this project funded by the Chemical Synthesis Program of
the Chemistry Division, Professor Tong Ren and coworkers at Purdue University
will explore the synthetic chemistry of cross-conjugated carbon rich
organometallics based on the frameworks of [M]-bridge-[M], where [M] is either a
diruthenium species supported by N,N'-bidentate ligands, or cyclam complexes of
3d metals such as Cr, Fe and Co, and the bridge is either geminal-
hex-3-ene-1,5-diyne (gem-DEE), or its derivatives. Specific aims include (1) the
synthesis and characterization of diruthenium-(gem-DEE)-diruthenium type
compounds and oligomeric derivatives; (2) the synthesis and characterization of
M(cyclam)-(gem-DEE)-M(cyclam) type complexes with M as Cr, Fe or Co; and (3) the
elaboration of electronic couplings between metal units across the cross-
conjugated bridge. This research project will involve a team of talented
graduate and undergraduate students from diverse backgrounds. Professor Ren and
students will also be intimately involved with Purdue's Science Express program.