* 1362256
* The Science Underpinning Anomalous Scaling Laws of Strength and Toughness in Nanocellulose Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Teng Li, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* kara peters
* 07/31/2017
* USD 400,000.00

The quest of materials possessing both high strength and high toughness is
perpetual in advanced material design. Unfortunately, these two mechanical
properties are generally mutually exclusive. For example, for metals and alloys,
their toughness is usually inversely proportional to their strength. As a
result, in practice, the design of strong and tough materials is inevitably a
compromise. So far, a general and feasible mechanism to address the conflict of
strength vs. toughness still remains elusive. This project plans to shed insight
on a possible strategy resolving the conflict of strength vs. toughness by
investigating the fundamental science of the anomalous but desirable scaling law
of mechanical properties of cellulose nanopaper: both its strength and toughness
increase as the cellulose fiber size decreases. These unique features combined
with the intrinsic biodegradability, low-cost and scalable manufacturing of
cellulose paper can have significant impact on bottom-up design of high
performance materials with desirable mechanical properties.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research plan will be carried out in a systematic
framework integrating multi-scale mechanics modeling and complementary
experiments and consists of two thrusts. The overarching goal of Thrust 1 is to
establish a quantitative understanding of the underpinning mechanism of both
strong and tough cellulose nanopaper, by investigating the mechanics of
cellulose molecular chains, nanofibrillated cellulose fibers and cellulose fiber
network via multi-scale mechanics modeling and complementary experiments. The
fundamental understanding from Thrust 1 will lay out a solid foundation that
motivates and enables the research efforts in Thrust 2, which focuses on
generalizing the underpinning mechanism of attaining both strength and toughness
to guide the exploration of a class of strong and tough materials with other
highly desirable multi-functionalities. Interdisciplinary graduate student
training will enable to access world-class imaging and metrology facilities at
NIST, and to learn from the vast expertise and state-of the-art technology from
a world leading paper company. Outreach activities will be conducted via
iMechanica.org, the largest international online community of mechanics with
50,000+ registered users.