* 1362281
* Desulfitative Redox Catalysis:  A New Paradigm for Carbon-Carbon and Carbon-Nitrogen Bond Formation
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2017
* Lanny Liebeskind, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 06/30/2017
* USD 510,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Catalysis program of the Chemistry
Division of the National Science Foundation, Professor Lanny S. Liebeskind and
his coworkers of Emory University are developing a new, atom-efficient,
environmentally-sensitive catalytic system for the production of amides (and
peptides), esters, and ketones directly from carboxylic acids. This new reaction
system possesses a number of the key attributes that are desired for
environmentally sustainable 21st century "green" chemical synthesis: the
minimization of chemical waste, the avoidance of hazardous reagents, the use of
benign solvents and reagents, the use of environmentally sustainable feedstocks,
and the use of ambient temperatures to maximize energy efficiencies.

This new reaction system currently under development relies, in part, on the use
of non-toxic redox organocatalysts that are easily recycled using oxygen in air.
In combination with an inexpensive phosphite, the redox organocatalyst drives
the dehydrative formation of carbon-carbon, carbon-nitrogen, and carbon-oxygen
bonds from carboxylic acids. The broader societal impact of this work derives
from its introduction of a new "redox organocatalytic" paradigm for chemical
synthesis that establishes an environmentally sustainable means by which
hydroxylic reactants, like carboxylic acids, can be transformed into value added
materials like amides/peptides, esters, and ketones using "green" chemistry
principles. It can positively impact chemical synthesis across various domains
(commodities, fine chemicals, biologicals) and its development represents an
excellent tool for training students and postdoctoral associates in the rigors
of critical scientific thinking and analysis.