* 1362837
* Motion Guidance for Ocean Sampling by Underwater Vehicles using Autonomous Control and Oceanographic Models with Forecast Uncertainty
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Kayo Ide, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 08/31/2018
* USD 504,600.00

This project addresses fundamental questions on how to select the optimal
locations to collect observations and how to ensure that the sensor platforms
travel to these locations along informative paths in an expansive, dynamic
process such as the ocean. The significance of the proposed research lies in the
observation that climate processes occur on long time scales. Understanding
these processes requires a combination of ocean models and observations, which
can be collected over large space-time volumes by fleets of high-endurance
autonomous submarines that steer intelligently to maximize the utility of their
measurements. Underwater vehicles that sample the ocean interior are important
for understanding ocean processes in general, because -- unlike weather
prediction in the atmosphere -- the subsurface ocean environment is difficult to
sample remotely. Thus, the long-term goal of this project is create new path-
planning strategies for unmanned, mobile sensor platforms to measure
information-rich but undersampled dynamic processes in the ocean. Indeed the
methods developed in this project will be readily transferrable to operational
data assimilation systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific objective of the
research is to apply tools from data assimilation, nonlinear control, and
dynamical systems theory to design sampling trajectories for accurate estimation
and prediction of circulating ocean currents represented by a system of
vortices. The technical approach is to (1) synthesize Lagrangian analysis based
on deterministic, dynamical systems theory with data assimilation techniques
that properly account for uncertainty via a Monte Carlo approach; (2) construct
a theoretically justified framework for multi-vehicle control using a fluids-
inspired strategy based on the nonlinear feedback control of active
singularities; and (3) formulate an optimal sampling framework to generate long-
endurance vehicle trajectories using Lagrangian descriptors of the flow geometry
while maximizing flowfield observability. The intellectual significance lies in
the anticipated contributions to the practice of Lagrangian data assimilation
and nonlinear feedback control for the guidance of autonomous sampling platforms
by incorporating uncertainty. Lagrangian analysis methods are well suited for
sampling deterministic dynamical systems with autonomous sensor platforms
because they use platform motion as a sensor measurement and do not require
onboard flow sensors. By relaxing the deterministic assumptions of the observing
system, an ensemble-based, probabilistic approach to planning with Lagrangian
analysis promises to improve the accuracy of the forecast of the estimated
processes. A principled design of path-planning algorithms based on artificial
flow potentials will allow sampling platforms to exploit whenever possible the
underlying motion of ocean currents to maximize endurance.