* 1362854
* Expanding the Chemistry of Cerium and Uranium in their Highest Oxidation States: Electronic Structure, Redox and Organometallics
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Eric Schelter, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 07/31/2017
* USD 360,000.00

This research award in the Chemical Synthesis (SYN) program supports work by
Professor Eric Schelter at the University of Pennsylvania to synthesize
molecular cerium and uranium compounds. Cerium oxides are used broadly as active
supports in heterogeneous catalysis. Applications of these supports range from
automotive catalytic converters to the production of hydrogen gas. Knowledge of
molecular cerium and uranium compounds will potentially contribute to new
materials and device development such as solid oxide fuel cells. New
applications of cerium and uranium will also add economic value to light rare
earth ores, given the abundance of those elements in domestic reserves of rare
earth metals. Since rare earth materials are used broadly in both renewable
energy technology, and military applications such as radar and avionics, the
increased production of lanthanides domestically is expected to contribute to
national security. In addition to training graduate and undergraduate students,
Professor Schelter works with the Chemical Heritage Foundation to raise public
awareness on the importance of lanthanides and actinides.

The syntheses of molecular cerium and uranium compounds in their highest
oxidation states will support studies of their unique electronic structures,
bonding and reactivity. The characteristics of ligands that support cerium(IV)
cations will be identified using electrochemistry and density functional theory.
That knowledge will be applied to prepare strongly stabilized cerium(IV)
compounds including organometallics. Uranium(V) and uranium(VI) compounds with
axial symmetry will be prepared through novel multi-electron reactions. The
electronic structures and physicochemical characteristics of the uranium
compounds will be evaluated for signatures of metal-ligand covalency. The
reactivity of the new compounds prepared toward small molecule substrates will
be probed and contrasted with transition metal, actinide and lanthanide
counterparts.