* 1362504
* Charge transfer, injection and mobility in organic semi-conducting materials: modeling for insight on mechanistic aspects
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2019
* Barry Dunietz, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 06/30/2019
* USD 325,683.00

Barry D. Dunietz at Kent State University is supported in an award from the
Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program to develop and
implement computational models to study electron transfer and transport
processes involved in solar-to-electric energy conversion using organic
materials. The modeling supports related experimental efforts for synthesizing
the materials and fabricating devices with the goal of improving their energy
conversion efficiency. The project involves outreach activity that seeks to
engage large numbers of high school students in a college-level curriculum and
to expose the students to research within the chemistry department. The
investigator partners with high schools in the area and collaborates with Kent
State University (KSU)-based programs to effectively integrate the young
students into the teaching and research activities of the chemistry department.

The Dunietz group develops and implements computational models to study electron
transfer and transport (ETT) processes involved in solar-to-electric energy
conversion using organic semiconducting materials. The computational approach
addresses challenges in modeling charge transfer electronic states and the
effects of coupling to the environment such as solvation, binding to electrodes
and thenmorphology of organic thin films. The modeling requires the appropriate
treatment of the underlying states, the coupling to extended systems, and the
reaction kinetics induced by exciton generation. Both density functional theory
and time-dependent density functional theory are used as well as molecular
dynamics tools for ETT through organic solid crystals. The group investigates
related spectroscopic studies and physical measurements to benchmark this
approach and to provide mechanistic insight into ETT processes. Ultimately the
studies combined with related experimental efforts have the potential to improve
organic photo-voltaic applications.