* 1362119
* Planning Grant:  I/UCRC for Creating a New Research Site of the I/UCR Center for Visual and Decision Informatics
* ENG,EEC
* 04/15/2014,12/31/2015
* Noel Greis, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Thyagarajan Nandagopal
* 12/31/2015
* USD 14,560.00

The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill is proposing to join the I/UCRC
for Visual and Decision Informatics as a new research site, bringing together
expertise in coastal hazards and data management with visual and data analytics
and decision science. A planning grant workshop involving potential industry
partners, academic researchers from the existing Center and UNC, NSF, and
evaluators will be organized to develop the research and operation plan that
defines member activities, describes member benefits and responsibilities,
identifies specific industry needs, and designs initial research projects. A
large gap exists between rapidly advancing capabilities for predicting coastal
hazards and the products made available to decision makers for interpreting the
predictions and taking action. Whether used for risk assessment, protection
system design, or event forecasting, advanced coastal hazard prediction models
are complex, computation intensive, and data intensive. Thus far, both model and
product developments have mostly been driven by modeler needs as opposed to end-
user needs. As a result, advances in predictive modeling have been slow to
translate into products that can help save lives, protect property and enhance
coastal sustainability and resiliency. New analytical methods, techniques, and
models are needed for both mining the data as well as curating the data for
future and as yet unforeseen uses. By joining the existing CVDI I/UCRC, critical
research and applications between visual and data informatics and coastal
hazards and risk will be posed and addressed. Academic and industry researchers
will come together to tackle problems that may only be tractable with a broad
and multidisciplinary perspective motivated by industry needs and requires
academic expertise, technology, and resources. It is expected that the projects
will result in significant leaps forward in understanding and improving risk
assessment and management of coastal resources, assets, and people in risk-prone
coastal areas, and will motivate business opportunities with startup and spin-
off potential. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new understanding, techniques, models,
and data strategies that emerge from individual Center projects will help in
improving the risk management of coastal resources. Since non-governmental
insurers back much of the protection of coastal assets and investors, helping
relevant industry sectors find new ways to better understand, manage, and
diversify their risks is essential for long-term sustainability and maintenance
of coastal resources. These resources will experience increasing pressures in
the future, due to demographic, environmental, economic, and natural changes. A
well-trained and knowledgeable workforce is thus essential to meet the
employment demand for research and applications in the insurance, science
services, and related industries. Post-doctoral, graduate and undergraduate
students, including women and underrepresented minorities, will participate in
Center activities to give them a full perspective on societally relevant
research and provide a conduit for skilled people who can enter the commercial
workforce with immediate benefit to industry and society.