* 1362509
* Dispersive partial differential equations: between a deterministic and a probabilistic approach
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Gigliola Staffilani, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Edward Taylor
* 08/31/2017
* USD 240,000.00

Nature has many ways of expressing itself but certainly wave phenomena are some
of the most ubiquitous demonstrations of its power. From the freak waves forming
in the middle of a calm ocean, to the singularities of a black hole, to a signal
which passes through fiber optics cables, to Bose-Einstein Condensates, wave
phenomena arise in many distinct physical settings. Clearly being able to
accurately predict wave phenomena by knowing only few measurements would impact
our world in many ways: from evacuation plans, to the understanding of our deep
universe, from better and clear communication tools to the understanding of the
micro-cosmo. The fundamental difficulty in obtaining accurate predictions for
wave phenomena lies in the fact that they are expressed via mathematical
identities that are too complex for us to study using classical tools. It has
been the PI's long time research goal to investigate these complicated analytic
structure in order to isolate the fundamental parts than can then be used for
computer modeling. An example of the great advances that have been made in
recent years in this direction is the ever more accurate weather predictions
that we have been enjoying in the last decade.

The PI's research is focused on the discovery and invention of new abstract
mathematical tools that can be effectively used in several aspects of the study
of wave phenomena. Most notably, to study the longtime behavior of certain wave
system, to control the error of certain numerical approximations and to
determine that probabilistically, a particular outcome is the only observable
expression of a wave phenomenon. In recent years, it has become clear that in
order to conduct a successful mathematical analysis for complex problems
involving waves, one has to be ready to use tools from several areas of
mathematics. Based on this principle, the PI has conducted research with an
"interdisciplinary" approach. The classical harmonic and Fourier analysis
techniques, in which the PI was trained and that subsequently refined and
sharpened over the years, are of fundamental necessity for understanding complex
wave interactions. Recently, however, the PI has complemented this analysis with
ideas from classical probability, geometry, number theory and dynamical systems
in order to capture more subtle aspects of the problem at hand. It is fair to
say that in the last twenty years, thanks to this interdisciplinary approach,
which many researchers have adopted, the subject of dispersive and wave
equations has experienced an unprecedented level of research activity.
Increasingly, the gap between empirical observations and abstract mathematical
descriptions is being narrowed.