* 1362102
* Spectroscopy and Imaging of Organometallic Complexes
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Dong-Sheng Yang, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 07/31/2019
* USD 439,000.00

Professor Dong-Sheng Yang of the University of Kentucky is funded by the
Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms A (CSDM-A) Program for a project
titled "Spectroscopy and Imaging of Organometallic Complexes." The conversion of
hydrocarbons, the major constituents of petroleum and natural gas, into chemical
feedstocks is an important commercial process. The design of selective and
efficient catalysts (species that facilitate a chemical reaction) is a current
area of much interest. This study will look at the way metal atoms interact with
hydrocarbons. This information will show how hydrocarbons can be converted into
other chemicals and should guide the design of new catalysts that can reduce the
energy required for hydrocarbon conversion. The project provides technically
challenging training for a diverse group of students at all levels and prepares
them for careers in industry, academia, or the public
sector.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ttransient organometallic complexes formed in the
reactions of the neutral lanthanide atoms and small hydrocarbons will be
characterized by single-photon ZEKE/MATI spectroscopy, PEVMI, and two color IR-
UV photoionization. Accurate IEs, metal-ligand and ligand based vibrational
frequencies, and structural differences between the neutral and cationic species
will be determined. Electronic states and molecular structures will be
investigated by comparing the spectra of chemically and electronically similar
molecular systems and by combining the spectroscopic measurements with
theoretical calculations. The investigator is active in the development of
undergraduate curricula and in the mentoring programs for local K-12 students.