* 1362286
* Unprecedented Intramolecular Reactions of Heteroallene Salts for the Synthesis of Architecturally Diverse Nitrogen Heterocycles
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2018
* Matthias Brewer, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Tarek Sammakia
* 05/31/2018
* USD 415,000.00

With this New award, the Chemical Synthesis Program supports Professor Matthias
Brewer of University of Vermont &amp; State Agricultural College in a project
investigating new chemical syntheses that will provide routes to a variety of
structurally complex molecules. Several of these new transformations will follow
unique routes that are not accessible by current synthetic methods. The new
organic molecules that will be prepared will be of fundamental importance to
researchers seeking to develop new pharmaceuticals and other molecules of
biological interest. These studies will provide a mechanism for the training of
developing scientists in the areas of synthetic organic chemistry, reaction
design, total synthesis and complex structure elucidation. This project will
also give a summer research experience to an economically disadvantaged high
school student.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will investigate the
intramolecular reactions of in situ-generated 1-aza-2-azoniaallene salts in the
synthesis of nitrogen heterocycles. Aspects of these novel heteroallene salts
that will be explored include C-H insertion reactions, reactions involving
aziridinium ion intermediates, cycloaddition reactions and the use of this
methodology for the total synthesis of (+)-ibophyllidine. This work will provide
new ways to prepare structurally complex nitrogen heterocycles under mild, low
temperature, conditions.