* 1362112
* Planning Grant:  I/UCRC for Identification Technology Research
* CSE,ITR
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2015
* Anil Jain, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Dmitri Perkins
* 12/31/2015
* USD 14,080.00

Michigan State University (MSU) proposes to join the existing Center for
Identification Technology Research (CITeR) as a university site. This addition
will expand the research portfolio of CITeR as well as bring new affiliates
whose partnership will be instrumental in furthering the frontiers of
identification technology. This extended collaboration framework will broaden
CITeRs leadership role in transitioning biometric research into practice while
influencing socio-legal policies emerging from the use of this technology.
Biometrics is the science of automatically recognizing individuals based on
their physical, behavioral and physiological attributes such as fingerprints,
iris, voice, and gait. As a discipline, biometrics relies on several fields
including engineering, statistics, mathematics, biology, physics, jurisprudence,
and computational sociology. As a technology, biometrics has applications in
cyber-security, law enforcement, surveillance, forensics, multimedia, mobile
devices, and healthcare. While the field has significantly matured over the past
two decades, several fundamental problems are yet to be addressed. A concerted
research, education, and industry-engagement model is needed to effectively
leverage and deploy biometric solutions for the benefit of society at large. MSU
I/UCRC site proposes to include faculty and affiliates in the areas of cyber
security, mobile computing, genomics and big data. The goal of the planning
meeting will be to formulate a research roadmap for engaging the research
expertise of MSU faculty in furthering the societal and technological impact of
CITeR while simultaneously addressing the needs of the affiliates. MSUs
expertise in DNA processing, forensic analysis, cloud computing, deep learning
and data mining will be used to design next generation identification systems
focusing on rapid DNA identification, forensic data analysis, cloud-based
biometrics, genomics, and large-scale biometric analytics. Data security and
privacy will be an integral component of this research agenda and will benefit
affiliates in the field of identity management, healthcare, access control,
personalization, forensics, computer security, national security, and genomic
analysis.

The active involvement of graduate and undergraduate researchers will ensure the
development of a strong biometric workforce consisting of future leaders,
visionaries, researchers, professionals, and technicians. Collaboration with
experts from other fields such as forensics, bioinformatics, health science and
cybersecurity will expand the domain-of-influence of biometrics whilst creating
novel opportunities for inter-disciplinary research and education. The site
directors will connect with existing programs in MSU such as ADAPP (Advancing
Diversity through the Alignment of Policies and Practices) and MSU WIC (Women in
Computing) in order to promote the involvement of underrepresented groups in
STEM research and education. The research conducted in CITeR will be showcased
to middle school and high school students through community activities such as
MSU Science, Engineering and Technology Day; MSU College of Engineering Design
Day; and MSU CSE Research Open House.