* 1362922
* Maintenance of Mechanical Tension for Normal Tissue Function Requires Intercellular Cooperation
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2014,01/31/2019
* Michael Smith, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 01/31/2019
* USD 387,061.00

Mechanical stresses influence biological form and function. For normal
functions, tissues must maintain stress at a preferred level a process known as
tensional homeostasis. Various factors including injuries, diet, aging and
genetic risk factors may disrupt tensional homeostasis, and loss of homeostasis
promotes the progression of diseases including atherosclerosis, formation of
aneurysm balloons, acute lung injury, and cancer. Although it is widely believed
that tensional homeostasis traverses a wide range of length scales and that even
single cells in isolation are capable of maintaining tensional homeostasis,
preliminary data indicate that isolated cells are not capable of maintaining
tensional homeostasis and that intercellular cooperation is required. This award
will investigate how intercellular cooperation contributes to tensional
homeostasis and to determine the underlying biophysical and biochemical
mechanisms. The project will focus on homeostasis in vascular endothelial cells
since vascular diseases are linked to a loss of tensional homeostasis. Results
from this study will have a transformative impact on our understanding of the
functional link between loss of tensional homeostasis and progression of
diseases such as atherosclerosis and aneurysm. Furthermore, results of our study
may provide insight into diseases such as cancer where the loss of tensional
homeostasis is a hallmark of disease progression. The work will involve both
undergraduate and graduate students and will be integrated into
coursework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The dominant paradigm in vascular biology is
that tensional homeostasis exists across multiple length (and time) scales
through the feedback control of intracellular mechanics and signaling in
response to the externally imposed stresses. However, preliminary data from this
study revealed that isolated cells could not maintain tensional homeostasis,
whereas confluent multicellular clusters could, suggesting that cell-cell
interactions might be necessary for homeostasis. This leads to a working
hypothesis that direct cell-cell interactions are required for maintaining
tensional homeostasis in the endothelium. This is accomplished either via
mechanical interdependence between adjacent cells, or via molecular crosstalk
between adherens junctions and focal adhesions. To test this hypothesis,
traction forces in cellular clusters and in individual cells will be measured
using a micropattern traction microscopy system that was developed by the PIs.
This technique utilizes multiple, distinct adhesion ligands and is compatible
with substrate strain application mimicking the stretch conditions in vivo,
application of shear flow mimicking vascular wall shear stress, tunable
substrate rigidity, and high resolution microscopy to measure cellular traction
forces with less than 1 nN accuracy.