* 1362858
* RUI: Cyclometalated Platinum Complexes Having Selective Reactivity and Applications in Catalytic, Photophysical, and Bio-Organometallic Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Craig Anderson, Bard College
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 08/31/2017
* USD 216,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Craig M. Anderson of the Chemistry
Department at Bard College will investigate the synthesis of transition
cyclometalated complexes. The study of these complexes may advance the
understanding of fundamental catalytic reactions and eventually contribute in
areas with energy implications, as cyclometalated complexes are well known in
the study of artificial photosynthetic devices. Another very important aspect of
this work is that it will involve undergraduates at all levels from first-year
to senior students. It will also allow students to gain experience in many
diverse skills and techniques such as synthesis, characterization, and analysis
of results. The students will become well trained in order to continue further
scientific studies, disseminate their work through written publications and oral
presentations, and develop new hypotheses for testing.

Cyclometalated transition metal complexes are a very versatile group of
compounds whose varied applications include acting as catalysts, sensors,
artificial photosynthetic devices, and bio-organometallic agents. The effect
that ligand architecture exerts on selectivity and reactivity of cyclometalated
complexes is important to understand, as the coordination environment determines
both reaction functionality and efficacy. First, the physical and chemical
properties of these cyclometalated compounds will be tuned to maximize their
benefits, which include catalysis and anti-cancer agents. Second, studying the
regiochemistry of C-H and C-X bond activation will be examined in the area of
synthetic chemistry. Third, several multi-heteronuclear species will be
synthesized and their interaction with biomolecules, such as proteins, DNA, and
RNA will be examined