* 1362497
* Collaborative Research: Understanding the reactivity of hydrogen atoms in solid parahydrogen
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* David Anderson, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 07/31/2018
* USD 367,029.00

In this award, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms A
(CSDM-A) Program of the Division of Chemistry Professor Robert J. Hinde of the
Department of Chemistry of the University of Tennessee Knoxville and Professor
David T. Anderson of the Chemistry Department of the University of Wyoming and
their postdoctoral, graduate and undergraduate student researchers are working
on a collaborative theoretical and experimental effort to understand the low-
temperature reactivity of hydrogen atoms with other molecules in the ultra-cold
environment of solid hydrogen. They are investigating the unique chemistry in
these unusual systems, where the ordinary rules of chemistry do not apply. This
research could shed light on the chemistry that takes place in non-terrestrial
systems. Young scientists working on this project will receive excellent
training in experimental physical chemistry and computational chemistry
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prof. Hinde and Anderson are investigating the
interesting reactivity of H atoms in para hydrogen matrices. These are ultra-
cold environments where the effects of quantum mechanical behavior can dominate
the reactivity. Among the topics being investigated are: (1) the study of the
temperature dependence of H-atom reactions, where some reactions show Arrhenius
behavior while others show abrupt increases at low temperatures; (2) determine
H-atom solvation energies, where there is a subtle interplay between kinetic and
potential energy contributions and fully-quantum many body methods need to be
employed; and (3) the further development of infrared spectroscopic tools for
investigating these systems. The chemical systems being studied include H + H2,
H + N2O, H + NO, H + HCN, and H + C2H2. Students working in the groups of Hinde
and Anderson will receive state-of-the-art training in advanced computational
chemistry and low-temperature chemical physics, respectively. Both groups of
students will benefit from close interaction with members of the other groups,
broadening their training.