* 1362927
* Development &amp; Applications of Density Functional Methods
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Weitao Yang, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 06/30/2018
* USD 450,000.00

Weitao Yang of Duke University is supported by the Chemical Theory, Models and
Computational Methods program in the Chemistry Division to develop new
electronic structure methods. Electronic structure calculations provide
fundamental information about molecular structure and molecular interactions,
with broad applications in science and engineering. Because of its efficiency
and its good accuracy for many applications, density functional theory (DFT) is
the method of choice for such calculations for large systems. There are,
however, many important applications where current DFT methods do not give
accurate results. This proposal aims to build on the insight and progress made
recently in order to develop the next-generation density functional
approximations for accurate and efficient determination of electronic structure
of large systems that are found in biology, chemistry, physics, engineering and
nano-science and technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With various theoretical
strategies, the research effort will focus on exploring the functional forms
needed to approximate exact conditions with fractional charges and spins,
following two complementary directions: (1) Constructing approximations from
first-principles many-body theory, particularly via the pairing matrix
fluctuation formulation and (2) Imposing known exact conditions in terms of
fractional variables on commonly-used functionals. The functionals developed
will be theoretically sound, and have minimal delocalization and static
correlation errors. They will be accurate for a broad range of applications and
advance the frontiers of DFT towards the correct descriptions of
thermochemistry, reaction kinetics, charge transfer, organic and transition
metal molecules to bulk materials. The research approach will be based on
derivation from theory and physics, using the minimal number of parameters . The
proposed work should contribute to the progress of theoretical and computational
chemistry in becoming an equal partner with other more traditional fields of
chemistry.