* 1362272
* Collaborative Research: Ionic Liquid Structural Paradigms- Beyond Alkyl Tails
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Edward Castner, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 07/31/2018
* USD 430,019.00

In this award, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms A
(CSDM-A) Program of the Division of Chemistry, Professors Claudio Margulis of
the University of Iowa and Edward Castner of Rutgers University - New Brunswick
and their graduate and undergraduate student researchers are working on a joint
experimental and theoretical project to investigate the behavior of an
interesting class of materials (ionic liquids). The results from this work could
help scientists understand how microscopic changes to the structure of the ionic
liquid constituents result in macroscopic behavior. The hope of studies like
this is to develop a framework for engineering these potentially useful
substances for use in research and industrial processes. Graduate and
undergraduate students working on this project will receive training in
materials synthesis, x-ray methods and theory. This project will also
incorporate Prof. Sharon Lall-Ramnarine of Queensborough Community College and
her students in the research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Profs. Margulis and Castner
will conduct a joint theoretical and experimental program to investigate a
number of new ionic liquids, especially non-amphiphilic ones. The two groups
will: (1) study the behavior of ionic liquids with cationic and anionic side
chains of the same (8-mer) length; (2) investigate with theoretical methods the
behavior of ionic liquids with silyl and siloxy functionalities; and (3) compare
ionic liquids with ether and alkyl functionalities. For this work, new ionic
liquid compounds will be synthesized, surface characterization, x-ray scattering
and x-ray photoelectrons spectroscopy measurements will be carried out at
Rutgers University and the Advanced Photon Source of Argonne National
Laboratory. Computational chemistry work will be carried out in the group of
Prof. Margulis. The team also includes Prof. Sharon Lall-Ramnarine of
Queensborough Community College, a minority serving undergraduate institution
that is part of the CUNY system. Prof. Lall-Ramnarine will work on research in
this project with some of her chemistry students.