* 1362655
* Accurate Many-Body Electronic-Structure Methods for Extended Molecular Assemblies
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Edward Valeev, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 07/31/2018
* USD 401,635.00

Edward Valeev of Virginia Tech is supported by an award from the Chemical
Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Chemistry Division, the
Condensed Matter and Materials Theory program in the Division of Materials
Research and the Computational and Data-Enabled Science and Engineering Program
(CDS&amp;E) to develop radically improved understanding of electrons in
molecules and materials. Electrons are the universal "glue" that holds together
molecules and materials and thus determine their most relevant properties.
Predicting the behavior of electrons is of fundamental importance to chemistry
and materials science. The new computational approaches being developed in this
project will allow scientists to see with an unprecedented degree of precision
the delicate details of the dance of electrons in molecules. The new models will
then help to explain how some new fascinating materials are able to chemically
transform carbon dioxide, a major greenhouse gas, into valuable products. The
long-term objective of this project is to design on the computer -- rather than
discover by trial-and-error -- new chemical processes and new materials that
help improve our everyday lives. Valeev and his research group develop software
that is freely available to the research community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
technical focus of this project is on new, efficient computational methods for
describing the electrons in their ground and excited states in large molecular
assemblies (100-500 atoms) with the level of confidence only accessible for
small molecules (5-10 atoms). These objectives are achieved by using more
efficient numerical representations for electronic states, such as explicitly
correlated numerical representations that model short-range correlations of
pairs of electrons much more efficiently than standard approaches, and reduced-
scaling representations that take advantage of the short-sightedness of the
electron correlations. These ideas will be also leveraged to couple "weak"
(short-range) electron correlations into models describing "strong" (long-range)
correlations, such as configuration expansion or renormalization group
approaches. This work has a chance to substantially change the state of the art
of accurate electronic structure methods by making them a practical alternative
to the currently dominant density functional methods. The algorithms and methods
developed in this research will result in open-source publicly-available
computer software for doing quantum mechanical modeling of large molecular
systems.