* 1362396
* SusChEM - Sustainable Organic Synthesis Through Aerobic Carbon-Hydrogen Bond Functionalization Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Paul Floreancig, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Jin Cha
* 08/31/2019
* USD 450,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Synthesis program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Paul Floreancig of the University of Pittsburgh is
developing environmentally benign approaches to oxidative bond forming reactions
in organic synthesis. The advance is achieved through the use of inexpensive,
non-toxic stoichiometric oxidants to regenerate quinones and through new
transformations that significantly shorten the synthesis of biologically active
molecules and their analogs. These efforts provide new routes to access complex
structures through carbon-hydrogen bond functionalization in a manner that
minimizes waste generation. Professor Floreancig is traveling to colleges and
universities that have high populations of students from groups that are
traditionally underrepresented in the STEM fields to give seminars and to engage
these students in discussions about scientific careers. In addition, Dr.
Florencig will use the results of the research carried out under this award as
the basis for lectures on green oxidation chemistry.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
project focuses on merging the exceptional capacity to access stabilized
carbocations through carbon-hydrogen bond cleavage by the oxidant
2,3-dichloro-5,6-dicyano-1,4-benzoquinone (DDQ) with the environmental benefits
of visible light-mediated photooxidation. DDQ is commonly used in stoichiometric
quantities and generates significant quantities of reduction product waste.
Visible light-mediated oxidations employ environmentally benign stoichiometric
oxidants but do not show broad scope in oxidative cation formation. Using
visible light-mediated oxidations to regenerate DDQ from the reduction product
provides a path to retaining reactivity while reducing waste formation.
Investigating several catalyst systems allow determination of the ideal catalyst
structures for this new strategy.