* 1362310
* Optimal Staffing Policies to Stabilize Performance at Target Levels in Service Networks with Time-Varying Arrivals
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Yunan Liu, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 06/30/2018
* USD 241,140.00

This research is focused on the development, implementation, and evaluation of
new and effective policies to set appropriate staffing levels in large-scale
multiserver queuing networks that are equipped with complex features typically
found in real-world service systems. First, arrival rates in service systems
typically vary significantly over time, which is not accounted for by standard
queuing models. Second, abandonment by waiting customers, which corresponds to
patients leaving without being seen by a care provider, or to callers hanging up
in a call center, can significantly alter system performance. In addition,
empirical data show that neither service time nor abandonment time is
exponentially distributed. Finally, service systems often exhibit complicated
network structures, such as the following: (a) retrials by customers who have
received service but still need more service; and (b) flows among multiple
facilities, as occurring among different units in a hospital. Despite the
immense queuing-theory literature, the model complexity of these features makes
exact analysis far beyond the scope of existing methodologies. In response to
these challenges, this research will develop optimal staffing strategies for
large-scale queuing networks with all the above realistic features, aiming at
uncovering fundamental principles, advancing operations research methodologies,
devising effective control policies for better managing service systems, and
seeking effective approximations that turn the large scale into an advantage
instead of a disadvantage.

If successful, the results of this research will provide new tools to better
design and manage service systems, with special emphasis on healthcare systems.
To contain costs, many hospitals are significantly understaffed; when resources
(such as nurses and beds) are inevitably limited, inefficient staffing
strategies can cause excessive suffering, low quality care, degradation of the
ultimate treatment outcomes, and significant increases in mortality. The
proposed research intends to help system managers make the right operational
decisions; it will help answer questions such as: How should a hospital staff
the doctors and nurses over the course of the next week so that the delays
before treatments are at most one hour? What percentage of patients will have to
wait more than four hours? This research is also relevant for many other
applications, for example, customer contact centers; public housing authorities
providing apartments to low-income tenants; web-server farms processing requests
for web pages; and financial back offices processing loans. Education outreach
will be a key component of this project, because the investigator shares a deep
commitment to engineering education at both the undergraduate and graduate
levels. The investigator has been active in introducing operations research
techniques (with a special emphasis on queuing theory) to K-12 students through
a series of summer workshops and camps. The results of this project will be
integrated into the investigator's new undergraduate and graduate courses.