* 1362025
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: The role of Kin Relations and Residential Mobility in Attica
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2016
* Eleanna Prevedorou, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 04/30/2016
* USD 28,798.00

The underlying goal of this dissertation project is to gain insight into the
role which family relationships and broad regional interactions play in the
development of complex societies, a process which culminates in entities which
exist and exert political power in many regions of the world today. Archaeology
provides a valuable means to examine this question since it can examine actual
instances in which this first occurred.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under the guidance
of Dr. Jane Buikstra, Eleanna Prevedorou will address the role of biological
kinship and post-marital residence in the formation of Early Bronze Age (EBA)
Attica, in the southern Aegean (Greece). She will focus on the cemetery of
Tsepi, located in Marathon, that dates to the early third millennium BC. Tsepi
constitutes the earliest example of formal organization on the Greek mainland,
characterized by uniformity in grave construction, orientation, and space
allocation. Moreover, the strong Cycladic influences on artifact and grave
styles at Tsepi have raised questions about EBA coastal mainland-island
interaction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research integrates osteological,
biogeochemical, temporal (radiocarbon), and archaeological data. Inherited
dental dimensions, as well as heritable dental and cranial morphological
features will be used to examine biological affinities within each grave (e.g.,
whether or not the communal graves represent families), and post-marital
residence practices (e.g., exogamy vs. endogamy, matrilocality vs.
patrilocality). Chemical analysis on archaeological human teeth will be
conducted to investigate the geographic origins of the individuals buried in the
cemetery. Biogeochemistry, a new and developing field in archaeological science,
uses strontium that is incorporated into the skeleton through diet to detect
changes in the residential history of individuals. Thus, it becomes a powerful
and invaluable tool in reconstructing prehistoric human mobility and migration.
Given that strontium analysis is based on the underlying geological variation,
the characterization of "local" vs. "non-local" ranges through appropriate
baseline samples is a challenging aspect. Here, to be able to detect mobility
between different regions, modern animal (wild hare), plants (edible wild
greens), snails, and soil samples will be analyzed. Strontium analysis will also
be used to reconstruct prehistoric diet by establishing differences between
different trophic levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will generate an
extensive and detailed database of isotopic signatures that can be used in
future studies and will serve as a model for other ecosystems. The systematic
use of legal modern game (from food waste) is innovative and can be of great
value in paleomobility research. Hence, this endeavor will advance the
application of biogeochemistry for the identification of archaeological
residential mobility. Furthermore, on a regional scale this project will
contribute to the long-lasting archaeological debates on the nature of kinship
and mobility by answering questions on grave use, cemetery structure, descent
systems, mate exchange, marriage practices, and social networks through
residential relocation. On a broader scale, this study will add to the
anthropological investigation of kinship and marriage practices as mechanisms of
integration, adaptation, or differentiation by offering a time depth of 5,000
years. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will assist in graduate student training
by providing the candidate with additional professional experience in
bioarchaeology. It will train four undergraduate students in biogeochemical
analysis at Arizona State University (ASU), while also serving long-term
preservation goals in Greece through the curation and study of this rare
archaeological skeletal assemblage. Public dissemination of the results and
datasets will include their full publication and availability digital webpages.
In addition to international professional conferences such as the Archaeological
Institute of America, the results will be presented at the American School of
Classical Studies at Athens (ASCSA) and the University of Athens to inform
scholars who live and work in Greece. Finally, this project fosters the
collaboration between Arizona State University, ASCSA, the Institute for Aegean
Prehistory, the Archaeological Museum of Marathon, and the Hellenic Ministry of
Culture, and thus it strengthens ties between US and Greek academic
institutions.