* 1362481
* Proton Coupled Electron Transfer. Redox Cofactors, Catalysis, and Photochemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2017
* Thomas Meyer, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 06/30/2017
* USD 500,000.00

In this award, the Chemical Catalysis program of the Chemistry Division supports
Professor Thomas Meyer of The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill for
the research on "Proton Coupled Electron Transfer (PCET). Redox Cofactors,
Catalysis, and Photochemistry." PCET is a chemical process that involves
movement of a negatively charged electron that is facilitated by the
simultaneous transfer of a positively charged hydrogen ion. This process plays
an important role in both chemical and biological systems. However, its
implications for catalysis, energy conversion, and for biological function and
disease are only beginning to be fully appreciated. In fact, a full
understanding of the elementary processes in PCET has not been achieved. This
project explores the details of the PCET mechanisms that help dictate biological
function and involves both experimental and theoretical studies. In addition,
PCET is being extended toward the preparation of valuable organic chemicals.
Graduate students and postdoctoral research fellows are actively involved in the
project as are undergraduate students from "Climate LEAP," a summer program that
targets underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research focuses on
two important themes. One is an investigation of the role of PCET in key redox
cofactors of biology with an eye toward elucidating its role in the larger sweep
of enzymatic reactivity. In the other, recently uncovered roles for PCET in
excited state chemistry are being extended to map its role in molecular
photochemistry, and, potentially, its role in chemical synthesis and energy
conversion. In the first, the PCET mechanism will be explored in concert with
functional analysis of oxido-reductase protein structures with application of a
computational protocol based on the Rosetta energy function. PCET and electron
proton transfer (EPT) will be investigated in quinone/hydroquinone
interconversion and in the isoalloxazine functional group of flavins and the
dihydropyridine/pyridinium functional group of nictotinamides. Investigations on
redox cofactors will be extended to modified electrodes to explore PCET/EPT at
electrode interfaces with possible applications in analysis and
electrocatalysis. Finally, excited state PCET will be extended to H-atom and
photoEPT reactivity in solution and on the surfaces of mesoscopic,
nanostructured oxide films with an eye toward photoelectrochemical organic
synthesis.