* 1362798
* Function Theory on Polydiscs
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2014,08/31/2014
* Kelly Bickel, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 08/31/2014
* USD 95,000.00

This project concerns the study of complex functions of two or more variables
with sufficiently nice structure. Such functions can be used to encode
information about simple physical systems that accept input data and release
output data, such as signal processors. They are also closely related to
problems in robust control theory; here, the driving question is how to design
systems that perform desired tasks while maintaining internal stability. The
project's motivation is this: classic results by mathematicians such as Beurling
and Herglotz show that nice functions of one variable can be represented using
different and enlightening formulas. Different formulas are useful in different
situations, and the collection serves as a robust toolbox for studying
properties of complex functions and related objects. Recent results show that
several essential one-variable formulas have two-variable analogues. The goals
of this project include extending these known results, developing new formulas
for functions of several variables, and investigating applications. While
pursing this research, the principal investigator will continue to mentor
students interested in science and mathematics through her teaching and outreach
activities.

The specific focus of this project is the study of holomorphic functions on the
polydisc and multivariate analogues of classic representation formulas for such
functions. The formulas of interest include transfer function realizations for
Schur-Agler functions and weak factorizations of Hardy spaces. Specific topics
of interest include canonical constructions, generalizations to other function
spaces and domains, and applications. The study of transfer function
realizations is closely related to both reproducing kernel Hilbert spaces and
the "state space" methods of systems engineering. The proposed generalizations
and refinements will use properties of related Hilbert spaces of functions and
techniques that arise in the context of multidimensional input/state/output
systems and scattering systems. The construction and study of weak Hardy space
factorizations will require tools from multiparameter harmonic analysis,
including atomic decompositions of product Hardy spaces and technical geometric
results. Many properties of reproducing kernel Hilbert spaces can also be
described with functions called generalized Bergman metrics. Within this
context, the principal investigator plans a further study of functions on
polydiscs, with an emphasis on boundary behavior. Such questions have
applications to Cowen-Douglas operators, and the techniques suggest a method of
generalizing results on polydiscs to classes of reproducing kernel Hilbert
spaces.