* 1362425
* RUI:  Harmonic Analysis on Weighted Lebesgue Spaces
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* David Cruz-Uribe, Trinity College
* Standard Grant
* Justin Holmer
* 07/31/2018
* USD 105,772.00

The goal of this project is to further the research of the principal
investigator (PI) in harmonic analysis, a branch of mathematics that is an area
of active research and also one that is very important for its applications to a
wide variety of problems in physics and engineering. The research will be
conducted a Trinity College, a liberal arts college that focuses on
undergraduate education but requires its faculty to maintain active research
programs. This project will further the development of mathematical research at
Trinity. Undergraduate students will be given the opportunity to participate in
the project. This will help Trinity expand its undergraduate research programs
to include mathematics. Undergraduate research enhances the quality of
undergraduate education and better prepares students for advanced work in
science, mathematics, and engineering. In particular, the PI (himself a Mexican-
American) hopes to recruit women and members of underrepresented minority groups
to participate in the research project, thereby increasing diversity in
mathematics and the sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project the PI will
study weighted norm inequalities in harmonic analysis. The goal is to further
the recent work of the PI in three closely related areas: Rubio de Francia
extrapolation, sharp constant estimates, and two-weight norm inequalities.
Recent work by a number of mathematicians, including the PI, on sharp constant
estimates with Muckenhoupt weights and extrapolation theory has yielded new
results and a number of techniques that should be applicable to additional
problems, including endpoint estimates for functions of bounded mean oscillation
and extrapolation estimates for matrix weights. These results in turn will yield
applications to regularity estimates for degenerate partial differential
equations and to the study of variable Lebesgue spaces. The PI will also work on
two-weight estimates, particularly on the separated bump conjecture for singular
integrals and Riesz potentials.