* 1362900
* Mimicry and Confidence: New Insights into the Positive (and Negative) Consequences of Behavioral Mimicry
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2013,05/31/2015
* Kenneth DeMarree, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* kerry marsh
* 05/31/2015
* USD 80,072.00

Mimicry occurs when one person non-consciously mirrors the nonverbal behavior of
another person. Being mimicked generally increases one's willingness to help the
mimicker and increases the likelihood of being persuaded by the mimicker. Past
work has suggested that the reason mimicry promotes these outcomes is because of
(a) shifts in the mimicked person's self-concepts or (b) increases in the
mimicked person's liking for the mimicker. This research will test a different
potential reason why mimicry influences helping and persuasion. Specifically,
the proposed studies will test the idea that being mimicked increases one's
confidence in one's own thoughts. This increased confidence should magnify the
impact of one's current thoughts on judgment and behavior. Unlike previous
accounts of mimicry -- which predict nearly universal prosocial outcomes of
being mimicked -- the proposed idea that mimicry increases confidence predicts
that when a person's thoughts happen to be antisocial (e.g., competitive)
mimicry will lead to more antisocial behavior rather than more helping.

The proposed research will challenge existing theoretical perspectives on
mimicry by demonstrating that increased confidence stemming from mimicry can
produce effects opposite to those previously documented. In most interactions,
positive thoughts predominate, so "main effect" theories (e.g., increased
liking) and the confidence perspective make the same predictions. However, a
unique prediction of this proposal is that if antisocial thoughts predominate,
the confidence resulting from being mimicked will increase antisocial behavior.
That is, mimicry will increase the impact of a person's currently accessible
thoughts, regardless of whether the thoughts are positive ("help him," "believe
her") or negative ("defeat him," "disagree with her"). In short, the PI proposes
a new explanation for the effects of mimicry, one that explains current findings
and identifies when opposite findings should follow from being mimicked.

Knowing the precise reasons why mimicry influence persuasion and helping
behavior is important not only because it contributes to theories of helping and
persuasion but also because it has a wide range of applications -- especially in
interpersonal settings. For example, mimicry is relevant to clinical psychology,
health communication, human-computer interaction, management, and marketing.
This research has great potential to inform theory, training, and practice in
these fields. For example this work can tell us when a therapist (or "social"
robot) who mimics a client is most likely to facilitate the desired outcomes
versus when mimicry might "backfire." The proposed research will also be
disseminated widely, as the investigators will actively seek opportunities to
present this research at major conferences and to publish findings in top tier
journals in psychology. Finally, this research will promote science education
and training by involving a diverse group of undergraduate and graduate students
in all phases of the research process.