* 1362064
* Limit Theorems in Dynamical Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2017
* Dmitry Dolgopyat, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Edward Taylor
* 06/30/2017
* USD 239,990.00

It is well known that many deterministic systems exhibit random behavior. The
simplest example of one such system is provided by a ball moving between two
infinitely heavy periodically moving walls. This example was studied by Fermi
and Ulam in the middle of the last century. More complicated examples include
the motion of charged particles in plasma and the motion of the asteroids in the
asteroid belt. The aim of this proposal is to understand the origin of
stochasticity (randomness of motion) of such systems using recent advances in
chaotic dynamics, with the goals of making precise predictions about their
behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will continue his work on limit theorems
for dynamical systems combing the methods of probability theory and dynamical
systems. The main directions of research will be the following: (1) Evolution of
adiabatic invariants, and (2) Local Limit Theorems. This proposal will
concentrate on the methods of obtaining precise asymptotics which allows control
of the limit distributions on long temporal scales and short spatial scales. The
broader impact of the proposed activity will be in applying dynamical systems
tools to other fields including probability theory, number theory, and
statistical physics. The PI will continue his synergistic activities including
organizing conferences, giving lectures and minicourses on recent advances in
dynamics, writing survey papers and mentoring graduate students.