* 1362949
* Utility and Application of Chiral, Unsaturated Acylammoniums
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2014,08/31/2015
* Daniel Romo, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Johnson
* 08/31/2015
* USD 450,000.00

Through this award, funded by the Chemical Synthesis Program, Prof. Daniel Romo
from Texas A&M University is turning to bioinspired organocascade or domino
processes that generate multiple bonds and stereocenters in a single operation,
significantly increasing the efficiency of bioactive natural product and
pharmaceutical synthesis. Organocatalysis involves the use of small, chiral
organic molecules to activate substrates and initiate various bond
constructions. Generic substrate activation modes, and their implementation in
reaction design, have led to an explosion in covalent organocatalysts over the
past decade, using judicious combinations of catalytic activation modes.
However, there is a paucity of general substrate activation modes, with only
limited types revealing multiple reactive sites in a single catalytic cycle.
This research will explore a new activation mode that could prove broadly useful
for the development of novel organocascade reactions. Undergraduates, working in
the Texas A&M Undergraduate MiniPharma Program, will study certain aspects of
the proposed methods gaining teamwork and leadership experience, a taste of
various aspects of pharmaceutical research, new research skills, and experience
with state-of-the-art equipment ultimately contributing to publishable research.

This research pursues a novel and broad design principle based on readily
generated chiral unsaturated acylammonium salts, significantly impacting the
growing field of scaleable, asymmetric organocatalysis. The organocascade
processes focus on cycloadditions, enabling highly practical, enantioselective
synthetic routes to carbocycles and heterocycles commonly found in bioactive
natural products and pharmaceuticals. In addition, the synthesis of recyclable,
supported-isothiourea catalysts and mechanistic studies of unsaturated
acylammonium intermediates, given their established and increasing importance
for organocascade catalysis, are undertaken in collaboration with Prof. Dean
Tantillo (UC Davis). The utility of the developed synthetic methods is
demonstrated by targeting the synthesis of natural products with compelling
bioactivities enabling further fundamental studies at the chemistry/biology
interface with Prof. Stephan Sieber (Tech Univ of Munich, Germany). Hypothesis-
driven, novel reaction development and empirical laboratory synthetic methods
for reaction discovery are employed to reach these objectives.