* 1362893
* A Bio-Inspired Strategy for In-Plane Energy Dissipation through Suture Interfaces
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Yaning Li, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 06/30/2018
* USD 345,852.00

The research will explore a new strategy for the creation of mechanically sound
connections between individual parts of plates and shells. This approach is
inspired by findings in natural materials where individual parts are often found
to be connected to each other om jigsaw-puzzle-like structure. One such example
are seed coats of some plants, which consist of stiff, nominally planar building
blocks that are connected to one another via compliant zigzag seams. These seams
are called suture interfaces. This investigation will focus on how the network
of suture interfaces contributes to toughness, damage-tolerance, and the
efficiency of load transmission between building blocks. Engineering analysis,
computer simulations and experiments on 3D printed plate and shell systems will
be conducted. The knowledge gained from this research will provide guidelines
for designing new lightweight and damage-tolerant material systems with broad
engineering applications in aerospace, naval, architectural structures, ground
vehicles, and armor. The interdisciplinary nature of the research will involve
diversified participants and will expose students to the areas of mechanics,
materials, biology and manufacturing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will
employ an integrated analytical, computational and experimental methodology to
systematically quantify the mechano-morphological effects in the bio-inspired
jigsaw composite plates and shells. A hybrid analytical and finite element
modeling approach will be used to predict the mechanical behaviors of suture
interfaces and jigsaw composites, including the mixed-mode damage initiation and
evolution, two basic failure mechanisms of suture interfaces and the failure
mechanism transition. A 3D multi-material printer will be extensively used to
fabricate suture and composite specimens for mechanical experiments to verify or
provide inputs to the analytical and numerical models. In the area of bio-
inspired engineering, although substantial progress has been made on
understanding the mechanical response of biological structures, the manufacture
of artificial composites with precisely-controlled interface morphology and
material composition remains a challenging goal. The development of 3D printing
technology provides an opportunity to overcome this difficulty. Therefore, this
research will not only explore a new toughening and energy-dissipation
mechanisms of a natural composite material but also the methodology developed
reveals a paradigm for using 3D printing as a tool to explore fundamental
engineering and scientific questions and new concepts in biomimetic design.