* 1362826
* Quantum-Classical Path Integral Methodology
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2014,05/31/2017
* Nancy Makri, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 05/31/2017
* USD 550,000.00

Nancy Makri of the University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign is supported by an
award from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the
Chemistry division and the Computational and Data-Enabled Science and
Engineering Program (CDS&amp;E) to develop theoretical and computational methods
to describe electron and proton transfer processes in molecular systems.
Electron and proton transfer play a vital role in many chemical and biological
reactions. These small particles are subject to the laws of quantum mechanics,
and thus standard simulations based on classical mechanics cannot correctly
predict their behavior. Unfortunately, the exact solution of the quantum
mechanical equations of motion for processes in liquid or biological
environments requires enormous computing power that does not exist. Makri is
developing accurate algorithms for simulating these processes; treating the
electron or proton at the full quantum mechanical level, while capturing the
dynamics of the rest of the system via inexpensive classical trajectories. These
algorithms are being implemented in computer code which will be freely available
to the research community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central theme of
this work is the further development and application of the quantum-classical
path integral (QCPI) methodology. The spatially localized, trajectory-like
nature of quantum paths makes the path integral framework ideal for quantum-
classical dynamics. The proposed methodology exploits the memory-free nature of
system-independent solvent trajectories to account for all "classical
decoherence" effects on the dynamics of the quantum system. Inclusion of the
residual, less prominent "quantum decoherence" is accomplished by evaluating the
full path integral, which is amenable to large time steps and iterative
decompositions. Application to electron and proton transfer in solution and in
biological molecules will shed light on important mechanisms with unprecedented
accuracy. The PI's core computer code, QCPI, is being interfaced with the
powerful molecular dynamics packages, NAMD and LAMMPS. The goal is to produce a
computer package, QCPI-MD, suitable for the simulation of proton, charge and
energy transfer processes with unprecedented accuracy.