* 1362027
* 2014 IEEE International Microwave Symposium Project Connect Support. To Be Held in Tampa, FL June 1-6, 2014.
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/15/2014,12/31/2014
* Thomas Weller, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Mahmoud Fallahi
* 12/31/2014
* USD 8,000.00

The proposed project will support student participation in the 2014
International Microwave Symposium (IMS), which will be held in Tampa, FL from
1-6 June 2014. Support will be provided in conjunction with a new educational
program called IMS Connect which has as objective to increase the participation
of students from underrepresented minorities in the 2014 IMS. The project aims
to develop the technical interests of the student participants, motivating them
to be more involved in undergraduate research, being interested in graduate
school and improving their long-term professional success.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2014 IMS meeting addresses research areas in
RF/microwave engineering and is the largest conference in the world in this
field. IMS has played a key role in identifying new directions for research and
development. Topics to be discussed at IMS span a broad range in related
emerging areas of research, from advanced synthesis, microwave devices, signal
generation, emerging technologies, and system applications. IMS is one of the
few conferences where participation from both the industry and academia is
extremely strong. The participating students will share their experience with
others through video diaries, helping to increase awareness of the opportunity
for other students in future years. The program will also be described in
professional magazines with the potential to encourage other conferences to
adopt a similar type of program.