* 1362004
* Collaborative Research: Salt Rock Microstructure and Deformation
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Chloe Arson, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 08/31/2017
* USD 200,123.00

Salt rock is used for secure storage of oil, high-pressure gas, and nuclear
waste because of its ability to creep and form barriers to gas and fluid flow.
However, creep processes near subsurface storage facilities can lead to crack
debonding, opening, closure and rebonding that compromise the integrity of flow
barriers and stability of engineered structures. Mathematical descriptions of
cracking and healing are incompletely developed. This award will support
fundamental rock physics and mechanics research to link deformation by crack
debonding, opening and rebonding to microstructures and mechanical variables
that govern the time-dependent behavior of salt rock over geological space and
time scales. Deformation of salt occurs rapidly at laboratory conditions making
it a good analog to study damage and healing in other crystalline materials and
porous media. Project findings are expected to advance quantitative relations
enabling accurate modeling and prediction of behaviors in engineering projects.
The work will advance fundamental understanding of cracking and healing in other
rocks that deform by the same processes, especially around earthquake faults and
zones of induced seismicity. The team of geoscience and engineering researchers
will collaborate with other programs to broaden the participation of women and
other under-represented groups in research and engineering.

Most continuum damage models for salt are based on the concept of dilatancy
boundary, and do not account for crack-induced anisotropy of elastic properties.
Micro-mechanics and homogenization principles were successfully employed to
model salt rock elastoplastic behavior, but were not used to test scale
invariance of microstructure to transitions in deformation regimes. The goal of
this project is to link salt deformation regimes and rheological behaviors with
the density and orientation distribution of microstructures. Deformation regimes
at the scale of a Representative Elementary Volume will be decomposed into
independent processes (e.g., cracking), each related to different microstructure
descriptors (e.g., grain aspect ratio). Macroscopic thermodynamic variables will
be formally related to the microstructure descriptors to test the space and time
scale invariance of transition points in deformation regimes. Specific research
objectives are to: (1) Identify topological components and subcomponents of salt
microstructure; (2) Determine the energy cost of intra- and inter-granular crack
debonding, opening, closure and rebonding; (3) Compute energy thresholds
associated with transitions between deformation regimes at the grain and REV
scales; (4) Test the time and scale dependence of microstructure organization
during transitions; (5) Design rock salt microstructural systems that optimize
healing properties in subsurface storage environments.