* 1362830
* Multidimensional Spectroscopic Studies of Condensed Phase Dynamics
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2014,10/31/2018
* Graham Fleming, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 10/31/2018
* USD 779,998.00

With this award, the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms A program is
funding the research of Graham Fleming of the University of California Berkeley
to develop two new experimental methods to study the way energy flows through
individual molecules, even if that flow is affected by the solvent the molecules
might be dissolved in. Molecules in living tissue, for example, are always
surrounded by a great deal of water and other substances that affect the way
those molecules absorb energy from light and redistribute it. The influence of
the water or other solvent can be quite large, and currently available
experimental techniques are unable to separate the effects of the solvent from
the molecule of interest. In this project, two new methods are being developed.
The first method, which is called "two dimensional electronic-vibrational
spectroscopy," or 2D-EV, will enable the investigators to directly observe the
flow of light energy in, for example, a green plant as it undergoes the process
of photosynthesis. The second new technique being developed in this work, known
as "two dimensional fluorescence-detected coherent spectroscopy," or 2D-FDCS
will more directly measure the influence of the solvent (usually water) on the
molecule of interest. This work is having a broad impact on scientific
infrastructure through the development of new devices so solve problems ranging
from biology to materials science. Students at all levels will participate,
including young students from local schools in the Oakland area who might not
otherwise have the opportunity to consider a career in
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has two aims: (1) to investigate
electronic-vibrational coupling; and (2) to understand the role of the solvent
environment in preserving quantum coherence. To achieve these aims, two new
methodologies are being developed. The first of the new methodologies involves
the construction of a new two-dimensional spectroscopic technique, 2D-EV, used
to elucidate the involvement and role of nuclear motions in molecular and
nanomaterial electronic dynamics. This technique measures the interplay between
electronic and vibrational coordinates by correlating the electronic (visible)
spectrum with a second dimension, the (mid) infrared spectrum of the system, as
a function of waiting time. The ability to follow the ultrafast temporal
evolution of both electronic and vibrational degrees of freedom allows the study
of coupling between electronic and nuclear dynamics in, for example, regions of
the potential surface where the Born-Oppenheimer approximation breaks down, such
as in situations where conical intersections occur. By providing a site-
sensitive tag, the method is, thus, enabling direct exploration of energy flow
pathways. The second new technique, 2D-FDCS, aims to extend photon echo and
related techniques to small ensembles and, eventually, single molecules. This
method can be used to detect weak signals from small ensembles and single
molecule nanoparticles and is allowing a sampling of fluctuations as well as the
distribution of environmental frequencies. The result is new insight into the
role of the solvent environment in destroying quantum phase and the degree to
which the ensemble average masks the true microscopic dynamics. The group is
also using theoretical methods to interpret their experiments and inform new
directions for study.