* 1362561
* Advances of Methodology and Design for the Synthesis of Complex Polycyclic Natural Products
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2014,05/31/2017
* David Williams, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 05/31/2017
* USD 450,000.00

This project funded by the Chemical Catalysis program of the Chemistry Division
of the NSF investigates organometallic complexes in order to discover new
reaction methods and reactivity. These advances are sought in order to
streamline the efficiencies of chemical pathways for the rapid assembly of
complex molecules. A key aspect of these efforts seeks to define versatile,
high-value methods for the construction of bioactive compounds to create a
platform for studies of medicinal chemistry.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Specific
aspects of the research examine the development of new reactions involving
complexes of iron, indium and palladium. These studies are applied in the
synthesis of natural products which display promising bioactivity toward various
cancers and disease models of inflammation. Because of current limitations of
the science, the natural products proposed in this investigation have not been
previously prepared by synthesis. Therefore, success in this program is
advancing the design and study of these substances as potential drug-like
molecules. A goal of this research is to create new methodologies for generally
useful cross-coupling reactions to produce chemically reactive allenes, and to
design new carbocyclization reactions. These efforts are directly applied toward
the synthesis of daphnicyclidin and tetrapetalone natural products, but also
have broader applicability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This University laboratory
offers state-of-the-art training and mentoring in the field of synthetic organic
chemistry with a significant diversity program. A blend of predoctoral students,
postdoctoral fellows, and undergraduate participants emphasizes the inclusion of
women and underrepresented minorities. All individuals receive training and
mentoring to enable future opportunities as leading scientists of the next
generation. The broader impact of these scientific results benefit society by
enabling the discovery of new pharmaceuticals.