* 1362572
* Development and Application of Molecular Simulation Methods to Compute Bulk and Interfacial Properties of Ionic Liquids
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2014,05/31/2018
* Jeffrey Errington, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 05/31/2018
* USD 405,000.00

Jeffrey Errington of the State University of New York at Buffalo is supported by
an award from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in
the Chemistry Division to carry out the development and application of molecular
simulation methods to compute properties of ionic fluids at interfaces, e.g.,
where another fluid or the walls of a container is encountered. These places are
particularly difficult for accurate computations compared to others away from
interfaces. Numerous current and emerging technologies such as supercapacitors
(which store energy in small areas) and solar cells (which convert sunlight to
electricity) contain ionic fluids, e.g., salts in which the ions move as liquids
at room temperature. In many cases, how well such devices perform their work
depends on properties of the fluid in more than one place, i.e., both close to
and far from containing walls. Development of a deeper fundamental understanding
of the behavior of ionic fluids in the presence of surfaces would have a
profound influence on the ability of scientists and engineers to improve device
performance, design novel technologies, and harness the unique features of
natural systems. For example, information of this type may provide insight into
how the chemistry of an ionic liquid or surface could be tuned to optimize the
performance of a supercapacitor in energy storage, improve a coating placed on
various materials, or facilitate development of a lens whose focus and other
properties can be changed at will. Both graduate and undergraduate students are
being trained in the areas of surface thermodynamics, statistical mechanics, and
computer simulation. The principal investigator also participates in outreach at
a local middle school.

The group studies two fundamental issues: (1) the temperature dependence of the
interfacial properties (e.g., contact angle) of ionic fluids such as room
temperature ionic liquids (RTILs), molten salts and charged colloids, and (2)
the impact of small molecules, such as water and carbon dioxide, on the
interfacial properties of RTILs. The temperature dependence of interfacial
properties has received relatively little attention. Recent simulation results
for model ionic fluids suggest that these fluids exhibit highly tunable
temperature dependence, which could be exploited in the design of technological
devices. Experiments provide contradictory views regarding how water impacts the
surface tension of RTILs. In the present work, molecular simulation is used to
resolve these discrepancies and provide a better understanding of the link
between macroscopic interfacial properties and the manner in which molecules
partition within these inhomogeneous systems. To facilitate the investigation of
these issues, the group pursues two methodological advances: (1) an isothermal-
isobaric version of the interface potential approach and (2) strategies for
sampling mixtures of ionic liquids. The interface potential approach focuses on
the surface excess free energy of a thin fluid film in contact with a substrate.
The investigator's group has employed a grand canonical version of this approach
for several years with success. However, application of this technique to
complex systems is hindered by molecule transfers required within a grand
canonical ensemble. The research team addresses this limitation via development
of a version of the method that is implemented within the isothermal-isobaric
ensemble. This advance allows one to both address complex systems and leverage
popular molecular dynamics software to complete calculations.