* 1362030
* SusChEM: Chiral Silanediols in Anion-Binding Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2014,09/30/2016
* Anita Mattson, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 09/30/2016
* USD 405,400.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Catalysis program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Anita E. Mattson of the Department of Chemistry and
Biochemistry at The Ohio State University is investigating catalysis strategies
for the sustainable construction of complex target molecules. Specifically, new
silanediol-based catalysts are being advanced for development in metal-free
chemical processes. The broader impacts of this work include the discovery of
strategies to synthesize valuable chemicals with less harm to the environment
and the development of a training ground for aspiring chemists, including
graduate, undergraduate and high school students, to acquire skills to help them
grow into the next generation of scientific investigators. Local high school
students and teachers are learning about the importance of environmentally
benign catalyst systems through an outreach program developed by Professor
Mattson. The information from this study can provide opportunities to make the
syntheses of materials, medicines, and fine chemicals more sustainable.

Silanediols, a new family of metal-free catalysts, are under investigation as
environmentally benign tools for the construction of pharmaceutical agents and
materials. The approach relies on synthesizing and characterizing new families
of chiral silanediol catalysts, probing how silanediol structure affects
catalytic activity, and exploring the mechanism of silanediol-catalyzed
processes. A variety of silanediol catalysts are being studied and correlations
between their structure and function are being established. The most promising
silanediols are under examination as catalysts for the syntheses of bioactive
molecules.