* 1362897
* RUI: Spectroscopic and Computational Studies of Alpha, Beta-Unsaturated Carbonyl Compounds in Triplet Excited States
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Stephen Drucker, University of Wisconsin-Eau Claire
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 07/31/2019
* USD 228,693.00

Professor Stephen Drucker, Department of Chemistry at the University of
Wisconsin - Eau Claire is funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and
Mechanisms A (CSDM-A) program for "Spectroscopic and Computational Studies of
Alpha, Beta-Unsaturated Carbonyl Compounds in Triplet Excited States." Triplet
states (species having two unpaired electrons) play a central role in many
reactions that occur in the presence of light. Prof. Drucker and his group are
investigating the nature of the triplet states of a series of organic molecules
and aree exploring the differences between the triplet states and their singlet
(the species that has no unpaired electrons) counterparts. These studies give
fundamental insights into light induced chemical reactions. In addition, the
experiments provide benchmark spectroscopic information for testing or refining
computational treatments of chemical species. In this project, undergraduate
group members will conduct in-depth research. Such opportunities add substantial
value to the undergraduate education program, and can also foster rich
opportunities for advanced study. Ongoing collaborations with investigators at
Purdue will enable Prof. Drucker's undergraduates to participate in a range of
activities. In turn, graduate students in the collaborating research group will
be able to explore faculty careers at undergraduate institutions as they
interact with Prof. Drucker and his students from UW-Eau
Claire.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The cavity ringdown (CRD) spectra of acrolein and
isotopically substituted derivatives under the cooling conditions of a free-jet
expansion, using a slit nozzle source are being recorded. These experiments
afford high-precision inertial constants that will be used to determine a
substitution structure for the T1 state. Experimental geometrical parameters
will be compared with predictions of equilibrium geometry from high-level
calculations. In a second component of the project, CRD at room temperature or
in a planar free-jet expansion is used to characterize the lowest triplet states
of monocyclic alpha,beta-unsaturated carbonyl compounds. Studies on cyclic
enones, including cyclic lactones, provide information on the relative energies
of the triplet (n,pi*) and (pi,pi*) states, the propensity for configuration
mixing, and hyperconjugation between these molecules. The ability to reproduce
such differences will constitute a stringent test of TDDFT or other
computational methods.