* 1362060
* I/UCRC:  Proposal to Establish a Joint NSF I/UCR Center for  Particulate Systems and Surfactants
* ENG,EEC
* 04/01/2014,09/30/2022
* Brij Moudgil, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 09/30/2022
* USD 482,183.00

In Phase II operation, the I/UCRC for Advanced Particulate Systems and
Surfactants (CPaSS) intends to address challenges which fall under two broad
categories: 1) characterization of particles and surfactants at nano and
molecular scale, predictability in tuning their performance, and environmental
and physiological compatibility, and 2) elucidation of understanding of
structure-property-performance relationships in particulate/polymer/enzyme
systems. To address challenges in fabrication of particles and surfactant
systems with tunable properties, development of predictive models to understand
their behavior in industrially relevant environments is needed. This requires
understanding the mechanisms by which particulate and surfactant systems of
different properties behave under industrially relevant dynamic systems - a
major theme of the center's Phase II research
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Particulate and Surfactant Systems are vital to
virtually every major industry including pharmaceuticals, detergents, cosmetics,
liquid crystals, micro-electronics, advanced ceramics, petroleum and fuels,
minerals, agriculture, biotechnology, photography, and paints and coatings.
Center research can contribute to efficient process development leading to more
effective and less costly consumer products; tools and protocols to screen
greenness of reagents and particles together - the platform for many industrial,
household and healthcare products. CPaSS is committed to continue and increase
the enrollment of women, underrepresented minorities and persons with
disabilities during Phase II through stronger interactions with college and
university programs that support recruitment of such students into the STEM
fields.