* 1362160
* Representation Theoretical Methods in the Theory of Special Function
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Adriano Garsia, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2018
* USD 190,000.00

The proposed research involves computer explorations and the transfer of
information connecting several areas of mathematics, most particularly
Representation Theory, the Theory Special Functions and Combinatorics. These
connections provide a powerful vehicle of discovery, since results and
mechanisms which may be quite obvious in one area often translate into highly
nontrivial and unexpected facts in one of the other areas. This type of activity
is also highly suitable for training young researchers and providing them with
the opportunity to discover the manner in which some research can be carried in
our Computer Age. Combinatorial interpretations translate mathematical
information, be it algebraic, analytical, logical or otherwise, into visual
information. Under this setting, even students with limited background can be
brought to experience the joy of discovery. For these reasons the PI, plans to
continue the practice of bringing all current research efforts right into the
classroom through graduate courses and seminars. In fact most of the work of the
students and collaborators of the PI carried out under prior NSF support
resulted from such classroom activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The subfield of
Algebraic Combinatorics, that is the focus of the research carried out under
this award was created by the PI's representation theoretical approach to the
(1988) conjectures by Macdonald concerning his now-famous symmetric polynomial
basis. The 1990's joint work of the PI and Mark Haiman led to a conjectured
formula for the Frobenius characteristic of the space ``Diagonal Harmonics'' in
terms of the Macdonald polynomials. Early computer explorations by the PI and
Haiman yielded data which revealed a surprisingly intimate connection of
Diagonal Harmonics with ``Parking Functions'' (a colorful combinatorial
structure created by computer scientists.) These discoveries led to the
formulation by Haglund et al. of the Shuffle Conjecture which gives the
Frobenius Characteristic of Diagonal Harmonics a beautiful explicit formula in
terms of Parking Functions. Around the year 2000, Mark Haiman proved the
original conjectures formulated jointly with the PI by Algebraic Geometrical
tools. This brought the attention of the Algebraic Geometers to this field of
investigation. This attention resulted in a truly surprising enrichment of the
field with a variety of new tools and open problems. Very recently the PI and
his collaborators, using these new findings succeeded in formulating an infinite
family of ``Shuffle Conjectures'' connecting a whole Lie Algebra of Symmetric
Function Operators to new ``Parking Function'' like objects. Under the support
of this award the PI plans to use the vast collection of tools developed in two
decades of efforts in this area to work on these problems in collaboration with
his present PhD students Emily Leven, Yeonkyung Kim and Marino Romero.
Preliminary results obtained by the PI and his present students have been very
promising. In fact, recently Leven has succeeded in solving an infinite
subfamily of these new conjectures. Historically, difficult problems have been
the source of fundamental mathematical discoveries. Our particular area of
investigation should be no exception in this respect.