* 1362709
* Metal-Catalyzed Silylene Transfer Reactions as Methods for the Synthesis of Strained trans-Cycloalkenes
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Keith Woerpel, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Tarek Sammakia
* 06/30/2018
* USD 450,000.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Synthesis Program, Professor Keith
Woerpel of New York University develops new chemical reactions of silicon-
containing reactive intermediates to synthesize a class of compounds, trans-
cycloalkenes, that have been particularly difficult to prepare, and explores the
chemistry of this class. The source of that difficulty has been their
extraordinarily high energy, which renders them very reactive and difficult to
isolate using conventional methods. Conversely, their distinctive reactivity
makes these tempting intermediates for the synthesis of biologically active and
other useful compounds. Once the reactivity of this particular type of compound
has been determined, the structure and reactivity of structurally related
compounds can be predicted, and the design and synthesis of pharmaceutical
agents, of tools for exploring biological systems, of plastics for use in
medical and technological applications, and of materials for solar cells can be
exploited. This project also serves as a training tool for graduate,
undergraduate, and precollege students to prepare themselves for careers in
research, in medicine, and in materials science.

Divalent silicon reactive intermediates (silylenes, R2Si) are used to prepare
highly strained trans-cycloalkenes. Although strained cycloalkenes show promise
for the development of efficient routes for the synthesis of biologically active
natural products, the construction of strained cyclic alkenes has been
difficult. This project explores the synthesis of highly strained seven- and
eight-membered ring trans-alkenes and examines the elevated reactivity of these
compounds. Studies of new reactions of these compounds focus on reactions that
give products that are difficult to prepare using other methods. Additional
efforts will address the detailed reaction mechanisms of new reactions that
deviate significantly from expected reactivity.