* 1362213
* Development of Methods for the Automated Synthesis of Plant and Microbial Oligosaccharides
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2017
* Nicola Pohl, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 06/30/2017
* USD 450,000.00

Through this award, funded by the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Division of
Chemistry, Prof. Nicola Pohl from Indiana University-Bloomington and her
students address two impediments to study of an important class of biomolecules
called glycans, which are bioactive molecules containing linked chains of
sugars. These stumbling blocks include both the lack of facile chemical methods
to make well-defined sugar fragments and the availability of educational
materials for introducing this class of biomolecules to budding chemists and
biologists very early in their advanced education. The broader impacts of this
proposed research include: 1) increasing participation of underrepresented
groups by their inclusion in the proposed research and education activities; 2)
advancing discovery and understanding through inclusion of graduate and
undergraduate students as participants; 3) developing and disseminating
educational materials that outline the role of carbohydrates beyond metabolism;
and 4) developing robust automated methods to synthesize plant, viral and
microbial oligosaccharides, a bottleneck to advancement of this line of
research, since significant quantities of these materials are necessary for the
study of their functions in a variety of biological, materials, and medical
contexts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves study and exploitation of
the mechanism of a bismuth(V) complex discovered to promote glycosylation
reactions using alkylthiol-linked sugars. The goal of the study is to better
understand the chemistry that this relatively nontoxic element can effect and,
in the process, to gain clues for how the glycosylation reaction can be
accelerated. In addition, protocols to apply this new promoter to automated
solution-phase oligosaccharide synthesis and to develop feasible building block
strategies for the production of larger bioactive structures associated with
important plant and microbial saccharides will be explored.