* 1362723
* Fiber Optic Method for Bridge Health Assessment Based on Long-Gauge Sensors
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2017
* Branko Glisic, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 06/30/2017
* USD 200,000.00

For civil infrastructure there is a need for structural health monitoring to
provide an optimized maintenance, lifetime extension, and improved safety.
Structural health monitoring can provide accurate and in-time information
concerning condition and residual life of civil infrastructure. It consists of
instrumentation of the structure with sensors and transformation of the
collected data into meaningful and actionable information for the owner or
manager of the structure, so decision makers can undertake informed and
economical maintenance and repair actions. This project focuses on the typical
bridge beam systems that represent 60 percent of all US bridges.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to pursue research in
creating and validating a universal health assessment system for typical beam
bridges based on static and dynamic measured strains using long-gauge fiber
optic sensors. This research will provide means to avoid disruptive closures and
catastrophic failures, while also ensuring on-going reliable health assessment.
The success of the project stands to have profound societal impact by addressing
public safety and minimizing economic disruption. The neutral axis and the
deformed shape are universal beam parameters that reflect bridge health and
performance condition. Real-time determination of these parameters has potential
to enable a robust bridge health monitoring assessment method. Fundamental
questions associated with determination of these parameters addressed in this
project are related to: 1) variability of these parameters and uncertainty in
their determination under damaged and undamaged conditions, and 2)
transformation of the collected data into meaningful and actionable information
to the bridge owner or manager. The objective of the project is to create a
reliable method for performance and health assessment of beams in bridges based
on determination of the position of the neutral axis and on deformed shape.
State-of-the-art long-gauge fiber optic strain sensors have inherent advantage
to acquire data relevant to the global structural scale. Algorithms will be
created based on general probabilistic approaches, Bayesian structural
identification, and performance prediction models taking in to account
variability and uncertainties in collected data. Experimental validation will be
performed both through laboratory tests and controlled tests on two bridges in-
use. The method will be applicable to existing and new beam bridges and will not
be material dependent.