* 1362477
* Nonlinear Chemical Dynamics
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Irving Epstein, Brandeis University
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2018
* USD 608,878.00

CHE-1362477: Irving Epstein, Brandeis University, "Nonlinear Chemical
Dynamics"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Irving Epstein of Brandeis University is funded
by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms A program for research to
deepen our understanding of chemical systems that operate far from thermodynamic
equilibrium. One question the researchers are investigating involves the
chemical mechanism of the development of form in an embryo, a process known as
morphogenesis. Experiments are underway in this research project to more fully
test a suggestion made over fifty years ago by the late Alan Turing that
patterns in biology arise from a particular type of chemical pattern that also
exists in nonliving systems. In other experiments, the investigators are
building connected groups of model nerve cells to mimic and study communication
networks in the brain. Other experiments are using gels and a specially-designed
reactor to try to capture and preserve chemical patterns that have been observed
in previous studies but, to date, only as fleeting and transient patterns.
Because these studies are specifically designed to mimic certain behaviors in
biological systems, such as communications between neurons and the development
of form in embryos, the work helps us understand key life processes. Broader
impacts of this work are the education of future scientists and the inclusion of
otherwise under-represented groups in science. The Science Posse project, a
mentoring and outreach program designed by Epstein as part of this research
project, has received national recognition for its success in recruiting and
maintaining a diverse group of STEM students. Other outreach efforts include the
Science Café project, designed to bring science to the public, and a series of
YouTube videos.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this research project, the investigators
are building an open flow reactor for the study of emulsions consisting of 10-50
nm sized droplets of the Belousov-Zhabotinsky (BZ) reaction mixture. They are
also seeking to determine the conditions under which chemical oscillators other
than the BZ system can be introduced into nano-emulsions and will study pattern
formation in these other chemical systems. The group is exploring whether the
patterns that arise in emulsions can be "frozen in" to yield gels or solids that
might have novel optical, electrical or mechanical properties and, thus, might
be useful for developing new devices. Another study involves a hexagonal droplet
array of 100 nm BZ drops. Previous observation has revealed that the drops first
undergo chemical differentiation to produce either a reduced or an oxidized
steady state. Subsequent physical differentiation occurs and the droplets are
observed to either shrink or swell. Finally, new experiments are being carried
out to synthesize gels containing the BZ catalyst attached to a conducting
polymer backbone. Other experiments involve finding ways to attach new catalysts
for the Briggs-Rauscher oscillator to polymers.