* 1362980
* Cluster Algebras, Atomic Bases, and String Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* Gregg Musiker, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2018
* USD 139,999.00

Oftentimes in mathematics, a formula can arise from multiple perspectives. For
example, the quadratic formula from high school algebra is used to find the
roots of a polynomial equation but also indicates geometrically where a line and
a parabola intersect. In research on so-called cluster algebras, formulas arise
via a complicated but explicit process known as cluster mutation. In previous
research, the PI developed simpler models that give an alternative way to
compute these formulas and avoid the longer recursive procedure. This research
project compares these models to those arising in string theory and geometry,
revealing new features of all of these topics in the process, and creating
exciting collaborations among physicists, mathematicians, and
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates various applications of
cluster algebras, defined by Fomin and Zelevinsky in 2001, to topics in other
fields of mathematics and physics. Cluster algebras are certain commutative
algebras defined by binomial exchange relations introduced to study Lusztig's
dual canonical bases. Since then, applications to many different topics have
been discovered, including category theory, quiver representations, Teichmüller
theory, discrete integrable systems, polyhedral combinatorics, and statistical
physics, just to name a few. This research project will further investigate the
connections to hyperbolic geometry and string theory. In particular, the PI will
investigate scattering diagrams and brane tilings and their links to cluster
algebras and cluster variables.