* 1362686
* "Higher Energy Gap" Control Principle in Fluorescent Conjugated Polymers
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Evgueni Nesterov, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 07/31/2018
* USD 375,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms-B
(CSDM-B) Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Evgueni Nesterov of
Louisiana State University is developing a new operational principle for
amplifying fluorescent sensors using semiconducting polymers. This program
directly impacts one of the promising research and technological fields, organic
optoelectronic and sensing materials, using highly sensitive and reliable
detecting devices for important targets. Materials to be studied include those
with dual functions, for example, porous organic materials for simultaneous
detection and detoxification of organophosphate warfare agents. Participating
students are trained in a multidisciplinary and collaborative fashion, preparing
them to become highly competitive in the high-tech job market.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ultimate goal of this research program is to develop
and study in detail the novel "higher energy gap" paradigm for controlling
photophysical properties of fluorescent conjugated polymers (CPs). The immediate
objective is the preparation of novel CP materials which achieve high
chemosensing performance and practical utility. The project involves: (1) design
and synthesis of a series of CP systems incorporating reactive sites, which are
converted into higher-energy upon reacting with target analyte; (2)
photophysical studies (including time-resolved spectroscopies) and synthetic
manipulations to evaluate the nature of the higher energy gap control; (3)
design of practical chemosensory systems which utilize this control principle to
as a natural counterpart to the traditional amplification schemes based on
energy migration in CPs. In addition to direct practical benefits of the
advanced sensing systems to the national security and environmental monitoring,
the broader impacts of this work include benefits to the society from
multidisciplinary training of graduate and undergraduate students in STEM
disciplines, from public awareness and appreciation of modern science and
technology, and from increased interest in science in younger generations.