* 1362251
* RUI: Support Shape Effect in Metal-CeO2 Catalysis on Low-Temperature CO Oxidation
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2014,10/31/2016
* Ruigang Wang, Youngstown State University
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 10/31/2016
* USD 200,640.00

Professor Ruigang Wang of Youngstown State University is funded by the Chemical
Catalysis Program of the Division of Chemistry for research to help improve the
performance of systems used to catalyze the conversion of dangerous carbon
monoxide emissions to less harmful substances. These catalytic conversion
systems, composed of tiny particles of metal supported on a metal oxide
substrate, are used in automobiles as part of the exhaust clean-up system, but
also find application in gas sensors, fuel cells and other useful devices. The
nature of the interaction of the small metal particles with the oxide substrate,
as well as the contact area between these two parts of the system, determines
how selective and active the catalytic convertor is. Therefore, the goal of this
research is to develop a deeper and more detailed understanding of how contact
between the metal particles and the oxide substrate affects the catalysis so
that performance of these devices can be improved. In addition to the broader
impact that this work is having on technology of use to society, the work is
also positively affecting the educational experience of a number of
undergraduate students involved in the research. Youngstown State enrolls a high
percentage of students from groups that are traditionally under-represented in
science, so the research team is working with other programs at the university
to engage students from these minority groups in the project. The research is
having a further impact by the inclusion of community college faculty from the
surrounding region in the research team.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
focuses on elucidating the effect of the shape and size of cerium oxide (CeO2,)
supports on carbon monoxide oxidation. The goal is to develop stable catalysts
with high redox activity at low temperatures. Particle shape and, especially,
the type of crystalline faces exposed on the surface of crystalites are believed
to play a major role in surface reducibility and catalytic activity of cerium-
based oxide type redox catalysts. Preliminary data obtained in a pilot study
have shown that CeO2 particles shaped as nanorods, nanotubes, or nanocubes with
reactive {110}, {100}, {211}, etc., faces on the crystal surface can be produced
using hydrothermal and microwave methods. In this project, the research team is
preparing CeO2 supports with well-defined sizes and shapes, and investigating
how these shapes and sizes affect model catalytic reactions, such as carbon
monoxide oxidation and the water-gas shift reaction. The overall goal of this
research is to develop a predictive model that naturally links different metals
with various CeO2 surfaces for a superior low-temperature catalytic activity.
Through the development of such a predictive model, the project has the
potential to have a major impact on materials processing for many practical
applications such as catalysis, fuel reaction and gas sensing, where the redox
functionality of cerium-based oxides plays a crucial role.