* 1362294
* SusChEM: Base Metal Heterobimetallic Catalysts For C-H Borylation And C-C Coupling
* MPS,CHE
* 05/15/2014,04/30/2017
* Neal Mankad, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 04/30/2017
* USD 375,000.00

In this projected funded by the Chemical Catalysis program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Neal Mankad of the University of Illinois at Chicago focuses
on the development of strategies for replacing noble metals with less expensive,
and more easily available base metals. To approach this problem, new catalyst
designs featuring inexpensive, benign, and earth-abundant elements are used to
mimic the behavior of traditional catalysts based on precious metals that are
expensive, rare, and environmentally hazardous. The ultimate goal of this
research is to decrease the environmental and toxicological footprint of
chemical catalysis and shift towards more sustainable
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The catalyst design in this project pairs base
metals such as iron and copper with direct, heterobimetallic metal-metal bonds.
The design principle involves uncovering cooperative chemistry of the
heterobimetallic pairs that is unavailable to either individual base metal
fragment, thereby reproducing chemistry typically observed at a single-site
noble metal, but in a bimetallic fashion. Using a modular synthetic approach,
several candidate catalysts are readily constructed for probing important
problems in catalysis. Precise control of the steric and electronic environments
at the bimetallic cores is achieved, as characterized by NMR spectroscopy, IR
spectroscopy, X-ray crystallography, Mossbauer spectroscopy, and physical
methods performed in collaboration with scientists at nearby Argonne National
Laboratory. These heterobimetallic complexes are being explored as replacements
for iridium in C-H functionalization catalysis and for palladium in C-C coupling
catalysis. The concepts of sustainability in chemistry are being incorporated by
Professor Mankad into the inorganic chemistry curriculum at the University of
Illinois at Chicago. In addition, Professor Mankad has co-founded and co-
organized the Chicago Regional Inorganic Colloquium series to network groups
working on similar projects in the Chicago area. The broader impacts of this
work include providing a training environment for future scientists while
learning the fundamental scientific principles that allow base metals to replace
noble metals in catalytic reactions of potential societal importance.