* 1362083
* Planning Grant:  I/UCRC for BWAC
* CSE,CNS
* 04/15/2014,07/31/2016
* John Daigle, University of Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Thyagarajan Nandagopal
* 07/31/2016
* USD 13,869.00

University of Mississippi (UM) will be conducting the planning grant meeting for
becoming a site of the Broadband Wireless Access and Applications (BWAC) I/UCRC.
The UM site will conduct cooperative research in the area of broadband wireless
technology involving faculty from electrical engineering and computer science.
The planning workshop will be held at conference facility on the UM campus in
Oxford, MS. From this workshop the UM site will identify the specific research
areas that are of relevance to potential industry members and align the research
projects according to industry member needs. UM site has research capabilities
in the areas of cognitive radios, sensor localization, file transfer protocols
for big data, wireless transmission of medical-images, wireless security,
wireless monitoring of elderly in assisted-living facility, and smart grids.
Four participating UM electrical engineering researchers have expertise in
wireless communications, and specialization in one or more areas related to
networks, coding theory, performance analysis in fading channels, emerging
wireless standards and technology, decision fusion, statistical signal
processing, and wireless security. Additional faculty expertise at UM exists in
the areas of electromagnetic (EM) theory and antenna measurement. Faculty with
relevant expertise from the Department of Computer Science and UM's industry-
aligned Haley Barbour Center for Manufacturing Excellence (CME) will augment the
research efforts of the UM BWAC I/UCRC site. The focus of the center is targeted
to reach out to the technology and equipment manufacturers of wireless
communications industries, defense electronics industries dealing with radars
and communications systems, power companies and utilities, manufacturing and
health-care industries within the geographical region of the University, and
certain Mississippi state agencies. The collaboration with industry members in
the Southeastern U.S. will provide co-op and internship opportunities for
students opening networking opportunities and exposure to industrial-experts
lectures.

The UM site is expected to provide graduate education and research opportunities
for 10 students annually. Annually, 6 to 8 qualified undergraduate students will
be encouraged to participate in the research projects pursued by the center and
will be paid undergraduate stipends. The center will be marketed as an avenue
for technology development thereby recruiting 20 to 30 additional undergraduate
and 10 to 15 additional graduate students to the educational programs offered by
the Electrical Engineering department at UM. By leveraging the minority graduate
fellowships offered by NSF and the support of the Computer Engineering and
Computer Science Departments at Jackson State University, which is primarily a
baccalaureate level HBCU, the UM site expects to attract and graduate three to
four underrepresented minority Ph.D. students over a five-year period. Summer
workshops for middle school children will be conducted in collaboration with the
UM Center for Science and Math Education to kindle their interest in STEM and
wireless applications. Specialized courses and workshops for industries on big
data transfer, wireless telemedicine, and cognitive radios will be developed and
offered. These courses will be elective courses for the advanced undergraduates
and graduate students.