* 1362785
* Random Structures and Algorithms
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2017
* Tom Bohman, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 05/31/2017
* USD 330,000.00

This research project is an investigation of discrete mathematical objects, like
networks or codes, whose structure is generated randomly. Randomness has long
played an important role in the construction of sophisticated mathematical
objects and randomness plays a central role in many algorithms in computer
science. Part of this research focuses on objects that are generated by a
sequence of dependent random choices. Such processes can be good models for the
dynamics of real-world phenomenon, like the spread of a disease in a network,
the evolution of social networks such as facebook or twitter, or phase
transitions in materials. We are particularly interested in the solution of
challenging computational problems in the context of random structures, and this
work will hopefully be useful in drawing back the shadow of the negative results
of complexity theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study of random
combinatorial structures has emerged as an important component of Discrete
Mathematics. This research project focuses on various structural properties of
random graphs and hypergraphs. One area of emphasis is the study of the
existence of Hamilton cycles in various sparse random graph models. It is
natural to conjecture that any suitably random model that ensures that a graph
has minimum degree 3 will have a Hamilton cycle with high probability. While
this has been established in a few setting, a number of very natural open
questions remain, and the development of a unified theory of Hamiltonicity of
sparse random graphs is a long range goal of this research. This project also
includes the study of algorithmic questions. For example, we will put
significant effort into the study of Cuckoo hashing. Here the main question is
whether or not the insertion of a new item into the hash table takes constant
expected time. Our approach here will be to show that an associated graph has a
fast mixing time, applying the theory of mixing times for Markov chains.