* 1362460
* Conjugated Hybrids: Functionalization of Polyaromatic and Pi-Conjugated Systems with Group 13 Elements
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Frieder Jaekle, Rutgers University Newark
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 07/31/2017
* USD 360,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Synthesis Program of the NSF Chemistry
Division, Professor Frieder Jaekle develops new conjugated hybrid materials that
contain electron-deficient Group 13 elements (boron, aluminum, gallium, and
indium). Conjugated organic materials enjoy ubiquitous applications in organic
electronics, sensory materials, and supramolecular chemistry. This research aims
to take advantage of recent advances in the field of Main Group Chemistry for
the development of new types of conjugated hybrid materials. Organoborane groups
offer electron-acceptor effect that are useful in new solution-processible
materials for light emitting devices (LEDs), field-effect transistors (FETs),
and photovoltaics (OPVs) - applications where acceptor materials remain in high
demand. In addition, Lewis acidic organoboranes show promise as sensors for
anions and other toxic small molecules.

Selective boron-silicon and boron-tin exchange chemistries, Lewis base-directed
electrophilic aromatic substitutions, and strategies for borenium cation
formation are exploited to prepare new classes of pi-conjugated materials that
are expected to exhibit: (i) strong electron-acceptor character, (ii) charge
transfer and two-photon absorption properties, and (iii) a propensity for
assembly on surfaces or interaction with other carbon nanomaterials. The project
contributes to the training of a diverse group of students in an
interdisciplinary research environment. A special focus is placed on the
training of students from groups underrepresented in chemistry (e.g. American
Chemical Society Project SEED high school students). Students benefit from
collaborations with physical chemists in the US and Germany. In addition,
Professor Jaekle organizes symposia and conferences such as the annual "Boron in
the Americas" meeting.