* 1362465
* Accurate molecular crystal modeling for nuclear magnetic resonance crystallography
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Gregory Beran, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 07/31/2018
* USD 443,001.00

Gregory Beran at the University of California, Riverside is supported by an
award from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods (CTMC) Program
in the Chemistry Division and the Computational and Data-Enabled Science and
Engineering Program (CDS&amp;E) to develop state-of-the-art computational
strategies for predicting the most stable molecular crystal structures and for
coupling these predictions with experiments to determine crystal packing, The
efficacy of pharmaceuticals, novel organic electronic materials, and many other
crystalline solids depends critically on the manner in which the molecules pack
together to form crystals. In the longer term, these studies of pharmaceutical
crystal packing will help the formulation of medicinal drugs with improved
shelf-life, solubility, and other important properties. Software resulting from
this project will be made widely available to the community. The principal
investigator also engages in outreach activities to bring awareness of
scientific computing to the a broad range of students and to the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve these goals, new electronic structure
algorithms that provide more accurate descriptions of intermolecular
interactions at lower computational cost are being developed that will enable
reliable crystal structure modeling. Improved techniques for predicting nuclear
magnetic resonance chemical shifts are being developed to allow mapping between
experimentally measured spectra and three-dimensional structural models. High-
quality chemical shift predictions are needed to discriminate among different
crystal packing forms. These techniques are being integrated into a workflow
that combines crystal structure prediction, nuclear magnetic resonance spectrum
simulations, and experimental measurements to identify the structures for
several unknown crystal forms of two important pharmaceuticals. The new methods
are incorporated into software which will be released to under open-source
licensing terms. The code will be integrated into the Q-CHEM package, a
commercial code with a very large user base.