* 1362541
* Novel Catalytic Annulation Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Vladimir Gevorgyan, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 07/31/2017
* USD 450,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Vladimir Gevorgyan of the Department of Chemistry at the
University of Illinois at Chicago is developing novel transition metal-catalyzed
methodologies to synthesize multisubstituted aromatics and heteroaromatics.
Existing catalytic approaches toward these ubiquitous classes of compounds
suffer from regioselectivity problems, whereas more selective methods usually
require employment of stoichiometric organometallic reagents, which severely
limits broad application of these methodologies. To address this problem,
development of truly novel catalytic methods for selective construction of
diverse aromatic and heteroaromatic frameworks will be pursued. The proposed
work is expected to have broader impacts in health related areas by providing
new effective routes to biologically important intermediates and in material
sciences by allowing easy access to valuable building blocks, which could be
utilized in the rapid assembly of complex frameworks and conjugated materials.
Moreover, the development of sequential or one-pot transformations, in which
multiple reactions occur in one flask, has a positive environmental impact by
dramatically reducing waste and the cost of chemical
transformations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on
broadening Pd-catalyzed [4+2] and formal [2+2+2] benzannulation reactions. An
emphasis is placed on the development of novel activating groups, elaboration of
migratory cyclizations and C-H functionalization techniques to synthesize
multisubstituted benzenes. Novel pre-benzannulation cascades, involving
dimerization of alkynes in a head-to-head fashion, followed by their
benzannulation with diynes is also being explored. In addition, the development
of novel post-benzannulation cascades, including various types of sequential or
one-pot carbo- and heterocyclizations proceeding after the benzannulation step
is being pursued. Finally, several novel modes of heterobenzannulation are being
used to synthesize pyridines. These novel reactions, if fully developed, allow
for a dramatic increase of molecular complexity giving easy access to important,
densely substituted frameworks from simple precursors.