* 1362183
* RUI: Developing Convergent Syntheses of Complex Nitrogen Heterocycles
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Erin Pelkey, Hobart and William Smith Colleges
* Standard Grant
* Tarek Sammakia
* 08/31/2018
* USD 210,000.00

With this New award, the Chemical Synthesis Program supports Professor Erin T.
Pelkey of Hobart and William Smith Colleges in a study of the synthesis of
cyclic molecules with nitrogen in their rings. Since these structures are
ubiquitous in compounds of biomedical significance, the development of new
selective and efficient methods for their synthesis is an important goal. These
methods will expand the repertory of tools available to synthetic chemists
seeking to develop new routesto wide range of biologically important natural
products, drugs, and related compounds of medicinal interest. The research will
involve extensive collaboration with undergraduate research students, including
those from historically under-represented groups, and will provide these young
scientists with valuable training in organic synthetic techniques.

The project will investigate convergent routes to 3,4-diarylpyrrolinones from
tetramic acid precursors. In particular, the project will investigate the
convergent stepwise attachment of aromatic and heteroaromatic groups to C-3 and
C-4 positions of tetramic acid by a variety of cross-coupling reactions.
Subsequent intramolecular aryl-aryl couplings leading to
dibenzo[e,g]isoindol-1-ones will be studied. These investigations, which will
take advantage of the ready availability of tetramic acids, will focus on
maximizing convergent synthetic methodology.