* 1362095
* Asymmetric Hydrovinylation of 1,3-Dienes
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Thaliyil RajanBabu, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 06/30/2018
* USD 435,000.00

In this project supported by the Chemical Catalysis program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor RajanBabu aims to develop efficient and selective new
reactions of readily available starting materials such as ethylene and simple
1,3-dienes for the production of valuable chemical intermediates. These
intermediates could be used for the synthesis of pharmaceutical, agricultural
and polymer products. Through an approach that relies on the preparation of new
catalysts, and detailed study of reactions, the PI's group addresses two
significant challenges: activation of stable molecules to enhance their
reactivity and high selectivity in their reactions. Search for solutions to such
challenging problems can provide opportunities to make fundamental discoveries
having an impact in the field of catalysis. The interdisciplinary nature of this
research, which covers the areas of organic, inorganic and organometallic
chemistry, and employs the techniques from analytical, physical organic and
computational chemistry, provides a valuable platform for training students at
every level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1,3-Dienes such as butadiene and isoprene are
readily accessible starting materials that have been used only rarely for the
synthesis of fine chemicals. Low reactivity of simple alkyl or aryl substituted
dienes and their conformational mobility are largely responsible for this dearth
of activity in this area. The PI's group recently developed the first examples
of highly enantioselective cobalt-catalyzed additions of ethylene to a wide
variety of 1,3-dienes. Extensions of these innovative methods provide highly
reactive new intermediates that are useful for elaboration into medicinally
relevant compounds. Proposed research to expand the scope of starting materials
further enhances the power of this method in organic synthesis by decreasing the
synthetic steps required to prepare complex molecules. Since ethylene can be
derived from bio-ethanol, these methods add to the repertoire of sustainable
processes. The PI is involved in the introduction of a research module to a
sophomore laboratory. The experiments in this module are carefully chosen to
familiarize a large class with some modern aspects of organic chemistry that
relate to selectivity and sustainability.