* 1362680
* GOALI: Simple Low Cost Methods for Making Conductive Interfacial Coatings for Solid Oxide Fuel Cells
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* Hossein Ghezel-Ayagh, Tennessee Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 07/31/2018
* USD 357,896.00

Fuel cells are a promising technology for converting the chemical energy stored
in fuels such as hydrogen and methanol into useful electrical energy in a clean
and environmentally sustainable manner. Fuel cells can be used to power a number
of devices, from portable electronics to electric vehicles. One type of fuel
cell, referred to as a solid-oxide fuel cell or SOFC, is particularly well
suited for use in providing power for transportation applications such as
electric cars. Today, solid oxide fuel cells can be manufactured that have
excellent performance, but the electrical power output and efficiency of those
fuel cells degrade quickly over time. This Grant Opportunity for Academic
Liaison with Industry (GOALI) award supports the development of new materials
and a new manufacturing technique that can overcome one of the problems leading
to this degradation in SOFC fuel cell performance. In particular, failure often
occurs at the point at which the electrical wiring is connected to the parts of
the fuel cell where chemical reactions take place to create the electric
current. In this work, a new method and material for making this electrical
connection to the fuel cell will be developed that will greatly increase the
operating lifetime of SOFC fuel cells. This project will be conducted as a
collaboration between university and industrial partners, which will provide a
pathway for commercial application of the scientific advances made in the work.
The scientific and societal broader impacts of the project will stem from the
wide number of applications fuel cells in industry and society for clean power
generation. The award will support training and education of undergraduate and
graduate students in an integrated university-industry team environment, and the
development of outreach programs directed at K-12 students to stimulate interest
in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) careers by using
fuel cells and electric power production as hands-on demonstration platforms.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to study the fundamentals of a
new process in which the electrical interconnect layer at the fuel cell cathode
and the porous cathode itself are made in a one-step process that can be simple
and inexpensive, thus solving a major problem in SOFC commercial development. In
this work, a process will be developed in which the cathode and electric
interconnect interface is processed in one step using reactive sintering. This
research will be the first attempt to systematically study the mechanistic
aspects of environmentally-assisted reactive sintering for synthesis of spinel
layers with metallic powders as the starting materials. Such spinel layers could
be an ideal interface material at the cathode-interconnect interface. The
reactive sintering process will be applied to synthesize a spinel-based dual-
layer structure that can serve as both interconnect coating and cathode-side
contact layer. The promising dual-layer spinel structures will then be
critically evaluated with regard to its applicability as a cathode-interconnect
interface. Cost reduction and improvement in long-term stack performance
stability afforded by the spinel dual-layer structure will contribute to the
commercial viability of the solid oxide fuel cell technology.