* 1362824
* C*-algebras, Groups, and Topological Invariants
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2018
* Marius Dadarlat, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Justin Holmer
* 05/31/2018
* USD 240,000.00

The study of physical laws has led to the development of a refined mathematical
framework where the algebra of numerical functions is subsumed by a theory based
on infinite matrices. Infinite matriceal structures such as operator algebras
are able to depict and model the interactions of elementary particles and the
symmetries underlying quantum physics. The present project is part of a
concerted effort to extend fundamental ideas and techniques of analysis and
geometry to the noncommutative context of operator (matrix) algebras. The
project will investigate the existence of finite-dimensional approximations of
operator algebras that are sufficiently rich to capture key features of the
initial data. Passing to finite-dimensional models is important since it gives
access to concrete numerical invariants. Inevitably, the structure of the
finite-dimensional models will be somewhat less symmetric than their infinite-
dimensional counterparts. The loss of exact symmetries is an essential feature
of the approximant finite models. It reflects subtle topological properties that
the principal investigator aims to quantify in numerical form. The resulting
invariants are related to those arising in the mathematics underpinning the
physics of novel materials, such as topological insulators with crystalline
symmetry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research concerns two projects in operators
algebras that have analytical and topological aspects. The first project is
devoted to groups, C*-algebras, and their approximations by finite-dimensional
matrix models. It will examine the existence of deformations of discrete groups
and group C*-algebras into matrix algebras, the invariants that arise from these
deformations, and potential topological obstructions encountered in the process.
One underlying goal of the investigation is to develop a better understanding of
the topological nature of quasidiagonality, a finite-dimensional approximation
property that plays a central role in the structure theory of C*-algebras. The
second project concerns the theory of continuous fields of C*-algebras and their
generalizations to C*-algebras over general spaces. While the primitive spectrum
of a C*-algebra is a fundamental invariant, it has one important limitation. It
gives only a low-level description of how the ideals are glued together. A first
goal of the project is to develop computable invariants that capture
K-theoretical interactions between ideals and local quotients. A second goal is
to further develop the generalized Dixmier-Douady theory of continuous fields of
strongly self-absorbing C*-algebras due to Ulrich Pennig and the principal
investigator.