* 1362629
* Foundations for Practical Solar Fuel Schemes: Novel Photosensitizer and Catalyst Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Stefan Bernhard, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 08/31/2017
* USD 446,000.00

This award in the Catalysis program in the Division of Chemistry supports the
work of Professor Stefan Bernhard at Carnegie Mellon University. The proposed
work focuses on the design of novel materials for the conversion of sunlight
into fuels. Solar energy conversion is of great societal interest, so this
project inspires students to gain chemical knowledge and to become involved in
chemical research. The educational activities at the undergraduate and graduate
student level will focus on the theme of renewable energy, while outreach
activities for non-scientists will both educate the public on energy issues and
instill excitement for science in general.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Materials will
be transition metal based and will address every step of catalytic fuel
generation from light absorption to reductive fuel production and complementary
water oxidation. For light absorption, a wide variety of dyes will be developed
targeting both broad coverage of the solar spectrum and highly efficient
activation of the fuel generating catalyst. Particular attention will be given
to the ligation and geometry of the dyes such that they will be robust under
illumination. Novel catalysts will also be envisioned exploring advanced
modification of the architecture as a means of pushing the limits of performance
and lifetime. Developed components will be tested in hydrogen producing
catalytic systems and these systems will then be further evolved to function in
the presence of the complementary water oxidation processes. It is the ultimate
objective of this work to create a molecular system capable of splitting water
into hydrogen fuel and oxygen using sunlight alone.