* 1362652
* Collaborative Research: Integration of Implantable MEMS Sensors and Computational Modeling to Assess Mechanical Regulation of Bone Regeneration
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2017
* Mark Allen, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* David Fyhrie
* 06/30/2017
* USD 135,076.00

These studies will provide a detailed characterization of the bone healing
mechanical environment in vivo at both the tissue level and the local cell
level. Additionally, the small scale and wireless properties of sensors advanced
in this study will provide a platform to enable non-invasive quantification of
the local mechanical environment for a broad range of regenerative engineering
and medicine applications. Ultimately, these sensors could be utilized to
transform the methods, modes, and costs of tissue replacements and enable the
real time assessment of such cases as graft rejection and spinal fixation. This
project will also combine an educational plan with three routes for broadening
participation: (1) outreach programs in micro- and nanotechnology to K-12
participants; (2) GT-ENGAGE, a program which immerses high-school students from
underrepresented groups in engineering research projects; and (3) the GT-SURE
undergraduate research opportunity program. Through this approach, students
across age ranges from K-college will be provided both a broad and detailed
immersion in the research and technology development experience.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this award is to develop a
multi-scale mechanics approach to comprehensively characterize the in vivo
mechanical environment within a tissue engineered construct during regeneration.
Studies conducted under this award will utilize implantable wireless
microelectromechanical (MEMS) sensors, biomechanical testing, and image-based
finite element modeling. Tissue engineered constructs and dynamic fixation
plates will be instrumented with wireless MEMS sensors; these will then be
implemented in a well-established in vivo critically sized segmental bone defect
model. In vivo measurements of the local strain gradients within the engineered
constructs will be measured in real time during the course of regeneration to
obtain a loading history. Image-based finite element models of the local
mechanical strains in regenerating bone will be created and validated using the
in vivo data from the implantable MEMS sensors.