* 1362134
* I/UCRC:  Cloud and Autonomic Computing I/UCRC site at Texas Tech University (CAC@TTU)
* CSE,CNS
* 04/15/2014,08/31/2021
* Alan Sill, Texas Tech University
* Continuing Grant
* Behrooz Shirazi
* 08/31/2021
* USD 630,331.00

Texas Tech University (TTU) is proposing to be added as a site to the existing
I/UCRC for Cloud and Autonomic Computing (CAC). TTU site will focus on cloud
standards and standards-based software development innovation. It will extend
and enhance the activities of the CAC in areas related to cloud computing best
practices and standards research, including standards-based software,
development and use of software stacks and reference implementations, and
industry applications in real-world settings. TTU site will be working with the
largest and most active of the computing-oriented Standards Development
Organizations and vendors. The research effort will meet the industry need to
organize, classify, develop reference implementations and contribute to the
standards-based software in advanced distributed computing. Development of
appropriate industry- and community-based consensus standards and application of
these methods are required to exploit the capacity for transformative change
provided by the new techniques for cloud and other advanced distributed
computing. Without coordination on interface standards, algorithms and
techniques, many potential advantages of these methods may be compromised due to
a chaotic multiplicity of approaches, protocols and application programmer
interfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The TTU site will leverage contacts with three
outreach-oriented organizations with which the PIs are involved: (1) the TTU
STEM Education &amp; Outreach project for which the university has been
nationally recognized; (2) by extensions of the existing High Performance
Computing Center (HPCC) involvement in the SURAgrid regional grid and cloud
computing educational dissemination project (including ongoing collaborations
with the SURAgrid Virtual Organization and Cloud Computing Options Working
Group); and (3) the High Performance Computing Across Texas (HiPCAT)
organization, which concentrates on broadening access to grid and cloud
computing in the physical sciences. The TTU HPCC and the PIs have extensive
involvement with each of these programs. The site will develop an annual
targeted workshop to integrate hands-on learning experiences for historically
under-represented population groups into the projects that will be carried out
during the performance period of this proposal, as well as activities to engage
with the needs of selected non-profit organizations in areas in which they could
benefit from the use of cloud computing. Texas Tech University has a number of
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) educational outreach
programs that overlap in the area of recruiting new students and in the
mentoring of STEM students from underrepresented groups. The PIs will leverage
these programs to strengthen their recruitment efforts.