* 1362140
* Stabilizing Unusual Main Group Allotropes, Alloys and Radicals Using Carbonyl-Decorated Carbenes
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2018
* Todd Hudnall, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* Tarek Sammakia
* 04/30/2018
* USD 345,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Todd Hudnall of the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry
at Texas State University will explore the development of methods for
stabilizing low-oxidation state and low-valent main group compounds. In addition
to their fundamental value in improving our understanding of main group
chemistry, these targeted low-oxidation state main group compounds may be
further utilized in applications such as energy storage at the molecular level
or in the preparation of novel nanostructured main group alloys. The project
lies at the interface of organic, inorganic, and materials chemistry, and is
therefore well suited to the education of scientists at all levels. Texas State
University is classified as a Hispanic Serving Institution, and is well-
positioned to provide the highest level of education and training for students
underrepresented in science. Outreach activities involving K-12 students will
also be part of the funded project.

Specifically, this work will explore the potential for a unique class of
electrophilic carbenes to support main group elements in unusual coordination
environments and oxidation states. By utilizing carbonyl-decorated carbenes as
stabilizing ligands, this project seeks to synthesize: (a) stable radicals
centered on heavy group 15 elements; (b) carbene-supported terminal borylenes
and gallylenes; and (c) formally zero oxidation state main group allotropes and
alloys.