* 1362048
* I/UCRC:  Center for Advanced Design and Manufacturing of Integrated Microfluidics (CADMIM)
* ENG,EEC
* 03/15/2014,07/31/2017
* Ian Papautsky, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 07/31/2017
* USD 278,000.00

The I/UCRC for Advanced Design and Manufacturing of Integrated Microfluidics
intends emphasize design-oriented research that anticipates the need for cost-
effective manufacture and practical deployment. The center plans to undertake a
simultaneous, broad-front integrated strategy that seeks breakthroughs at the
interfaces of the thrust areas in material science, material processing,
biology, chemistry, device design, electronics, and component integration.
Proactive emphasis on volume production and on-chip interfaces to existing
communications infrastructure are new research priorities for microfluidics
prototypes. These considerations early in the research and design cycle are
viewed as key to transitioning technologies out of academic laboratories and
into the manufacturing sector for societal benefit.

The I/UCRC for Advanced Design and Manufacturing of Integrated Microfluidics
employ competitive recruitment mechanisms and attractive cross-disciplinary
collaborative graduate research opportunities to engage excellent students,
including members of underrepresented groups. In addition to publications in
archival journals and conference proceedings, knowledge dissemination includes
an open-source "microfluidic function library" containing design specifications
for microfluidic "circuits" and interchangeable components organized by
application and chip manufacturing processes. Scalable prototyping processes
also will be targeted for dissemination to academia and industry, including
established companies and entrepreneurs, with the goal of dramatically
shortening the idea-to-product process.