* 1362302
* Molecular Design of Air-Stable n-type Fluorocarbon Semiconductors
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2014,12/31/2020
* Olga Boltalina, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 12/31/2020
* USD 511,506.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamic & Mechanism B Program
of the Chemistry Division, Professor Steven Strauss and Dr. Olga Boltalina of
the Department of Chemistry at Colorado State University will design a series of
new robust, air stable fluorocarbon acceptor materials from earth-abundant
elements. These new light-weight fluoroorganic acceptors will possess
incrementally tunable electronic properties desirable for n-type organic
semiconductors and sufficiently broad range of solid state packing motifs to
allow for molecular engineering of high-performance and air-stable materials for
optoelectronics. Their potential applications include but are not limited to
various organic electronic architectures (organic photovoltaic devices, organic
light-emitting diodes, Organic thin-film transistors, and various types of
chemical sensors). An important goal of this project will be the advancement of
scientific education by broadly training graduate students to become the next
generation of problem-solving scientists. By participating in this project they
will become chemical jacks-of-all-trades, learning the difficult art of chemical
synthesis and then mastering, through hands-on experimentation, an armamentarium
of physical techniques, including those in collaborators laboratories around the
world.

These materials are based on hydrocarbyl and heteroatom-containing polycyclic
aromatic hydrocarbons with multiple electron-withdrawing groups, primarily, but
not exclusively, fluorocarbon groups. In contrast to common synthetic approaches
involving multiple steps and metal catalysts, the team will use a solvent-,
catalyst-, or promoter-free gas-phase syntheses that will efficiently yield most
thermodynamically stable products. Fundamental understanding of the
interrelationships between single molecule properties and bulk material and
composites functions will be gained through a systematic approach based on
studies of the carefully selected families of high-purity novel electroactive
fluorocarbon compounds by the following physicochemical techniques: gas-phase
electron affinity measurements by low-temperature photoemission spectroscopy;
cyclic voltammetry; ESR- and UV-Vis-NIR-spectroelectro-chemistry; time resolved
microwave conductivity of thin films and blends with donor materials; and time-
resolved photoluminescence measurements of thin films and blends.