* 1362352
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: CLUSTER STRUCTURES ON POISSON-LIE GROUPS AND COMPLETE INTEGRABILITY
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2018
* Michael Shapiro, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Janet Striuli
* 05/31/2018
* USD 223,482.00

This project lies in Algebra and focuses on cluster algebras and Poisson-Lie
groups. Since the invention of cluster algebras by Fomin and Zelevinsky in 2001,
the mathematical community witnessed an explosion of interest in the subject due
to the deep connections that were revealed between cluster algebras and a
variety of branches of mathematics and theoretical physics ranging from quiver
representations and algebraic geometry to string theory and statistical physics.
The PIs will build upon their previous collaborations to continue a systematic
study of multiple cluster structures in coordinate rings of Poisson-Lie groups
and a number of other varieties of importance in algebraic geometry,
representation theory and mathematical physics and study an interaction between
corresponding cluster algebras. The proposed research is linked to the
development of undergraduate and graduate courses and research projects.
Synergistic activities are planned with the goal to promote inter-institutional
and inter-departmental cooperation, to attract graduate students from
underrepresented groups and with diverse educational backgrounds, and, through
community outreach, to expose high school students to mathematical research.

The PIs will continue their work on applications of Poisson Geometry to the
theory of cluster algebras. The main goals of the project include construction
and study of (i) exotic cluster structures on simple Lie groups compatible with
Poisson-Lie brackets described by the Belavin-Drinfeld classification; (ii)
generalized cluster structures on the Drinfeld double and the Poisson-Lie dual
of a simple Poisson-Lie group; (iii) combinatorics and inverse problems for
higher genus nets dual to quivers arising in cluster structures above; (iv)
discrete integrable systems arising as sequences of cluster transformations and
elementary transformations of higher genus networks; (v) continuous limits for
directed networks with applications to moduli spaces of flat connections.