* 1363231
* Dynamics of Bluff Bodies with Internal Nonlinear Oscillators: Vortex-Induced Vibration Suppression, Partial Wake Stabilization, and Drag Reduction
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Arne Pearlstein, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 08/31/2018
* USD 330,000.00

Fluid-structure interaction is ubiquitous across a range of engineering
applications, from flutter and divergence in aerodynamics, to vibration of fuel
rods in nuclear power reactors, tension legs in offshore platforms, wind turbine
towers, and hydrokinetic energy harvesting. A major aim of this work is to
demonstrate that using intentionally designed nonlinear oscillators inside a
bluff body it is possible to passively suppress vortex induced vibrations -
VIVs, partially stabilize the wake past the body, and reduce the drag force
exerted by the surrounding fluid without any external modification. This
research can have broad and significant impact in diverse fields. For example,
the reduction of the drag forces on a bluff body through the action of internal
nonlinear oscillators might significantly affect the design of future air
vehicles and boats by enhancing their performance, enlarging their range of
operation and decreasing fuel consumption. Also, enhanced and economical
hydrodynamic vibration energy harvesting could be achieved by appropriate design
and optimization of internal nonlinear oscillators inside a body undergoing
VIVs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this research, the dynamic interactions of a
strongly nonlinear finite-dimensional oscillator with an infinite-dimensional
fluid flow will be studied. This is important in understanding not only fluid-
structure interaction in a variety of contexts, but also, in a broader sense,
because it serves as a testbed for understanding the nonlinear dynamical
behavior of a variety of other mechanical (and nonmechanical) systems involving
nonlinear interactions of coupled finite- and infinite-dimensional parts. The
fundamental importance of dealing with an intermediate-to-high range of Reynolds
number -- Re -- lies in the fact that our preliminary results show that the
dimension of the attractor in the two-dimensional laminar case is less than
four, while in the turbulent case, it is expected to grow as Re to the 9/4
power. This system thus provides a unique opportunity to understand the dynamics
of fluid-structure interaction, where the dimension of the attractor varies from
one (for periodic response) to much larger values. We will also study the
heretofore unexplored role of angular momentum in VIV. Finally, the capacity of
strongly nonlinear internal oscillating elements to drastically modify the wake
of a bluff body and reduce its drag coefficient at both intermediate and higher
Re will be explored. The research will be performed using slow/fast dynamical
decompositions, invariant slow manifold considerations, nonlinear system
identification, and reduced-order modeling techniques. High-fidelity fluid-
structure interaction computations will be performed in the laminar, transition,
and turbulent regimes.