* 1363050
* Emission and Charge Transfer in Conjugated Materials and Their Aggregates: Towards Imaging Films and Devices
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* David Yaron, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 07/31/2018
* USD 468,490.00

In this award, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms A
(CSDM-A) and the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry (MSN) Programs
of the Division of Chemistry, Professor Linda Peteanu of Carnegie-Mellon
University and her graduate and undergraduate student colleagues are
investigating some of the photophysical properties of organic-based photovoltaic
and electroluminescent materials. Despite the fact that these materials have
become important in a large number of consumer electronics applications, there
are aspects of their microscopic behavior that remain poorly understood. Prof.
Peteanu and her group are working on improving our understanding of some of the
molecular-level behavior of these materials, with an eye towards making improved
materials. The young scientists working with Prof. Peteanu will receive
interdisciplinary training in experimental physical chemistry and macromolecular
science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prof. Peteanu and her group are carrying out a
multi-pronged research program to obtain a better understanding how molecular-
level behavior influences the photophysical properties of organic oligomers that
mimic important classes of organic polymers. Specifically, Peteanu and her
students are: (1) performing experimental and theoretical studies of the ways in
which electric fields lead to emission quenching in a variety of engineered
materials; the theoretical work benefits from collaboration with David Yaron
(Carnegie Mellon University), Sergei Tretiak (Los Alamos National Laboratory),
and Jing Ma (Nanjing University); (2) conducting experimental and theoretical
studies of aggregate spectra; experiments will benefit from collaboration with
the Center for Functional Nanomaterials at Brookhaven National Laboratory; and
(3) developing higher-resolution imaging of confluent films and device
structures to understand the photophysical behavior of differing regions
(core/shell) in aggregates. Students working with Prof. Peteanu receive training
in modern physical chemistry methods. Prof. Peteanu and her group are also
involved in educational outreach efforts to the larger community, including
National Chemistry Week activities at the Carnegie Science Center.