* 1363227
* Statistical and Number-Theoretical Properties of Dynamical Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2014,09/30/2015
* Franceso Cellarosi, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Kitchens
* 09/30/2015
* USD 29,998.00

There are classical results in probability theory that allow one to predict the
average long term behavior of random phenomena. The aim of the proposed project
is to study to what extent certain classes of deterministic phenomena can be
treated as if they were random in order to understand properties of the original
system. Examples of deterministic sequences of numbers that can be approached
this way arise in problems of number theory and quantum mechanics; these provide
the focus of this project. In these settings, it is possible to phrase the
questions addressed by this project using the language of probability theory,
but the methods required are of a different nature and vary according to the
application, coming from the theory of dynamical systems. The PI has already
successfully achieved several results on these topics, and has been active in
the fast-advancing interplay between dynamics and number theory.

The PI plans to study the statistical properties of deterministic processes of
number theoretical origin such as Weyl exponential sums, multiplicative
arithmetic functions, and continued fraction expansions. Although several
properties of processes arising from dynamical systems are known, the PI aims to
investigate finer details and answer novel questions in the field. It should be
stressed that sometimes the limiting distributions agree with the classical ones
of probability theory (which means that the deterministic phenomenon of interest
is a good stochastic proxy); on the other hand, often one gets non-standard
distributions. This means that the classical probabilistic methods cannot be
applied and the theory requires new ideas and tools. The main methods in this
project are of dynamical nature, such as equidistribution of one-parameter flows
in homogeneous spaces, Ratner theory, and spectral methods. The PI has already
successfully achieved several results on the topics, and has been active in the
fast-advancing interplay between dynamics and number theory. The multifaceted
aspects of this proposal will serve as an opportunity for the PI to initiate
activities (such as interactive seminars, symposia, workshops) with the aim of
popularizing the research subjects and their applications.