* 1363325
* A New Avenue to Promote Lanthanide Ion Emission
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Ana de Bettencourt-Dias, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 08/31/2018
* USD 428,451.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms B
Program of the Chemistry Division of the National Science Foundation, Professor
Ana de Bettencourt-Dias and her research group at the University of Nevada,
Reno, decorate the surfaces of diverse nanoparticles with lanthanide ions and
assess the ability of these nanoparticles to sensitize lanthanide luminescence.
The materials developed have potential application as bioimaging agents. The
project involves training of undergraduate and graduate students, as well as
postdoctoral researchers, in the synthesis of nanoparticles, organic molecules
and lanthanide ion complexes, as well as modern emission and absorption
spectroscopic techniques. Student researchers gain experience in writing
manuscripts describing their research for publication. To further improve the
students' ability to write scientific manuscripts, Prof. de Bettencourt-Dias has
developed and will continue improving a course on scientific writing. Topics
such as strategies to increase writing productivity, outlining of research
manuscripts and graduate theses, the ethics of using published sources and
resume writing for job searching in industry are included.

Lanthanide ions are light emitters due to transitions within the 4f orbitals.
These transitions and the light emission are most easily promoted through
coordinated chromophores. As part of this project, the nanoparticle surfaces are
functionalized with existing and with new ligands that serve to increase their
aqueous solubility and biocompatibility; the ligands also coordinate the
lanthanide ions and serve as mediators for the energy transfer. With the help of
spectroscopic techniques such as fluorescence, the efficiency of the energy
transfer will be assessed and parameters will be developed for improvement of
the luminescence properties and for the future use of these decorated
nanoparticles in bioimaging applications.