* 1363524
* GOALI: Shear Texture and Microstructure Control in Sheet Metal for Enhanced Deformation Processing and Properties
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/2014,05/31/2017
* James Mann, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 05/31/2017
* USD 379,291.00

Metal sheet and foil are widely used or under consideration for use in advanced
structural and magnetic product applications. Currently, sheet and foil are
produced by multi-stage rolling processes. Rolling processes, while mature and
large-scale, offer only limited control of sheet attributes. Furthermore, they
are quite energy intensive and encumbered by high capital costs. In
collaboration with three industrial partners, this Grant Opportunity for
Academic Liaison with Indstry (GOALI) research will develop the processing
science of a class of extrusion-cutting processes to produce sheet and foil in a
single step. Simultaneously, the extrusion-cutting can tailor specific
attributes of the sheet, via control of texture and microstructure, in ways not
possible by the conventional rolling processes. Successful development and
implementation of the extrusion-cutting will provide efficient routes for
production of high-performance sheet metals of light-weight magnesium and
titanium alloys, and magnetic silicon-iron. This will be a key enabling step for
use of these alloys in automotive, bio-medical, aerospace and power systems
applications. Complementing the research is an education and training program
that includes industry internships, fostering of entrepreneurship in graduate
study and undergraduate research internships, including a new dimension to
training involving physically challenged students from the National Technical
Institute for the Deaf.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The large-strain, extrusion-cutting
processes can overcome some key barriers that limit the scope of rolling for
producing sheet and foil from advanced alloys. Specifically, the extrusion-
cutting can effect development of strong shear textures and fine-grained
microstructures in sheet metals. Prior work has shown scalability of the
extrusion-cutting, even for alloys of poor workability such as magnesium and
titanium. These observations suggest a paradigm for creating new sheet metals
with interesting structural, magnetic and formability properties. The project
team will build on the preliminary findings with four coordinated thrusts.
First, a deformation science initiative will measure, directly, the process
strain, strain rate and temperature fields using in situ high-speed imaging. It
will establish how special deformation paths can be exploited to control texture
and microstructure. Second, structure development will be analyzed through
texture analysis and electron microscopy. New shear-based textures, combined
with fine-grained structures, and their effects on formability are of particular
interest. Correlations will be established between deformation, texture and
microstructure. Third, microstructure-property relationships will be assessed by
characterizing orientation-dependent properties such as strength, formability
and magnetic permeability. Lastly, by integrating the results, process design
for producing sheet with optimal properties will be assessed in collaboration
with the industry partners.