* 1363315
* Collaborative Research:  Experimental and Computational Investigation of Multiphase Consolidation for Partially Saturated Soils
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Ning Lu, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 08/31/2019
* USD 199,907.00

Partially saturated soils are three-phase earth materials that contain both air
and water in the void space between the solid grains. Such soils are commonly
encountered in field construction for a wide range of civil engineering works,
including foundations, landfills, slopes, retaining walls, compacted fills, and
highways. The mechanical behavior of partially saturated soils is not well
understood because of complex interactions of the three phases. This award
supports fundamental research, using both experimental and computer modeling
methods, to provide needed knowledge of the mechanisms by which partially
saturated soils undergo deformation and volume change (i.e., consolidation)
under various loading conditions. This work has the potential to transform
current understanding of partially saturated soils, which has relevance to
sampling, testing, characterization, and monitoring, as well as design and
construction of sustainable civil infrastructures using these materials.

The objective of this research program is to conduct a comprehensive
experimental and computational investigation of multiphase consolidation for
partially saturated soils, and then assess the significance of these findings
for relevant applications in geotechnical and geoenvironmental engineering. This
work has both intrinsic scientific merit in terms of advancing the current
understanding of a widespread physical process, as well as practical utility in
terms of developing improved prediction methods for settlement, fluid flow,
effective stress, and final material property profiles for a wide range of
engineering applications. The experimental program will include multiphase
consolidation tests conducted for a variety of soils with changing stress and
hydrologic conditions. Measured data will be interpreted using a new and
consistent framework based on unified effective stress theory and the suction
stress characteristic curve. The computational program will develop new models
using a novel tri-lagrangian (solid-water-air) discretization method to track
movements of each phase while accounting for geometric and material
nonlinearities, compressible non-Darcy gas flow, coupled flow effects, phase
discontinuities, and mechanical and hydrologic hysteresis. Once validated, the
new models will be used to perform numerical simulation studies to assess the
significance of multiphase soil consolidation for a variety of engineering
applications and highlight the importance of these effects to the broader
geotechnical and geoenvironmental engineering community.