* 1363386
* Control of ThermoAcoustic Phenomena with Applications to Novel Energy Conversion Devices
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2014,01/31/2018
* Bassam Bamieh, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 01/31/2018
* USD 359,770.00

Thermoacoustic energy conversion devices are engines and refrigerators in which
mechanical work is done by intense, contained pressure waves rather than the
traditional pistons, cranks or turbine mechanisms present in traditional engines
and refrigerators. These devices have almost no moving parts, thus minimizing
mechanical friction losses and leading to potentially higher efficiencies than
traditional ones. This award supports research leading to new types of
thermoacoustic devices in which active control enables the optimization of
thermodynamic cycles and adaptation to rapidly varying loading and operating
conditions. These smart thermoacoustic devices are integrated with control
electronics, thus transferring complexity from mechanical design into the design
of the control algorithm, where it can be much more easily implemented. They are
particularly suited to unpredictable and time-varying settings such as those
that harness waste heat or small-scale solar-thermal power.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The control design techniques investigated in this project
include (a) optimal design of periodic operating trajectories of thermoacoustic
systems using the techniques of Optimal Periodic Control (OPC) as well as
frequency domain methods, (b) the design of feedback for regulation of periodic
distributed systems around spatio-temporal limit cycles, and (c) the
investigation of the limits of performance in the control of thermoacoustic
systems with point versus distributed sensing. Aside from their direct relevance
to thermoacoutic systems, these research topics are important in a wide class of
spatially distributed dynamical systems that occur in flow and gas dynamics,
flexible structures and other domains. Another significant component in the
proposed research program is the experimental investigation of control design
concepts in several thermoacoustic devices including new varieties of Rijke and
Sondhauss tubes, as well as thermoacoustic engines and heat pumps.