* 1363360
* Model Updating of Structural Systems with Incomplete Information: Global Identifiability, Optimal Instrumentation and Uncertainty Quantification
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Raimondo Betti, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 08/31/2016
* USD 236,461.00

Civil infrastructure systems form the backbone of the economic well-being and
progress of any nation. The field of Structural Health Monitoring (SHM)
addresses the proper maintenance and timely rehabilitation of such systems,
thereby ensuring their continued functionality. In SHM, having a reliable model
of the structure is essential. Usually, Finite Element models are used to
predict how actual systems, e.g. bridges and buildings, behave under various
conditions, from day-to-day service conditions (e.g. traffic) to extreme events
(e.g. earthquakes, hurricanes). However, there is a certain level of uncertainty
inherent, for example, to the modeling assumptions used by the engineer. In
addition, a system changes its characteristics with time due to aging and
seasonal effects, and/or sudden extreme events. The aim of model updating is to
correct the physical parameters of a model of a structure using information
obtained from the real structure so as to get an updated model accurately
describing the current condition of the system. This updated model can then be
used for predictive, health monitoring and reliability analyses purposes. The
importance of this project is in its treatment of constraints related to
practical implementation, e.g. not having a sufficient number of sensors, which
could have serious implications and could consequently invalidate the results of
the entire representation of the model. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the project, a
model updating strategy will be conducted according to the following steps.
First, tests for global ascertaining and consequent constraints on
instrumentation requirements will be formulated, providing minimal
instrumentation set-ups to guarantee unique identification. Next, a mode shape
normalization scheme will be developed to estimate the complete normalized modal
information, which will then be used to estimate the system's physical
parameters. Efficient modal parameter comparative measures will be used for mode
matching purposes and ways to account for unobserved modes will also is
investigated. To account for the uncertainties introduced by uncertain
information about the system, environmental fluctuations and the inevitable
presence of measurement noise, the algorithm will be extended into a stochastic
framework using Bayesian inference as well as an alternative sensitivity based
approach to characterize the uncertainty propagation at different steps. The
goal of the project is to represent the structure in its present condition for
analysis.