* 1363326
* Nonlinear Viscoelastic Behavior of Glassy Polymers: Discriminating Experiments and Constitutive Modeling
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2017
* James Caruthers, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* kara peters
* 05/31/2017
* USD 399,998.00

Polymers and polymer composites are important engineering materials used in a
myriad of industrial and consumer devices, ranging from DVDs to food packaging
to automotive components to encapsulants for electronic circuits to matrix
resins in aerospace composites. In these applications the polymer can experience
significant mechanical loads, where long term mechanical performance is
critical. In this research a new class of models will be more fully developed
that acknowledge the microscopic structure of polymer glasses, providing
engineers with better predictive tools for describing mechanical responses of
polymer glasses.

A fundamental understanding of the behavior of glassy materials is one of the
outstanding problems in condensed matter physics, where dynamic heterogeneity is
emerging as a critical organizing idea for the glassy state of matter. A
Stochastic Constitutive Model has been developed, where for first time dynamic
heterogeneity is explicitly acknowledged. The primary focus of this research is
to fully understand the implications and value of explicitly incorporating
nanoscale fluctuations associated with dynamic heterogeneity in a constitutive
description of polymer glasses. The Stochastic Constitutive Model introduces a
new perspective, where the shape of the relaxation spectra changes during the
complex thermal-deformation history that a polymer experiences during its life.
A major research deficiency in the mechanics of glassy polymers is comprehensive
data set of the nonlinear viscoelastic data for a non-commercial material that
can be readily produced by all research groups. A second objective of this
research is to develop a comprehensive data set of the nonlinear, time dependent
mechanical properties for a well characterized, glass forming amine cured epoxy
resin.