* 1363161
* Frontiers in Dynamical Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2019
* Lai-Sang Young, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2019
* USD 600,000.00

Dynamical systems is a branch of modern mathematics concerned with time
evolutions of natural and iterative processes. It is both an area of pure
mathematics and a subject that lies at the crossroads of multiple scientific
disciplines. As an area of pure mathematics, it seeks to develop rigorous
theories and techniques that are applicable to general processes, addressing
foundational issues of stability and chaos. As a partner with the sciences, it
offers qualitative theories and viewpoints, and can be a powerful tool when used
in conjunction with numerical computations. While both aspects of dynamical
systems are worthy in their own right, there often is a gap that lies between
theory and applications. The proposed research has both purely theoretical and
application oriented components, one of its goals being the cross-fertilization
of ideas. This research will: (1) lead to significant broadening of the scope of
dynamical systems theory, (2) strengthen connections between dynamical systems
and other areas of mathematics, such as probability and partial differential
equations, and (3) build connections between mathematics and statistical physics
and theoretical neuroscience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this proposal there are
four specific research projects are presented. One proposes to extend hyperbolic
theory (or the theory of chaotic dynamical systems) from finite to infinite
dimensions, so that an enlarged theory will be applicable not just to ordinary
differential equations but also to large classes of partial differential
equations. A second project proposes to extend current techniques for analyzing
chaotic dynamics, which often exhibit Gaussian type fluctuations, to systems
that produce heavy-tailed statistics. Though well recognized as a hallmark of
complex processes, few analytical studies of such dynamical processes have been
carried out. A third project seeks to provide rigorous justification for certain
fundamental phenomenology in nonequilibrium statistical mechanics, such as the
idea of local thermal equilibrium in steady states dynamics. The fourth and
final project proposes numerical and analytical studies of phenomena identified
in previous computational models of neuroscience, specifically in models of
visual cortex. Providing scientific training for young researchers is a very
important part of the proposed activity. The principal investigator has a strong
and well documented history of mentoring students and junior colleagues, and she
fully expects to continue to do so using projects in the current grant.