* 1363364
* Forcing and large cardinals
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2019
* Itay Neeman, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2019
* USD 428,000.00

The overall goal of this project is to develop a better understanding of the
possible behaviors of the mathematical universe. Our knowledge of the
mathematical universe comes through deduction from axioms. This knowledge is
inherently incomplete, and there is a wide range of questions that cannot be
decided from the standard axioms. Set theorists have developed and studied
additional axioms that allow settling some of these questions. Some of these
axioms are purposely applicable outside set theory; others are of a nature that
is, at face value, largely internal to set theory, but turn out to have effects
on basic mathematical objects, for example on sets of real numbers. This project
deals with axioms of both types, and with methods that compare their relative
strengths. It involves the development of new axioms of the first type that
should have applications in contexts that were previously out of reach, the
construction of minimal models for axioms of the second type within set theory,
and applications of both the axioms and their minimal models, within set theory
and to the real numbers.

This project deals with several central areas in set theory: (i) forcing axioms
and their applications; (ii) inner models theory; (iii) applications of inner
models theory to descriptive set theory; and (iv) infinitary combinatorics.
Forcing axioms are strengthenings of the Baire category theorem that allow
meeting a prescribed number of dense sets with filters in prescribed classes of
partial orders. In connection with (i) this project is particularly concerned
with higher analogues of the proper forcing axiom (PFA). PFA, developed in the
early 1980s, allows meeting $\aleph_1$ dense sets in proper partial orders. It
has proved incredibly useful both as a starting point for consistency proofs and
as an axiom leading to set theoretic structure theorems. Recent work of the PI
shows that there are analogues of PFA which involve meeting more than $\aleph_1$
dense sets. It is one of the goals of this project to develop these analogues
further, and to use them in extending applications of PFA to new contexts. The
inner models program has as its main goal the construction of models for large
cardinal axioms from assumptions that do not directly involve large cardinals
(for example from forcing axioms). In connection with (ii), this project is
primarily concerned with the construction, nature, and combinatorial properties
of inner models at the level of supercompact cardinals. This is a long-standing
project in the area and one that saw a great deal of recent progress. In
connections with (iii) this project is concerned with applications of inner
models theory at the level of Woodin cardinals to questions in descriptive set
theory. The structure of inner models at this level is well understood, and
there are well known connections to descriptive set theory. These connections
already yielded solutions to several previously intractable questions in
descriptive set theory. Finally, in connection with (iv) this project is
primarily concerned with the tree property, a remnant of large cardinal strength
that can consistently hold at small cardinals.