* 1363513
* Linking Team Fluidity to Organizational Performance in Team-Centric Organizations
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2019
* Martha Grabowski, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 06/30/2019
* USD 376,988.00

The domain of this work - post-disaster debris removal operations - has become a
focal concern for both Federal and state governments as the threat of extreme
wind events (such as hurricanes and tornadoes) has extended to areas outside the
southeast United States. Rapid and efficient debris removal is the first step
toward successful recovery from disasters. This work will marshal data
associated with debris removal following a recent large-scale tornado storm in
Alabama to investigate these phenomena. This work is expected to benefit society
by contributing to its ability to plan for and respond to large-scale disasters,
particularly by improving understanding of the determinants of debris removal
performance. In particular, it should develop models and lessens that will speed
up the recovery process and make communities more resilient to disaster impacts.
It will advance discovery while promoting learning by developing educational
materials which will be integrated into undergraduate- and graduate-level course
work, as well as into materials for practicing professionals. It will broaden
participation of under-represented groups through their inclusion in the
research team and enhance research infrastructure through the creation of data
sets and analytic tools for use by other researchers. Results of this work will
be broadly disseminated through publications and presentations in academic and
practitioner venues, to include seminars organized to introduce new tools and
techniques to the practice of debris management.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
central goal of this research is to extend and test theories that link team-
level phenomena to organizational outcomes. The central focus is upon debris
removal teams. A particular thrust of this work is on developing and evaluating
new theory and methodologies to investigate (i) team-level phenomena that link
team composition to team performance, and (ii) reciprocal relationships from
team-level phenomena to organizational-level outcomes. To do so, it will extend
current methodological approaches for examining these relationships within and
across team and organizational levels. It will also explicitly model tradeoffs
among different aspects of performance (effectiveness, efficiency and equality)
in relation to team and organizational composition. This work benefits from
access to a wealth of data associated with debris removal operations (including
transactional records of every load of debris hauled by every team during this
operation), as well as access to subject matter experts. A distinguishing
feature of this research is its use of process-level data on team members and
the work they perform. Validation will be undertaken from multiple perspectives,
ranging from consultation with subject matter experts to archival research and
classical statistical methods such as holdout samples.