* 1363342
* Unraveling the nature of inter and intra-molecular interactions
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2014,05/31/2018
* Martin Head-Gordon, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 05/31/2018
* USD 420,000.00

Martin Head-Gordon of the University of California, Berkeley is supported by an
award from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the
Chemistry Division to develop computational tools that provide physical insight
into the numerical results of quantum chemistry calculations. Roughly half of
new research publications in chemistry today use quantum chemistry calculations
as a complement to experiment, to predict chemical reaction mechanisms,
structure, and diverse molecular properties. Most research on quantum chemistry
methodology is focused on improvements in the numerical methods and algorithms
to aid such applications. While very valuable because such research enables
better predictions, the resulting predictions may yield only numbers and not
physical insight. In contrast, the tools developed in this project are focused
interpreting the results of the quantum chemistry calculations. For example, a
computed interaction energy, such as the binding of a molecule to an active site
of an enzyme, can be decomposed into additive contributions which have different
physical origins, such as permanent charge-charge interactions, induced
interactions, and charge-transfer effects. Seeing which contributions are
dominant in a given molecular interaction can explain the origin of the binding,
and thus provide a rational basis for tuning the interaction by making chemical
modifications. There are many uses for these tools ranging from increased
understanding of simple bonding processes, to understanding new types of bonding
such as halogen bonds, to the desired goal of being able to rationally design
improved catalysts or drugs. The theory of such a breakdown is called an energy
decomposition analysis (EDA). There are only a few other successful existing EDA
methods, which are widely used in quantum chemistry. Each of these has
demonstrable limitations, which motivates this project on the development and
testing of a new and improved EDA.

At a more technical level, the objective is to develop a new generation EDA that
lifts three key limitations of an existing EDA based on absolutely localized
molecular orbitals (ALMO-EDA). This should yield more reliable interpretations
on broader classes of molecular problems where chemists seek insight in addition
to numbers. The first objective is the development of a convergent method for
electrostatic polarization which does not rely on an underlying atomic orbital
(AO) basis to define polarization in the overlapping regime. This method will
therefore have a well-defined basis set limit. The second goal is to use the new
polarization treatment together with a new non-perturbative treatment of charge-
transfer to extend the EDA to bonded intra-molecular interactions. Since such
interactions are very strong and yet can involve cancellation between even
larger positive and negative terms (e.g. positive repulsions and geometric
distortion vs negative polarization and charge-transfer), the development of an
adiabatic generalization of the EDA is also a priority. This adiabatic EDA will
be defined so that all contributions are negative semi-definite, such that
interpretation of strong interactions is more straightforward. The third
principal objective is to develop an extension of the EDA to go beyond the
framework of single determinant wave functions (i.e. Hartree-Fock or density
functional theory). To treat wave function methods that include correlation
correctly requires developing theory for the correlation contribution to the
frozen and polarization interactions, as well as a dispersion contribution that
is negative semi-definite. The initial target is second order Moller-Plesset
theory, but it will also be highly desirable to subsequently explore extensions
to coupled cluster theory.