* 1363076
* Molecular Dynamics of Chemical Reactions and Interactions at Liquid/Liquid Interfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Ilan Benjamin, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 07/31/2019
* USD 392,000.00

In this award, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms
(CSDM-A) Program of the Division of Chemistry, Professor Ilan Benjamin of the
University of California and his graduate student researchers are doing
computational work to develop a better understanding of the reactions that take
place between two liquids at a liquid-liquid interface. Reactions at liquid-
liquid interfaces are important in a number of fields, including environmental
chemistry, energy storage, and catalysis. Nevertheless, the microscopic details
remain poorly understood. Prof. Benjamin and his students will be working on
efficient computational methodologies to model these processes. Graduate
students working on this project receive training in theoretical chemistry.
Prof. Benjamin and his students have a long history of close collaboration with
experimentalists, and students working on this project are going to benefit from
these interactions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prof. Benjamin and his research group
are conducting a series of modeling studies to develop a better understanding of
the reactions taking place with phase transfer catalysts at liquid-liquid
interfaces. The specific aims are: (1) a study of the reaction free energy
profiles of polar species with nonpolar species at the water/chlorobenzene
interface; (2) the study of ion-pair free energy and diffusion-reaction activity
at a water/chlorobenzene interface as a model of a phase transfer catalyst; (3)
the study of a phase transfer catalyst under potential control at the
water/1,2-dichloroethane interface; (4) the development of a cyclodextrin model
of an inverse phase transfer catalyst at a water/organic solvent interface.
Students working on this project receive training in chemical physics.