* 1363313
* Collaborative Research:  Directed Templating of Semiconductor Nanocrystals Through Laser Melting
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Heng Pan, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 06/30/2018
* USD 110,000.00

Many applications in photonic and electronic devices require high quality
semiconductor crystal growth on supporting materials that do not intrinsically
promote, nor are compatible with current manufacturing processes. The essential,
but still challenging step is the deliberate templating of nanocrystals with the
desired size, orientation and placement accuracy on such substrates. This award
supports fundamental research to acquire knowledge for achieving nanoscale
control of nucleation and crystal growth processes. The research will open the
way to the fabrication of thin crystalline domains on inexpensive and abundant
substrates as well to the fabrication of quantum nanodevices. Applications
include thin film transistors for advanced displays, high performance thin film
solar cells, three-dimensional electronic devices and quantum computers. The
research will benefit the U.S. industry, economy and society. The coupled
experimental and computational methodology and state of the art nanofabrication
will provide new opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students and in
particular underrepresented minorities to have research experiences and state-
of-the-art training in nanoscience and engineering, consequently positively
impacting engineering education.

Nanocrystal seeds with highly uniform size and orientations will be manufactured
by laser crystallization in confined nanodomains. The research team will achieve
fundamental understanding of laser crystallization in nanodomains by combining
direct imaging via in situ Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM) with detailed
multi-scale computational modeling and molecular dynamics (MD) simulations. This
uniquely integrated research approach will enable engineering of the
nanoconfinement geometry and the imposed transient laser protocol parameters for
reliable generation of well-controlled seeding nanocrystals. State of the art
focused ion beam (FIB) processing and laser interference lithography will be
utilized to define nanocavities with minimum diameter <10 nm wherein amorphous
semiconductors (Si, Ge) will be deposited. Nano-cavities on large area will be
fabricated by nanoimprinting with FIB fabricated molds. Pulsed laser radiation
in combination with modulated background heating will be utilized to convert the
amorphous deposits into nanocrystals with deliberately engineered size and
crystallographic orientation. Such generated localized crystals can serve as
crystallization seeds, overcoming uncertainty associated to un-engineered
spontaneous nucleation. Molecular Dynamics (MD) simulation will be performed at
the same length scale to provide fundamental understanding of heat transfer,
nucleation mechanism, crystal growth and defect evolution in nano-confined
domains. Finally, a seeded crystallization process will enable controlled growth
of a large area monocrystalline thin layer on epitaxially non-participating
substrates.