* 1363349
* Collaborative Research: Improving the Safety of Complex Engineered Systems by Identifying Failure Paths Early in the Design Process
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2014,06/30/2017
* David Jensen, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 06/30/2017
* USD 147,847.00

Complex engineered systems, such as those found in energy production, aviation
and robotic industries rely on the integration of multiple technical, scientific
and engineering disciplines. The traditional practice to ensure the safe
operation of these systems is to use highly reliable components and to
rigorously test potential design alternatives. Under this process, safety
characteristics are often validated just prior to manufacturing instead of
having a meaningful role in directing design from the earliest stages. This time
and cost intensive approach of testing and redesigning after failures limits the
competitiveness of the United States' advanced manufacturing capabilities. This
award supports fundamental research for developing a new paradigm for safety-
driven early-phase design, and for validating the corresponding system design
theories. The immediate outcome of this research is a set of metrics that can
allow designers to identify and compare the safety of different system
alternatives early in the design cycle.

Systems engineers have traditionally addressed safety only using heuristic
reliability metrics or, towards the end of the design phase, using Monte Carlo
analysis or Probabilistic Risk Analysis. Recent research in design decision
making and formal systems modeling supports moving system analysis and testing
forward in the design phase. Building on these recent trends, this award focuses
on considering safety in early design. Specifically, this research aims to
develop an understanding of system behaviors that lead to safe operation, by
applying statistical clustering methods to thousands of complex failure
scenarios to classify and understand system faults. The exploration of potential
failure behaviors will be enabled through the use of hazard ontologies and
search algorithms that automatically generate potential failure paths. Metrics
will be identified to help system engineers identify the risk of hazardous
system behaviors. Further, these metrics will enable designers to evaluate and
compare design architectures and technological alternatives in the early design
stage based on safety properties. The methods and safety-based assessments that
are derived from this research will be validated using a novel complex system
design testbed, consisting of a cooperative team of robotic rovers.