* 1363438
* Fort Peck Community College Eci Project
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2020
* Ali Wehbe, Fort Peck Community College
* Continuing Grant
* Jody Chase
* 08/31/2020
* USD 2,517,825.00

A goal of the Tribal Colleges and Universities Program (TCUP) is to expand the
STEM instructional and research capacities of specific institutions of higher
education that serve the Nation's indigenous students. Expanding the STEM
curricula offerings at these institutions expands the opportunities of their
students to pursue challenging, rewarding careers in STEM fields, provides for
research studies in areas that may be culturally significant, and encourages a
community and generational appreciation for science and mathematics education.
This project aligns directly with that goal, and moreover will inform the body
of knowledge about strategies that attract, retain and graduate American Indian
students in engineering. The Fort Peck Community College (FPCC) will develop a
Pre-Engineering Associate of Science (AS) degree program that is transferrable
to a bachelor-degree program in Engineering or a related STEM field. The overall
purpose of this work is to increase the number of American Indian students
pursuing STEM career pathways and achieving STEM degrees at FPCC. The project
addresses a growing need for engineers in the region, some of which can be
attributed to region's fossil fuel and renewable energy activities. It is
important to increase the number of STEM majors and graduates at FPCC as a means
to assist Assiniboine and Sioux tribal members to enter these high-growth
sectors of the workforce. The project expands FPCC's degree offerings to include
a new AS degree in Pre-Engineering to meet the growing need for engineers in the
region, use promising strategies from emerging research on community colleges to
improve instruction and student achievement in mathematics, build innovative
supports to help students complete STEM associate degrees at FPCC and
matriculate to STEM bachelor degrees, and expand the college's undergraduate
research capacity in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project builds on and
advances research on promising practices from emerging community college
research to promote increased student math proficiency and success in STEM
fields through early assessment, curriculum redesign and targeted tutoring,
expanded access to learning supports, faculty development, transition support
from two-year to four-year degrees, and authentic research experiences. The
project will address research questions regarding the effect of these promising
strategies with American Indian students pursuing STEM degrees. The project is
evaluated using a multi-dimensional approach that utilizes both qualitative and
quantitative methods for collecting data. The evaluation plan is based on the
tenets of a model for return on investment specifically designed for TCUs and
based on the work of Phillips and Phillips. These measures and data elements
will be used to evaluate how well the project is meeting its objectives to help
the project leadership make data-driven decisions regarding project
implementation and to derive research-based understanding of the impact of the
strategies proposed. Formative data will be collected each semester to inform
ongoing activities of the project and summative data will be used to make
determinations regarding project successes, strengths, challenges, and
recommendations for next steps.