* 1363411
* Designing Complex Engineering Systems using Multi-Agent Coordination Approaches
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Irem Tumer, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 07/31/2018
* USD 200,000.00

The design of a growing class of complex systems, such as state-of-the-art
aircraft, advanced power systems, unmanned aerial vehicles, and autonomous
automobiles, requires the knowledge of many experts. But though each expert may
be able to design a particular subsystem efficiently, the combination of those
"optimal" subsystems does not generally lead to a "good" system-level design.
This is because the interactions among these subsystems are critical to the
performance of the complex system, and capturing the interactions becomes
increasingly difficult as the systems become more and more complex. The long-
term goal of this project is to address this design-decomposition problem by
deriving designer-subsystem objective functions in such a way that, when all
subsystem designers achieve their objectives, the overall design goals are also
achieved.

Traditionally, two broadly different approaches are used to design complex
engineered systems: (i) a centralized design approach where the impacts of all
potential system states and behaviors resulting from design decisions must be
accurately modeled. (ii) a mediated design approach where externally imposed
intermediate design targets are provided to determine the tradeoffs among
competing designs. The mediated approach avoids the modeling difficulties of the
centralized approach, but at the cost of expensive (in time and money) mediation
mechanisms. The project's approach is a hybrid of the two approaches, providing
a method in which decisions can be reconciled without the need for either
detailed interaction models or arbitrary design targets. A key insight on which
this project will build is that complex systems design is fundamentally similar
to the multiagent coordination problem, that lies at the intersection of game
theory, machine learning, and control theory. In both instances, the decisions
at the lower level (subsystems or agents) and the interactions at that level,
lead to global behavior (complex system or multiagent system.) In this project,
designer-subsystem pairs will be aligned with agents. Corresponding designer-
subsystem objectives will then be derived based on system-level objectives while
implicitly accounting for subsystem interactions. These objectives will replace
the traditional intermediate design targets with principled objectives that, if
met, ensure desired overall system performance. This project will aim to show
that an approach based on objective functions, previously successfully applied
to the operation of complex multiagent systems, can in a modified form also
serve as an approach for the design of complex engineered systems.