* 1363437
* Collaborative Research: An Integrated Approach to Measuring Dynamic Economic Resilience Following Disasters
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Adam Rose, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Robin L. Dillon-Merrill
* 07/31/2017
* USD 266,005.00

In 2011, the nation experienced a record fourteen, billion-dollar weather-
related disasters. The next year, Superstorm Sandy, the focus of this study,
caused an estimated $68 billion in losses, making it the second-costliest storm
in our history. These losses show why it is critical to understand how the
nation can become more resilient in the face of disasters. Dynamic resilience,
defined in this project as the ability to "bounce back" after experiencing a
disaster, is widely seen as a way of reducing the disruption disasters cause and
of containing costs, including those borne by individual property owners, the U.
S. Treasury in the form of disaster aid, and the insurance/reinsurance sector.
The financial losses that result from disasters and post-disaster recovery
assistance reduce the supply of resources available for other productive
investment. This project is thus consistent with the mission of NSF,
particularly aspects of that focus on understanding how to "advance national
health, prosperity, and welfare."&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In this study, we will
explore one dimension of resilience - dynamic economic resilience - by
developing a better understanding of how affected businesses in the New York
City area coped following Sandy and the extent to which they were able to
recover. We seek to understand in an integrated way how both business owners'
decisions and broader economic conditions contribute to resilience. We will
model post-disaster recovery investment decisions; conduct a survey with a
representative sample of businesses to learn more about their recovery decision
making; and examine the effects of community-level conditions such as employment
rates, labor force characteristics, and community economic diversity on
dimensions of economic resilience and recovery. The project will employ several
analytic strategies to provide a holistic and integrated model that incorporates
micro-, miso-, and macro-level factors affecting economic resilience following
disasters. A microeconomic investment framework will be developed to take into
account business owners' decisions to invest in post-disaster recovery. A
database will be developed consisting of community-level factors important for
regional economic recovery. We will also develop a dynamic computable general
disequilibrium model to analyze resilience at the macroeconomic level.