* 1363222
* Collaborative Research: Measuring, Predicting, and Improving Construction Safety by Improving Hazard Signal Detection with Augmented Virtual Environments
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Mani Golparvar-Fard, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Chen
* 08/31/2017
* USD 100,400.00

Each year the construction industry has a disproportionate injury rate compared
to other industries. One of the main causes of these injuries is human error,
which could be exacerbated by skill deficiency associated with signal detection
(defined as the ability of an individual to detect visual stimuli that indicate
the existence of a safety hazard). From psychological and engineering
standpoints little is known about signal detection or if this skill can be
accurately measured, predicted, or improved with emerging technologies. This
award supports interdisciplinary research that investigates if signal detection
can be reliably improved through exposure to and feedback from an augmented
virtual construction environment. Additionally, the research explores if an
individual's signal detection skill in a virtual environment can predict their
skill in real construction environments. As new knowledge is gained, it will be
shared with industry practitioners through presentations to national communities
of practice, integrated into multiple levels of civil engineering and psychology
curricula, and embedded in the final version of the virtual system that will
disseminated broadly for education and safety training.

The main objective of this research is to test hypotheses that augmented virtual
environments can be used to improve signal detection skill by over 30% and that
over half of the variability in signal detection skill in field environments can
be predicted by one's performance in an augmented virtual system. These
hypotheses will be tested using a multiple baseline design that has been adapted
from pharmaceutical research to address the dynamic nature of the construction
industry. The experimental results will be statistically verified using
interrupted time-series regression models. If successful, the adaptation of
multiple baseline design and statistical verification would serve as a new
approach of experimental research for construction. Additionally, a strong
relationship between performance in virtual and field environments would
indicate that high-fidelity augmented virtual environments provide a risk-free
proxy for measuring signal detection skill, potentially transforming the way
that construction safety is studied.