* 1363035
* A Novel Method for Manufacturing Ceramic-Reinforced Metal Matrix Composites Using Liquid Metal Processing
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2018
* Diana Lados, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 06/30/2018
* USD 423,783.00

It is well known that higher energy efficiencies in transportation vehicles can
be achieved through component weight reduction. An effective method to reduce
vehicle weight is to replace ferrous metals in structural components with novel
lighter weight materials that perform well at both ambient and elevated
temperatures, such as ceramic-reinforced metal matrix composites. Both small
size and uniform distribution of the reinforcement are critical for the
mechanical performance of a composite material yet most processes do not produce
an effective level for either. This award supports research into a new process
for manufacturing nano-ceramic reinforced metal matrix composites using liquid
metal processing. This new and energy efficient process will overcome current
processing challenges and potentially enable fabrication of composite materials
with extraordinary properties. Through direct collaborations with industry, the
knowledge, materials, and processing protocols emerging from this work will be
readily implemented. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research introduces a novel
method for manufacturing metal matrix nano-ceramic composites using liquid metal
processing, where the ceramic reinforcement is directly created in the molten
metal using a polymer precursor. Unlike conventional casting methods where the
nano-ceramic particles are added and mixed into the metal during processing, the
in-situ feature to be studied here offers several potential advantages. These
include uniform distributions of nano-scale ceramic particles, well-bonded
particle-metal matrix interfaces, broad selection of metal-ceramic systems, and
energy and cost savings during processing. The process has been demonstrated to
be feasible but the fundamental mechanisms responsible for the material
nanostructure and resulting properties are not well established. This research
will fill the knowledge gap through systematic experimental studies to
understand the mechanisms driving the formation of the nano-ceramic particles,
evaluate their behavior and stability at elevated temperatures, and develop
effective processing protocols and optimized microstructures. In addition, the
work will establish relationships between microstructure and mechanical
properties, including fatigue, that are needed to deploy the new metal matrix
nano-composites in critical structural applications for the transportation
industries.