* 1363081
* Mechanochemistry of Actin Networks
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Garegin Papoian, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 08/31/2017
* USD 476,741.00

Garegin A. Papoian of the University of Maryland, College Park is supported by
an award from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program, the
Computational and Data-Enabled Science and Engineering program (CDS&amp;E) and
the Division of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure to develop advanced algorithms and
software for computational modeling of "active matter" in biological and
artificial systems. The Papoian research group focuses their attention on
molecular motors. Commonly encountered matter in the natural world, such as
gases, liquids and solids, are governed by random molecular collisions resulting
from the surrounding thermal environment. However, in biological and artificial
systems, molecular motors may generate directional forces, producing so-called
active matter, with complex chemical and physical behaviors. One prominent
example of an active matter is the actin cytoskeleton inside cells of higher
organisms. The corresponding cytoskeletal chemistry and dynamics are responsible
for cellular motility, shape and mechano-sensing. The Papoian laboratory applies
their computational approaches to shed light on the principles of self-
organization in active matter, to uncover the not-yet-well-understood interplay
between the chemical and mechanical processes. The software and conceptual
insights resulting from this research will lead to deeper understanding of the
mechano-biology of cells and artificial active matter
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding active matter is one of the profound
challenges of modern science. A prominent active matter system, the cytoskeleton
of a eukaryotic cell, largely consists of actin networks, controlled spatially
and temporally by an intricate web of signaling and regulatory proteins. The
resulting couplings among the chemical, mechanical and transport processes give
rise to emergent collective behavior, including cell migration and cellular
mechano-sensing. Dr. Papoian's laboratory develops advanced algorithms and
software for computational modeling of the actin-based cytoskeletons containing
molecular motors, called myosins. They build upon the reaction-diffusion
algorithms previously developed by Dr. Papoian's group by adding innovative
mechanical models of the actin cytoskeleton. Their calculations significantly
advance our current understanding of the principles governing actin network
self-assembly and dynamics in both artificially reconstituted systems and living
cells. In addition, newly developed computational algorithms impact many
research areas beyond the actin cytoskeleton field, such as helping to better
understand and model active gels. The simulation software will be freely
disseminated on-line and also used in educational and outreach activities.