* 1363320
* Many-Body Expansion of Direct and Mutual Polarization Models
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2017
* Teresa Head-Gordon, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 06/30/2017
* USD 419,956.00

Teresa Head-Gordon of the University of California, Berkeley is supported by an
award from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the
Chemistry Division to develop computational and theoretical models and methods
that can be used to make accurate predictions for the behavior of complex
molecular systems. They are developing and testing the accuracy of several cost-
effective approximate models. The goal is to understand when these approximate
models are adequate and when more costly and accurate models are required.
Professor Head-Gordon and her coworkers use their methods to study the
properties and behavior of several important molecular and biomolecular systems
including supercooled water, ionic liquids and proteins. Ionic liquids are more
environmentally benign than traditional solvents used in industrial processes.
For example, ionic liquids are able to dissolve biological plant materials so
that they may be converted into renewable energy products. The Head-Gordon group
also studies biological systems ranging from small peptides in water to the
formation of protein-protein and protein-nucleic acid interactions. Such
interactions are required for diverse biological processes such as signaling,
regulation of gene expression, cell division, and DNA repair. An additional goal
of this project is to foster opportunities for undergraduate research and to
mentor women in the physical sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Head-Gordon
research group has developed the Many-Body Expansion (MBE) of polarization to
tackle the characterization of large condensed phase systems with a more
accurate force field. In principle, mutually polarizable models offer a
significant improvement in the physics of classical force fields. However, the
corresponding increased computational cost renders statistical convergence of
condensed phase observables more difficult to achieve. The researchers are
analyzing the quality of the approximation to the MBE truncated at 3-bodies for
four different polarizable models: iAMOEBA: an atomistic model that only
accounts for direct polarization; AMOEBA: an atomistic point dipole model that
accounts for mutual polarization; PB-SAM: a new semi-analytical solution to the
linearized Poisson-Boltzmann equation (PBE) that accounts for complete mutual
polarization; and iPB-SAM: devised to account for direct polarization only. The
new atomistic-based polarizable models and algorithms provide a more
sophisticated level of model physics for bulk water and ionic liquids as well as
peptides and proteins. New PB-SAM formulations of the PBE allow simulation of
the mechanism of complex formation and rate of association needed for
understanding function in the crowded cellular environment, for example ~1000
proteins in E. coli cytoplasm or other complex materials such as Nafion. In
addition it provides a practical guide to consumers of chemical software in the
proper application of theoretical models, as to which statistical properties and
mechanisms of condensed phase chemical systems actually require an advancement
over a classical pairwise additive force field.