* 1363399
* 2014 CSU-LSAMP Bridge to the Doctorate at California State University, Los Angeles
* EDU,EES
* 06/01/2014,09/30/2016
* Margaret Jefferson, University Enterprises, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* A.  Hicks
* 09/30/2016
* USD 987,000.00

The performance site for the 2014 California State University-Louis Stokes
Alliance for Minority Participation (CSU-LSAMP) Bridge to the Doctorate (BD)
Activity is California State University, Los Angeles. This BD activity will
contribute to advancing NSF's FY 2011-2016 Strategic Plan, which aims to:
"prepare and engage a diverse STEM workforce motivated to participate at the
frontiers." Additionally it will increase the number of Ph.D. level scientists
by identifying and developing the talent of students who would be unlikely to
pursue graduate-level study at either the Master's or the doctorate level
without NSF LSAMP support. California State University, Los Angeles provides a
Master's level "bridge" to doctoral-level study for a cohort of 12 graduates of
LSAMP undergraduate programs. These students are from groups historically
underrepresented in STEM disciplines. Although the American scientific research
enterprise has been well-served by the intellectual diversity of its scientists
and engineers, greater participation of women, persons with disabilities, and
persons from racial/ethnic groups that have historically been underrepresented
in STEM is essential to the continued health and vitality of science. These
populations are largely untapped sources of intellectual talent and bring a
diversity of insights and perspectives to the research enterprise. This BD
activity will contribute significantly to broadening participation in academe
and scientific research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Master's-level experience at
California State University, Los Angeles is designed to increase participant
persistence and competencies in STEM and their advancement to Ph.D. programs. In
addition to providing financial support to enable students to focus full time on
a two-year Master's program, the project provides an integrated set of
activities designed to advance BD students toward completion of doctoral level
studies in STEM. In addition to engaging participants in formal course work, BD
students will participate in a two-year mentored research experience. Faculty
mentoring of participants is a major component of this BD Activity. CSU-LSAMP
remains committed to the propositions that (1) given appropriate support, most
students can be successful; (2) increasing the number of Ph.D. scientists and
engineers requires that "additional" students (i.e., students who are not
already admitted to and engaged in Ph.D. programs) be recruited to and prepared
for doctoral-level study; and (3) broadening participation in the STEM
professoriate and scientific leadership requires that a greater number of URGs
be prepared for Ph.D. training at highly competitive research universities.