* 1363404
* Aerodynamics of Passive Flight and Probability of Landing Sites
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2017
* Eva Kanso, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Atul Kelkar
* 06/30/2017
* USD 300,000.00

Accurate prediction of the flight range and landing site of an object descending
under the influence of gravitational and aerodynamic forces is relevant to many
engineering and science applications. Examples range from forecasting the
touchdown locations of re-entry space vehicles to understanding the settlement
patterns of marine larvae and their influence on marine population dynamics.
While the descent motion follows the laws of classical mechanics, the delicate
interplay between the fluid medium and the geometric and material properties of
the descending objects makes the exact landing site difficult to predict a
priori and, thus, best treated as probabilistic. This award supports fundamental
research that aims to develop an experimentally and mathematically tractable
framework for studying the coupling between the mechanics of objects descending
passively in a fluid medium and the probabilistic outcome of landing sites. This
research will draw from techniques developed in several disciplines including
solid-fluid interactions, dynamical systems, and probabilistic modeling. This
multi-disciplinary research approach will be combined with outreach efforts in
the greater Los Angeles area to help broaden the participation of
underrepresented groups in research and positively impact engineering and
science education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The descent motion of objects falling in
a fluid medium is generally complex, even for regularly shaped objects such as
coins and cards. For such objects, four types of descent trajectories have been
identified: steady, fluttering, chaotic, or tumbling, depending on the object
and fluid properties. This research team will explore the dependence of the
probability distribution of landing sites on the type of descent trajectories
through carefully designed experiments as well as by developing mathematical and
computational models of increasing levels of fidelity to the physical systems.
Research efforts will also focus on establishing design principles that an
object should fulfill in order to achieve a desired distribution of landing
sites.