* 1363483
* Continuous Acoustic Assembly of Metallic Nanoparticles in Microfluidic Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2017
* Benjamin Wiley, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 12/31/2017
* USD 539,999.00

This project will exploit the wealth of functional metallic nanoparticles
developed over the last two decades by providing new continuous
nanomanufacturing methods for directed assembly of nanoparticles into well-
defined, multicomponent and multifunctional nanoclusters. The broad goal of this
work is to develop a suite of new manufacturing tools for the scalable,
continuous production of regular assemblies of metallic nanoparticles that are
either spherical or polyhedral in shape. Directed assembly will be accomplished
through the use of ultrasonic waves to pack nanoparticles together
(acoustophoresis), after which the nanoparticles will organize into highly
regular, packed structures to maximize the number of energy states available to
individual nanoparticles (entropic assembly). An advantage of this method is
reducing contamination. This work will develop the fundamental underpinnings of
continuous nanoparticle assembly and translate them into prototype manufacturing
processes. These processes will be capable of fabricating high-value products
for a number of applications including medicine, biotechnology, photonics,
catalysis, and security (anti-counterfeiting measures). To demonstrate the
impact of this new technology, this project will create well-defined,
multifunctional nanoclusters for high performance applications such as drug
delivery and bioimaging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fabrication of nanoparticle
assemblies will be accomplished in microfluidic systems that include ultrasonic
standing waves to achieve acousto-entropic assembly of the nanoparticles and
photochemical crosslinking reactions to covalently stabilize the physically
assembled clusters. To achieve these aims, several key tasks will be
completed--(i) study of the fundamental processes leading to continuous acoustic
and entropic assembly of nanoparticles, (ii) surface modification of the
nanoparticles to allow multi-functionality, including colloidal stability,
ligand and dye binding, and triggered crosslinking, (iii) development of new
metrology tools that permit process optimization to maximize throughput, yield
and purity, and (iv) study of model nanoparticle assemblies that have useful,
multimodal functionalities in drug delivery and bioimaging to maximize the
scientific and societal impact of acousto-entropic nanoparticle assembly. This
research program will include basic studies to demonstrate new manufacturing
principles that are unique to nanoscale phenomena, such as entropic assembly of
particles in the absence of confining solid boundaries, while at the same time
overcoming technical barriers, such as enhancement of the mass transfer limited
kinetics typically associated with nanoparticle assembly. This project will also
provide several innovations in manufacturing technology including continuous and
scalable production of well defined nanoparticle assemblies in the form of
heterogeneous particles, rods and filaments, as well as new nanomanufacturing
process control methodologies based on acoustic impedance spectroscopy and laser
light scattering.