* 1363334
* Nanomanufacturing and System Integration of Multi-Functional Metallic Pyramidal Probes
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/2014,05/31/2017
* Sang-Hyun Oh, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 05/31/2017
* USD 299,986.00

Optical microscopy and spectroscopy is limited in resolution to roughly half the
wavelength of light, generally about 200 to 250 nanometers. Scientists can
overcome this limit using a sharp metal tip as an antenna to focus light into
the optical near-field, gleaning crucial information about nanoscale light-
matter interactions inaccessible by other methods. Current state-of-the-art tips
for near field applications are fabricated one at a time, are fragile, and have
rough surfaces. These manufacturing inconsistencies limit resolution and often
give irreproducible results. The objective of this project is to manufacture,
integrate, characterize, and disseminate a new generation of metal probes.
Dissemination of reproducible, high-performance, and multi-functional probes
will democratize access to high-resolution near-field optical microscopy and
spectroscopy and enable its use in user facilities, promoting this technology
from the realm of a few experts to general use. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research team will use a high-throughput manufacturing technique known as
template stripping for reproducible, wafer-scale production of nanometrically
sharp, noble metal pyramidal tips. Crystalline-orientation-dependent wet etching
of silicon will be used to define an atomically smooth template, into which gold
or silver will be deposited. The metal will then be stripped off, using epoxy,
exposing the ultra-smooth, sub-nanometer roughness, backside surface. The
resulting ultrasmooth metal pyramids mitigate parasitic random hotspots, endemic
to other metallization techniques, and promote optical energy delivery to and
concentration at the tip. Robust packaging methods will be developed to
integrate these probes with scanning probe microscopy systems. These scanning-
probe-affixed metal pyramids will be quality controlled in an atomic force
microscope, enhancing spectroscopic signals from standard samples while
simultaneously acquiring topographic images. Detailed manufacturing and
packaging protocols will be published in peer-reviewed journals and provided to
researchers upon request. This will transform near-field microscopy and
spectroscopy from a difficult niche technique used by a small number of
specialists to a widespread, routine characterization method adopted by many
researchers in broad range of disciplines such as nanotechnology, materials
science, chemistry, and biology.