* 1363485
* Rational Design of Thermoelectric Materials and Material Processing Approaches Based on Microwave Processing of Silicides
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2014,01/31/2015
* Daryoosh Vashaee, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 01/31/2015
* USD 425,000.00

Thermoelectric materials are materials that can produce an electric current when
two sides of the material are exposed to different temperatures or vice-versa
(i.e., supplying an electric voltage and current to a thermoelectric material
can change the temperature of its surfaces). Thermoelectric materials are a
promising technology for a range of application from electric power generation
to heating and cooling. Most electric power today is produced from processes
where fuel is burned to produce heat that turns water into steam that is then
used to turn electric power generators, and low temperature steam is exhausted
as waste. Such processes are relatively inefficient, converting only about 30 to
40 percent of the fuel's energy into useful electric power. Thermoelectric
materials could be used to convert this wasted thermal energy into useful
electric power. The team will design and construct high efficiency
thermoelectric materials and devices from composite materials constructed from
combinations of amorphous (i.e., non-crystalline, molecularly disordered) and
crystalline materials that can maximize the material's electrical conductivity
while minimizing the material's thermal conductivity, an ideal combination for
effective thermoelectricity. The project will have broad educational impacts
through both development of nanotechnology related university-level coursework
and through the direct involvement of underrepresented students in the
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary focus of the work will be on the use
of composite silicide (i.e., materials that combine silicon with other elements
such as metals) to create highly efficient thermoelectrics. The target of more
efficient thermoelectric materials is to achieve a large thermoelectric effect
so that large amounts of electric power can be generated from relatively small
temperature differences between waste heat sources and the environment. This
project is a computationally guided material design effort which encompasses
both theoretical and experimental aspects of amorphous based materials. The
program addresses the multi-mode transport of charge carriers in extended and
localized states, along with phonon transport properties in disordered multi-
component amorphous structures. It is expected that new material structures
based on amorphous-crystalline composites of silicide alloys developed in this
work should result in significant nonlinear enhancement of the thermoelectric
power factor, along with the reduction of the thermal conductivity of the
materials. This research concept is a nanoscale effect that happens only if the
energy distribution function of the carriers does not relax to that of the bulk
material in the crystallites. This state requires crystallite sizes of sub-10 nm
in most thermoelectric materials, which is often difficult to reach with the
existing material processing methods. This project will develop a new material
synthesis method based on field decrystallization in a microwave cavity that can
produce non-equilibrium silicide materials. The effect of hydrogenation on
thermoelectric properties will be investigated for the first time, and the
scalability of the material growth technique will be demonstrated