* 1363265
* Applications of Automorphic Forms in Number Theory and Combinatorics
* MPS,DMS
* 03/01/2014,02/28/2015
* Ling Long, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 02/28/2015
* USD 43,000.00

The proposal is to support an international research conference for 60 or more
participants entitled "Applications of Automorphic Forms in Number Theory and
Combinatorics", to be held April 12-15, 2014, at Louisiana State University in
Baton Rouge, Louisiana. This conference aims to bring together top experts along
with junior researchers and graduate students in the active fields of number
theory and automorphic forms. Distinguished speakers include Abel prize winners
Jean-Pierre Serre and John Tate. From the synergy of a gathering of researchers
with related interests but complementary knowledge and skills, advances are
expected in research programs for the participants, dissemination of important
current work by experts to a broad audience, and professional development for
junior researchers and graduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Number theory
has long fascinated and challenged curious minds; in recent years, it is
becoming an indispensable tool for many practical applications including
communication, coding theory, and cryptography. In the 1960's and 70's Langlands
revolutionized number theory with broad conjectures linking algebraic number
theory to automorphic forms, which, if proved, would unify large areas of
mathematics. The proof of the Shimura-Taniyama-Weil conjecture and Serre's
conjecture for degree-2 Galois representations over finite fields provided
dramatic examples. Applications of these results have been seen in many areas of
number theory including the theory of noncongruence modular forms. The
coefficients of automorphic forms, central to this theory, often appear when
counting interesting mathematical objects, including integer partitions. Among
the applications of modular forms, one of the most unexpected is in the
construction of expanders, which are also known as Ramanujan graphs. In recent
years, there are applications of Ramanujan graphs to coding theory and
cryptography. This conference will enable direct communication between both
seasoned experts and junior researchers about current progress on these topics.
This will not only encourage new collaborations and research projects, but we
also expect distinguished experts to use their insights to guide the research
trajectories of many junior participants. This conference will impact society in
a few distinct ways. First, we expect significant professional development,
especially for graduate students and junior researchers, through contact with
distinguished plenary speakers, and participation in special sessions. In
addition, we expect broad dissemination of the results of this conference both
through our website, where we will post slides of talks and posters, and through
a potential proceedings volume for the meeting. Finally, we expect this
conference to draw publicity to the number theory currently being done in the
south, and work being done by female number theorists.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Conference website: https://www.math.lsu.edu/nt2014/