* 1363314
* GOALI: Inventory Management in Assemble-to-Order Systems: Analysis, Policies, and Asymptotic Optimality
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2019
* Qiong Wang, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 03/31/2019
* USD 349,999.00

The objective of this Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with Industry
(GOALI) award is to develop an optimization framework for inventory management
in Assemble-to-Order manufacturing systems with general structures and parameter
values. The basic approach is to employ a stochastic program to transform an
intractable control problem into a much simpler solvable optimization problem.
The optimal solution of the stochastic program, which sets a provable lower
bound on the long-run average expected total inventory cost, will be used to
inspire a family of inventory control policies for managing dynamic systems.
These policies will be tested by the criterion of asymptotic optimality on the
diffusion scale. In other words, when component lead times increase, thus making
the system more costly, the proposed policies will drive the percentage
difference between the inventory cost and its lower bound to zero. Performance
of these policies in various parameter regions will also be evaluated
empirically by numerical experiments, simulations, and case studies, including
comparisons with other approaches and stress-tests under the least favorable
conditions. Algorithms involving approximations will be developed to allow the
approach to be implementable on an industrial scale.

If successful, the results of this research will help manufacturing companies to
achieve significant savings in inventory cost, thus improving the efficiency of
the widely-adopted Assemble-to-Order manufacturing strategy. Because the
policies are particularly effective for systems with long lead times, they will
mitigate negative impacts on the inventory system of long transportation delays
between manufacturers and their oversea suppliers and thus lead to changes in
the cost-benefit calculation that favor insourcing, which will contribute to the
US manufacturing sector's revitalization. The combined use of stochastic
programs and asymptotic analysis also points to a promising new approach for
inventory management optimization, which involves many notoriously hard
problems.