* 1363008
* Quantum and statistical mechanics, characterization, and applications of long-lived nuclear spin states in magnetic resonance
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Warren Warren, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 07/31/2017
* USD 586,500.00

In this award, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms A
(CSDM-A) Program of the Division of Chemistry, Professor Warren Warren of Duke
University and his post-doctoral and graduate student researchers are conducting
experiments to develop very long-lived nuclear spin states in molecules for use
in nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy and magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI). The results from these experiments are of fundamental interest to the
scientific community, but they also open up new possibilities for use in
clinical applications of MRI. Postdoctoral and graduate students working on this
project will receive training. Prof. Warren also participates in significant
scientific outreach to the broader community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prof. Warren
and his research group are continuing work to develop long-lived (singlet) spin
states for use in magnetic resonance applications. His group has developed pulse
sequences to excite very long lived (minutes!) states in biologically
interesting molecules. Prof. Warren and his group will continue a multi-pronged
effort at: (1) using natural abundance (13C, 15N) species to identify long-lived
states; (2) conduct basic theoretical extensions of the density matrix
understanding of magnetic resonance; (3) conduct detailed quantum mechanical and
molecular dynamics simulations in these systems; (4) synthesize macroscopic
quantities of promising candidate compounds for further study; and (5)
significantly expand the list of candidate molecular motifs (including
strategies which completely avoid labeling). Young researchers working in the
group of Prof. Warren will receive training in both experimental and theoretical
magnetic resonance spectroscopy.