* 1363354
* Dynamics of Water-Rock Interaction in Rock Scour
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Nicholas Sitar, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 06/30/2018
* USD 566,118.00

Scour of rock by running water is an important phenomenon in landscape evolution
and it has been identified as a critical issue facing many of the world's dams.
Field observations at numerous dam sites and in mountainous creek channels show
that surprisingly large blocks of rock can be plucked from the stream channels
by relatively small volume of water as long as it flows at sufficiently high
velocity. In the case of dam spillways, several recent events have produced
erosion that threatened the actual stability and safety of the dams themselves
and resulted in very costly emergency actions. This research is an
interdisciplinary effort aimed at developing a better physical understanding of
the process. Laboratory experiments in a flume and field observations will be
used to create a mathematical model for the evaluation and prediction of the
severity of the process. The ultimate goal is to enhance the safety of existing
dams by being able to predict the critical zones which need to be strengthened
in order to prevent scour from developing. This effort is particularly important
in view of the increasing extreme weather patterns being observed as a
consequence of climate change. The broader impacts of the award will be a new
understanding of landscape evolution by stream erosion, an improved
understanding of the risks to dams as a result of potential overtopping and
catastrophic flooding, and the introduction of new concepts in undergraduate and
graduate earth science and engineering education.

Current scour prediction models are limited to very-simple representation of the
geometry and structure of the rock discontinuities in 2D, and do not adequately
account for the effect of joint orientation on the removability of rock blocks.
Furthermore, these approaches do not account for the potential for the
kinematics of the block erosion/removal due to hydrodynamic forces beyond simple
sliding or uplift. This research is an integrated program of laboratory and
field studies to obtain high resolution field data, including velocity and
dynamic water pressure measurements, from field prototype and scaled model
hydraulic laboratory tests. The objective is to use the experimental and field
data to develop a better understanding of the mechanics of scour of blocky rock
masses and to develop appropriate analytical tools capable of capturing the
dynamics of fluid-blocky rock interaction.