* 1363255
* Structure and Dynamics of Radical Intermediates in Biological Electron Transfer Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Judy Kim, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 07/31/2017
* USD 280,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms-B
program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Judy Kim of the University of
California at San Diego is investigating the flow of charge in biological
systems. This ability of proteins to separate charge is important for many
chemical processes in nature, including photosynthesis and respiration. Her
research group utilizes optical tools combined with molecular biology methods to
investigate protein structures and rates associated with the flow of electrons
in two model systems. Results from this project not only elucidate how nature
controls the flow of charge over long distances, but these findings are also
relevant to other disciplines, such as biology and physics. The broader impact
of the research is significant because discoveries described here may inspire
new strategies for directional control of long-range electron flow in man-made
and biomimetic devices. In addition to the laboratory efforts, the research team
participates in outreach programs that reinforce the significance of STEM topics
to K-12 students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on amino acids that
participate in electron transfer (ET) reactions in proteins. Modern
spectroscopic techniques are used to characterize tryptophan and tyrosine
radicals in proteins, and to correlate protein environment with radical
reactivity. Key topics of investigation are (1) the optical, magnetic, and
electronic properties of biological tryptophan and tyrosine radicals; (2)
kinetics and structural changes associated with ET reactions of amino acid
radicals; (3) effects of hydrogen-bonding and local dielectric on radical
stability and dynamics; and (4) multi-step ET reactions along amino acid chains
in a protein. Spectroscopic techniques are employed, including time-resolved and
steady-state resonance Raman, transient absorption, and electron paramagnetic
resonance spectroscopy. These tools, combined with protein mutagenesis efforts,
provide insights on the structures and dynamics of the cation and neutral
radical species.