* 1363203
* Multiscale Modeling of Compositional Stresses in Nonstoichiometric Oxides
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2018
* Vivek Shenoy, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 05/31/2018
* USD 374,113.00

Oxide materials are of immense importance for energy conversion and energy
storage technologies. Their working principle is based on the coupling of
transport between ions and electrons. Relevant use includes solid oxide fuel
cells, catalysts and electrolyzers, and these effects have also been employed in
chemical sensors, electrochemical transducers, and in advanced electronic
memories and computing devices. The goal of this work is to define novel
computational methods to study how the oxygen vacancies interact with defects
such as grain boundaries, dislocations and facets. This will be studied in
polycrystalline ceria films used in electronic and energy systems and in
nanocrystals used in catalysis, thus influencing functional properties. A large
effort and many resources are now being invested to develop efficient methods to
improve the catalytic properties and transport in oxide materials. Thus, the
insights gained from increased knowledge of defect mechanics at interfaces and
grain boundaries could have economic impact, mostly in the energy and
electronics industry. Results and methods will be embedded into college and
graduate level eductation. Interactive software will be produced to relate
mechanics concepts to the broader public.

Since the interactions between defects in oxide materials are determined both by
atomic-scale phenomena and by the elastic and electrostatic interactions of
defects over length scales of hundreds of nanometers, the project will adopt a
multiscale approach. The structure of grain boundaries and defects in oxide
materials (with ceria as a concrete example) will be predicted using a novel
genetic algorithm technique and validated with high-resolution measurements.
Based on the structure, this project will study how the formation energies and
interaction of defects are influenced by stresses and space charges near the
grain boundaries. The distribution of oxygen vacancies and dopants near surfaces
and grain boundaries will be determined using a combination of state of the art
quantum simulations and a new method to determine the strains of charged
defects. Using the information from these atomic-scale simulations, the project
will develop a fully-coupled continuum electro-chemo-mechanical model to predict
the stresses in polycrystalline oxide films and nanocrystals and to model the
influence of stresses on oxygen vacancy density and hence transport. For
nanocrystals and polycrystalline films, the project study the effect of stresses
on catalytic activity, which will be validated by coulombic calorimetry studies
and HRTEM observations. Finally, the fully-coupled electro-chemo-mechanical
model will be used to model and predict how strain patterning and defects such
as dislocations influence metal-insulator transitions in oxides (with NiO as an
example) and the predictions will be validated with experiments. The project
will provide an opportunity for graduate and undergraduate students to both
carry out experimental work in a leading industrial lab and to develop advanced
computational skills. The progress made in the computational methods will be
included in the course that the PI has created to promote hands-on simulation
experience. Simulation modules enabling the communication of complex mechanics
concepts to the broader public will be developed.