* 1363375
* SusChEM: Design and Mechanistic Studies of Organic Silanols for Homogeneous Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Annaliese Franz, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 08/31/2017
* USD 467,880.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project funded by the Chemical Catalysis
program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Annaliese Franz in the Department
of Chemistry at the University of California-Davis is developing new sustainable
silicon-based catalysts for the synthesis of organic materials and polymers. The
development of silicon-based catalysts is important because metal-free catalysts
tend to be non-toxic, stable, and minimize the use of reagents and organic
solvents. Outreach activities developed by Professor Franz are allowing girls in
elementary and middle school the opportunity to participate in hands-on
activities and learn about catalysts, energy, and polymers. The broader impacts
of this work include potential societal benefits from the discovery of new
catalysts from less toxic, earth abundant materials and biodegradable polymers
from natural feedstocks as well as student training and outreach activities to
promote science for girls and young women.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
focuses on the synthesis of new silicon-based catalysts with silanol activating
groups and the application of these catalysts to organic transformations,
including polymerization reactions for biodegradable materials. The structure,
binding interactions and mechanism of various catalysts are being studied using
computational methods, X-ray crystallography, and mass spectrometry. This
information will be used to enhance mechanistic studies for organic silanol
activation, as well as other classes of metal-free catalysts. The research is
improving the fundamental understanding of hydrogen-bonding and anion-binding
and enhancing the application of these catalysts.