* 1363328
* GOALI: Inter-Laminar Toughening of Composite Structures: Bonding Mechanisms and Delamination Resistance
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2014,12/31/2017
* Y Lawrence Yao, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Steve Schmid
* 12/31/2017
* USD 331,000.00

This Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) research
project investigates a novel process for the inter-laminar toughening of polymer
matrix composites. The need to toughen composite structures arises from the
preferential planar fiber/matrix brittle de-bonding (delamination). The method
aims to locally integrate a tough thermoplastic polymer interleaf between fiber
fabric plies near each existing stress concentration site by intimately bonding
it to the plies and the thermoset epoxy matrix. The intimate bonding is achieved
through (1) hot melt bonding the thermoplastic interleaf with fibers to deeply
encapsulate the fibers, and (2) diffusively bonding it with the thermoset matrix
in the subsequent vacuum assisted resin transfer molding curing. Analysis will
yield significant insights into the coupled effects of fiber-interleaf and
interleaf-matrix bonding on the fracture toughness and delamination resistance
of preform composites. Investigation into the interface resolved wetting and
viscous flow behaviors as well as thermoset-thermoplastic inter-diffusion
kinetics will elucidate interactions underlying these bonding mechanisms.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The expected results from this project will develop new
directions for the design and fabrication of more efficient composite components
with greater delamination resistance. The PI's close interaction with a key
industrial partner will lead to the rapid development of the thermoplastic
interleaving method through application-specific laminate fabrication and
testing, leading to greater competitiveness of an important renewable energy
source and thus broader societal impact. If the toughness of large, tapered
laminate composites such as wind turbine blades is enhanced, longer blades and
taller wind turbines will help reduce cost, spread wind energy usage, and reduce
environmental impact. Process knowledge and modeling developments gained from
this work may be extended to a wide range of material fabrication techniques
such as dissimilar materials joining and sealing: thermoset-thermoplastic matrix
composite bonding, and thermoset matrix composite to metals bonding.