* 1363526
* A New Self-healing Mechanism and its Impact on Multiscale Biomechanics of Bone
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Deepak Vashishth, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 06/30/2018
* USD 390,000.00

The research objective of this award is to investigate the mechanistic basis of
the nanoscale self-repair in bone and evaluate how it impacts the fracture of
bone. These studies will add significantly to the understanding of complex
biophysical self-healing mechanisms that are increasingly being applied to
develop advanced materials. Understanding self-healing will also have a major
impact on human health, by elucidating the impact osteoporosis has on bone
repair, and may lead to enhanced therapeutic treatments for osteoporotic
patients. An understanding of the inter- and intra-species matrix protein
content will provide direct evidence of biomechanical and mineral variation
between species, providing inferences related to bone evolution on a scale that
has previously been under explored. The educational plan supported by this award
focuses on developing new and interactive course content in Mechanobiology and
Continuum Mechanics, two courses taught by the PIs at the undergraduate and
graduate levels. The findings of this study will directly introduce
interdisciplinary material to the courses mentioned above.

Studies conducted under this award will employ biochemical analyses and x-ray
techniques to examine the association between non-collagenous bone proteins,
osteocalcin and osteopontin, and the bone mineral phase within humans and across
selected animal species. Nanomechanical testing and atomic force microscopy will
be used to evaluate and monitor the roles of osteocalcin and osteopontin, and
mineral in repairing nanoscale damage, under physiological conditions in vitro.
Finally, multi-scale modeling approaches, incorporating macroscale fracture
toughness and bone mineral data obtained from bones of multiple animals, will be
used to develop a comprehensive understanding of how bone matrix self-healing at
the nanoscale, impacts whole bone fracture resistance across various species.