* 1363499
* A Scalable Control Framework for Boundary Coverage and Cooperative Manipulation by Robotic Swarms
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Spring Berman, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 07/31/2017
* USD 260,000.00

Swarms of low-cost autonomous robots can potentially be used to collect massive
amounts of sensor data and transport heavy payloads across long distances. Novel
robots for swarm applications are currently being developed as a result of
recent advances in computing, sensing, actuation, power, control, and 3D
printing. However, there remains a need for theoretically-grounded methods of
programming robotic swarms to achieve target sensing and transport objectives
under realistic conditions. In many applications, each robot will have highly
limited capabilities, undependable communication, no information on its
location, and no map of its surroundings. This research project develops a
framework for reliably controlling arbitrarily large populations of robots with
such constraints. The project focuses specifically on the problem of regulating
robot interactions with different types of features that may be present in their
environment. These features can be regions of interest that require certain
distributions of robots along their perimeters, or they may be objects that
require teams of robots to move them to specified destinations. The developed
framework applies techniques from the fields of chemical kinetics, social insect
behavior, dynamical systems, feedback control, and optimization. It provides a
formal way to program robotic swarms for a range of tasks of wide benefit to
society, including environmental monitoring, search-and-rescue operations,
disaster recovery, automated construction and manufacturing, and even biomedical
imaging and drug delivery at the nanoscale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
develops a rigorous methodology for feedback control and optimization of robotic
swarm population dynamics to produce target coverage and manipulation behaviors
in unknown environments using only local sensing and common broadcast
information. The approach incorporates stochastic, deterministic, and hybrid
stochastic-deterministic models at different levels of abstraction that describe
the robots? roles, task transitions, motion, and manipulation dynamics. It
includes a novel encounter-based approach to boundary coverage that does not
require characterization of encounter rates or knowledge of environmental
parameters. New stochastic strategies for cooperative manipulation are developed
in part from models of desert ant group retrieval that are based on experimental
data using rigid loads and ant force sensors. The control framework is validated
through computer simulations and testbed experiments with small mobile robots,
each equipped with a multi-degree-of-freedom gripper that is designed as part of
this project. Beyond robotics, the project provides analytical tools for a
deeper understanding of surface coverage processes in biology, such as protein
adsorption, and the behavioral and biomechanical mechanisms that underlie
collective transport strategies in social insects.