* 1363468
* Friction Stir Blind Riveting for Dissimilar Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2014,01/31/2017
* Scott Miller, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Steve Schmid
* 01/31/2017
* USD 316,114.00

This award supports fundamental research on a novel one-sided joining process of
dissimilar materials through friction stir blind riveting. The research
objective is to establish the link among the thermomechanical inputs, material
properties, microstructural characteristics, and resulting joint strength.
Specifically, the research will formulate a physics-based thermo-mechanical
model for intrinsic forces and torques with frictionally rotated rivet and
validate the model experimentally; test the hypothesis that viscoplastic type
material response can simulate metal deformation in friction stir blind
riveting; investigate the effects of process conditions on material flow, defect
formation, and joint strength; analyze microstructure evolution and its impacts
on joint failure mechanisms; identify different thermomechanically affected
zones; and assess the friction stir mechanisms for different joining materials.

Research results will provide knowledge and understanding to meet the critical
need for the incorporation of advanced lightweight materials in the automotive
industry. The capability to incorporate these lightweight materials in an
automobile is crucial for improving fuel economy and reducing environmental
impact. This technology combines the benefits of friction stir welding with the
strength of blind rivets. The research will advance this new joining technique
for a wide range of dissimilar materials, from metals to composites. Research
findings will also have a broad impact on other transportation industries, such
as aerospace, rail, and shipbuilding, where joining materials with different
weights or functionalities is increasingly demanded but limited by traditional
joining techniques. This project will promote active learning for industrial
practitioners, and broaden participation of underrepresented student groups in
Hawaii. The research outcomes will be integrated into undergraduate/graduate
course development, and hands-on modules for K12 education.