* 1363244
* Collaborative Research: Modeling and Analysis of Advanced parking Management for Congestion Mitigation
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Yingyan Lou, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Chen
* 08/31/2018
* USD 170,000.00

Parking is a growing problem in dense urban areas. To many, finding a parking
space in these areas is an unpleasant experience of uncertainty and frustration.
Cruising for parking makes traffic on already-congested urban streets even worse
and leads to significant waste in time and fuel. In transportation, smartphone-
based parking management applications have emerged. These applications help
drivers find parking spaces by allowing them to use smartphones to view real-
time availability and prices of parking spaces and guide them to open parking
spaces, reserved or otherwise. This award develops theoretical foundations and
methodologies for analyzing these emerging parking management services. Results
from this research provide a better understanding of the impacts of advanced
parking management services on parking competition and travel patterns. The
research develops policies to reduce traffic congestion and emissions in dense
urban areas. This award positively impacts engineering education by offering new
materials and case studies and engaging underrepresented student groups in
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using game-theoretic, dynamic and stochastic
programming approaches to investigate both temporal and spatial travel patterns
with advanced parking management, this project generates a set of analytical
tools that explain the underlying working mechanisms of advanced parking
management services and gauge their potential for reducing traffic congestion.
The theoretical efforts in this research are complemented by an agent-based
simulation, which tests the validity and applicability of the theories, and
unveils complex outcomes of parking competition under realistic parking search
behaviors. This work advances the knowledge and analysis of parking management
and enriches the literature of modeling morning commute and vehicle routing.