* 1363447
* Energy-Efficient Compressed Sensing: A joint Algorithmic/Implementation Approach Using Deterministic Sensing
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2013,04/30/2015
* Vladimir Stojanovic, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* GEORGE HADDAD
* 04/30/2015
* USD 118,481.00

The objective of this research is to develop low-power, robust, and energy-
efficient sensors to satisfy a wide range of current applications including
large-scale networks and implantable biomedical sensors. The aim is to develop
the fundamental framework for sensor systems, connecting theory and algorithms
with efficient hardware implementations and circuit metrics, such as power,
footprint, quantization effects, and other circuit and channel non-idealities.
The approach is to develop compressed sensing techniques that result in
universal and efficient sensor designs.

Intellectual Merit: The transformative aspect of this research is a joint
investigation into both theoretical and hardware development of compressed
sensing techniques for sensor systems. The plan is to optimize energy allocation
in the information chain, by shifting from (the original) randomization
techniques to more energy-efficient deterministic sensing techniques. The focus
is on regimes relevant to practice, and the results of this research are
foreseen to greatly impact both systems and hardware communities.

Broader Impacts: Energy-efficient sensor nodes are in great demand today. For
example in large-scale networks and implantable sensors, low power nodes are
required to increase the average node life-time until maintenance, as well as
improve the patient's quality of life. The goal is to convince practitioners,
that compressed sensing can be mapped to hardware-efficient implementations. By
creating an online portal, the project will also demonstrate the benefits of the
developed sensing techniques to both experts and general population. To
disseminate the fundamental systems/hardware framework, a new multi-disciplinary
course will be created at MIT and offered to a wide-range of students.