* 1363012
* Selective Fundamental Problems in Supramolecular Assembly and Phase Stability of Homopolymer Mixtures
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2017
* Karl Freed, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 06/30/2017
* USD 511,000.00

Karl Freed at the University of Chicago is supported by an award from the
Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods Program to study self-assembly
and related phenomena. Equilibrium self-assembly involving the spontaneous
organization of molecules into larger structures that show order is a ubiquitous
phenomenon pervading chemistry, materials science, and biology. Hence, the
ability to control this self-assembly has numerous applications for industry and
medicine. The vast array of complex functional structures formed through
equilibrium self-assembly suggests that an understanding of the underlying
principles can be transformative in designing truly novel materials and medical
therapies. This has motivated numerous advanced experimental studies of
synthetic self-assembling systems such as nanoparticles, peptides and DNA
complexes, the development of transformative strategies for synthesis of
macromolecular systems, the synthesis of supramolecular systems with specific
properties, and computer simulations of the self-assembly of molecular and
larger-scale particles. The last is a focus of the work in the current project.
The rapid growth of analytical modeling of self-assembly promises to drive
applications forward as one learns to exploit the rich palette of principles,
long utilized by nature, to create highly responsive and functional self-
organizing and self-healing materials. These advances can greatly improve
knowledge concerning diverse problems in soft matter, nanotechnology,
biotechnology, medicine, and, when extended to non-equilibrium self-assembly,
allow addressing basic processes such as the development of living systems and
cell locomotion and communication. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current proposal
represents the culmination of a long term research program devoted to developing
fundamental theories for predicting thermodynamic properties of homopolymer
mixtures and of solutions containing species that can associate with each other
or with solvent. Both types of association lead at chemical equilibrium to the
formation of clusters of variable size. The theoretical approaches are based
either on extensions of Flory-Huggins (FH) theory to self-assembly or on the
more detailed lattice cluster theory (LCT), which includes a description of
molecular features neglected by FH theory, such as monomer size and shape, chain
stiffness, and compressibility effects. The LCT has recently been extended to
describe solutions of strongly interacting telechelic polymers (polymers with
sticky end groups). The theory aims at elucidating the generic effects of many
structurally important binding processes in living systems that are greatly
influenced by surrounding chains, confining surfaces, and binding molecules
(e.g., proteins that modulate the stability of assemblies). The common general
mechanism of mutual association, polymer solubility and hydrophobicity stresses
the fundamental nature of the proposed studies of solvation/binding. Competitive
molecular binding is also of central significance in elution chromatography,
materials synthesis, and biological processes. The proposed research outlines a
broad theoretical framework for developing theories that can assist in the
rational design of new materials, new drug systems, and physical therapies to
mitigate against diseases associated with malfunctioning self-assembly.