* 1363135
* Mechanics of Deformation of Flexible Fibrous Networks
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Deborah Fygenson, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 07/31/2018
* USD 400,000.00

Many useful materials are made up of interconnected networks of fibers. This is
observed both in biological materials (such as tissues and cells) as well as in
man-made materials (such as paper and textiles). Resistance to external forces
is a key property of these materials. Still, it is not understood how the
mechanical characteristics of the fibers and the distribution of the cross-links
between fibers determine the stiffness of the entire network. Here, fibrous
networks with precise control over network architecture will be created. These
materials will then be tested mechanically. Thereby, this research will reveal
exactly which microscopic parameters matter most in defining network stiffness.
Specific results will test a recent predictive model of network mechanics and
contribute to the fundamental understanding of the mechanical properties of
biomaterials. General outcomes will influence the use of artificial fibrous
materials, with potential impacts for the design of prosthetics and/or tissue
implants. The Principal Investigators will contribute to human resource
development in Science, Technology, Math and Engineering.

The investigators will synthesize fibrous networks using sequence-based self-
assembly of DNA, and test their mechanical properties using an array of methods
of rheology. Networks will be designed using a two-component strategy in which
linkers are attached to multi-armed nodes. As a result, it will be possible to
independently vary the bend stiffness and stretch stiffness of the linkers, as
well as the connectivity of the nodes. Investigation will focus on so-called
"marginal gels" (i.e. networks whose connectivity is in the vicinity of the
Maxwell isostatic point) that are predicted to have dramatic mechanical
properties associated with thermodynamic critical behavior, including a sudden
stiffening with connectivity, and critical fluctuations. College internship
opportunities and through cross-disciplinary graduate student training will be
provided. International collaboration via student exchanges and through an
international summer workshop on biomolecular networks will be conducted.