* 9600262
* Japan JSPS Program:  Use of Pyrolysis Gas Chromatography    Mass Spectrometry for Assessing the State of Preservation   of Proteinaceous Materials
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1997
* Mary Becker, Fellowships
* Fellowship Award
* Larry H. Weber
* 08/31/1997
* USD 3,000.00

9600262 Becker This award supports a 12 month Japan Society for the Promotion of
Science (JSPS) Postdoctoral Fellowship for Dr. Mary Becker at the Tokyo National
Research Institute of Cultural Properties, Tokyo, Japan. Dr. Becker will work
with Dr. Chie Sano, senior researcher in the Conservation Science Department ast
the Institute, on a research project entitled, "The Use of Pyrolysis Gas
Chromatography Mass Spectrometry for Assessing the State of the Preservation of
Proteinaceous Materials". The proposed research will develop analytical
techniques sensitive to chemical alterations prior to their manifestation as
physical changes in museum objects. A gas chromatograph (GC) interfaced with a
mass spectrometry (MS) and combined with an initial pyrolysis (Py) step will be
used to reveal the concentrations and number of pyrolysis products of Nylon 6,6
change as a function of heat treatment. Since soluble fragments with a
distribution of molecular weights are formed as silk deteriorates, it is
anticipated that this technique (Py-GC-MS) will be useful in monitoring the
chemical alterations as a function of aging. Ascertaining the complex nature of
natural degradation and that which occurs during pyrolysis, the research will
examine if changes in the fragmentation patterns of naturally degraded proteins
in silk can indicate the state of preservation. A systematic study of aged silks
could not only supply information on the state of preservation of silk but will
also determine the usefulness of this technique as a strategy for routine
analysis of proteinaceous materials found in cultural property objects. ***