* 9600975
* CAREER:  Biochemical and Genetic Analysis of Vacuole-Mediated        Mitochondrial Turnover
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/1997,12/31/2001
* Peter Thorsness, University of Wyoming
* Continuing Grant
* Nara Gavini
* 12/31/2001
* USD 292,375.00

9600975 Thorsness This research project is focused on understanding the
integration of mitochondrial and cellular metabolism, specifically the turnover
of mitochondrial compartments. In the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae,
mitochondrial compartments that are damaged or in excess of what is required for
optimum cellular metabolism are specifically taken up and degraded by the
vacuole. In order to further investigate this process, a novel assay that
monitors autophagy of mitochondria by vacuoles has been developed. A yeast
strain has been constructed in which the only alkaline phosphatase activity in
the cell is localized in the mitochondrial compartment. This alkaline
phosphatase is inactive unless it is activated by a specific proteolytic event
that occurs only in the vacuole. Thus, changes in growth conditions, mutations,
or damage by chemicals that alter the rate of autophagy of mitochondrial
compartments by vacuoles can be easily monitored by assaying alkaline
phosphatase activity. A specific goal of this project is to define
physiologically relevant events that change the rate of turnover of
mitochondrial compartments. The autophagy assay will be used to investigate the
catabolite inactivation of mitochondrial activities occurring in yeast upon
changes in culture conditions. A second goal is to investigate the stability of
mitochondrial compartments with respect to vacuolar function upon the inducement
of damage to mitochondria by chemicals and drugs that inhibit mitochondrial
activities. Finally, a plate assay for mitochondrial autophagy will be developed
with the long range goal of using that assay for the identification of vacuolar
and mitochondrial gene products that are required for the turnover of
mitochondrial compartments. %%% In addition to being an important site of
cellular energy production, mitochondria are also the site of many essential
biosynthetic operations. Thus, mitochondria are essential components of all
eucaryotic cells. Under some circumstances, mitoch ondrial compartments can be
damaged by environmental toxins or be present in excess and consequently need to
be destroyed by the vacuole, a site of degradation in the cell. This research
project is designed to identify what types of damage lead to destruction of
mitochondrial compartments and what metabolic conditions result in excess
mitochondria that are subsequently destroyed. Additionally, the components of
mitochondria and vacuoles that are necessary for this destruction will be
identified. ***