* 9600304
* Japan JSPS Program:  A Teleseismic Survey of Upper-Mantle   Reflectivity Structure Beneath the Mid-Atlantic Ridge
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1996,10/31/1997
* Paul Earle, Fellowships
* Fellowship Award
* Larry H. Weber
* 10/31/1997
* USD 3,000.00

9600304 Earle This award supports a 12 month Japan Society for the Promotion of
Science (JSPS) Postdoctoral Fellowship for Dr. Paul Earle at the Earthquake
Research Institute, University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. Dr. Earle will work with
Dr. Yoshio Fukao, director of the Earthquake Research Institute, on a research
project entitled, "The Teleseismic Survey of the Upper-Mantle Reflectivity
Structure Beneath the Mid-Atlantic Region." The proposed research will determine
the sharpness (depth extent) and topography (depth variations) of seismic
discontinuities occurring at average depths of 410- and 660- km. At present,
seismic stations located in Japan form part of a unique geometry for studying
the discontinuity structure below the Mid-Atlantic Ridge. Energy originating
from earth-quakes in the Tonga and New Hebridies trenches reflects from
discontinuities beneath the Mid-Atlantic Ridge before arriving in Japan. This
energy is recorded on two Japanese seismic arrays: the J-array (over 300 short-
period seismometers blanketing Japan) and POSEIDON (a network of more than 30
modern broadband seismometers located in and surrounding the Japanese islands).
The research will use seismograms from earthquakes of magnitude > 5.6 occurring
after April 1991 (birth of the J-array) to examine seismic wave arrivals which
have interacted with seismic discontinuities. Drs. Fukao and Earle will develop
automated methods to analyze over 70,000 seismograms contained in this data
base. Array processing techniques will aid in the positive identification of
these small amplitude reflections and will be used to place constraints on the
Earth's chemical composition, temperature variations, and the nature of material
flow within it. ***