* 9600254
* RUI: Organic Archaeometry
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/1996,08/31/2001
* Edith Stout, Vassar College
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2001
* USD 61,561.00

With National Science Foundation support Dr. Curt Beck and Ms Edith Stout will
continue their ongoing program of the analysis of organic materials recovered
from European archaeological sites. These include amber as well as tars and
pitches which served as glues and sealants in many prehistoric contexts. Organic
materials are found in many archaeological sites from different time periods
from the Paleolithic through Classical civilizations. The team will pursue three
specific goals: 1. The provenience analysis by infrared spectroscopy of
archaeological artifacts of amber and related fossil resins with principal
emphases on the archaeological amber finds of Switzerland, Portugal and Romania;
2. The determination of the chemical composition and botanical sources of fossil
resins by using gas chromatography-mass spectrometry to separate and identify
the molecular constituents of ambers native the European Alps. This will permit
distinction between amber artifacts made from local raw materials and those
imported from Northern Europe; 3. The analysis and identification of tars and
pitches used for the hafting of tools, caulking of ships and lining of transport
amphoras. Archaeologists recognize that to understand prehistoric adaptations
they must look beyond individual sites and must determine how these were
integrated into intra and inter regional systems. Even before the development of
agriculture, interactions appear to have covered hundreds of miles and by 10,000
years ago trade goods moved across Europe. Such systems are reconstructed by
matching materials recovered in archaeological sites with their raw material
source. Amber, which was highly valued as an ornament was very widely traded and
thus is ideal for this purpose. However since this tree resin occurs in many
regions it is necessary to pinpoint area of origin and this can be difficult to
accomplish. Through the analytic techniques applied by Dr. Beck, in many
instances such sourcing can now be done and with this award he and MS Stout will
analyze a number of amber and other organic objects. This research is also
important because of its training component. Dr. Beck teaches at an
undergraduate institution and for many years has actively involved students in
his research. Many of them have been exposed to scientific research through his
projects, have published jointly with him and gone on to pursue careers in
science.