* 9600628
* U.S.-Latin America Cooperative Research:  Towards a Model of the Biogeochemistry of Continental-Scale River Basins:  The Andean Source Regions of the Bolivian and Peruvian Amazon
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/1996,07/31/1998
* Jeffrey Richey, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Beverly Diaz
* 07/31/1998
* USD 49,935.00

9600628 Richey This Americas Program award will fund a collaborative research
project between Dr. Jeffrey Richey, University of Washington, Seattle and Dr.
Jorge Quintanilla, Instituto de Investigaciones Quimicas, Universidad Mayor de
San Andres, La Paz, Bolivia, and Dr. Carlos Llerena, Universidad Nacional
Agraria La Molina, Lima, Peru. They will investigate the biogeochemistry of
natural flowing waters in the Amazonian regions of Bolivia and Peru. The goals
of the research are to characterize the chemistry and hydrology of these little
studied regions and to synthesize these data with data already collected in the
Brazilian portions of the basin. They will try to determine where are the key
"setpoints" of river chemistry in the Andean source regions of the Amazon River
system. To meet these goals, the project will carry out collaborative field
expeditions along transects of key Andean drainage basins, conduct field and
laboratory analyses at the participating institutions and integrate results with
basin characteristics. The project will bring together, for the first time, a
team of U.S. biogeochemists and scientists with similar interests from Peru and
Bolivia and will directly address the needs of all countries involved. U.S.
scientists will benefit substantially from the input from those experts in the
region and the access to base laboratory, field stations, vehicles, and human
resources. ***