* 9600327
* International Research Fellow Awards Program:  Specimen     Fabrication and Atom Probe Analysis of Metallic Multi-Layer Thin Film Structures
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1998
* David Larson, Fellowships
* Fellowship Award
* Susan Parris
* 08/31/1998
* USD 52,800.00

9600327 Larson The International Research Fellow Awards Program enables U.S.
scientists and engineers to conduct three to twentyfour months of research
abroad. The program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the
use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions
abroad. This award will support a twelve-month postdoctoral research visit by
Dr. David J. Larson to work with Dr. Alfred Cerezo at the University of Oxford
on a project entitled, "Specimen Fabrication and Atom Probe Analysis of Metallic
Multilayer Thin Film Structures." The objective of this project is to correlate
interfacial structure with magnetic properties in multilayer films. This will be
done by 1) development of a specimen preparation technique for multilayer film
(MLF) structures which allows atom probe analysis when the film normal is
parallel to the tip axis and the films have not been prepared by sputtering or
evaporating onto a highly curved sample and 2) atom probe field ion microscopy
(APFIM) characterization of MLF structure for the purpose of correlating
deposition and processing conditions with interfacial structure and ultimately,
with magnetic properties. This correlation will allow optimization and
reproducibility of the most important magnetic properties of MLFs for commercial
applications. ***