* 9600060
* Hydrodynamics & Magnetohydrodynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1999
* Bruce Turkington, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 06/30/1999
* USD 67,900.00

9600060 Turkington Recent progress with statistical equilibrium models of ideal
fluid turbulence suggests that they have greater predictive power than
previously believed. Unlike traditional homogeneous turbulence theory, these
models capture the essential features of the long-lived, large-scale structures
that form in the process of turbulent relaxation. Moreover, they furnish
definite macroscopic equations for the coherent structures that persist amidst
the microscopic disorder. The proposed investigations address the formulation,
justification and solution of these statistical equilibrium models. The goal of
the work is to answer fundamental questions about prototype models drawn from
hydrodynamics and magnetohydrodynamics. Both analytical and numerical methods
are employed. On the theoretical side, continuum and lattice models are
constructed, and their properties are established using a synthesis of x-space
and k-space methods. This approach is expected to yield new theories of
turbulent relaxation for uniform and stratified fluids, and incompressible
magnetofluids in two and three dimensions. On the computational side,
optimization methods are designed to solve the constrained maximum entropy
problems that govern the various models. These numerical methods are implemented
to reveal the predictions of the models, especially in settings where
experiments or simulations are available for comparison. %%% Turbulent fluid
flow remains one of the unsolved puzzles of physical science. A satisfactory
theoretical understanding of it would provide much more powerful means of
computing the behavior of fluid motions than is presently available. Such
computations are needed in numerous applied fields, from aerodynamic design to
weather prediction. Similarly, the modeling of plasmas (hot, ionized gases),
such as arise in fusion energy research, requires a theory of turbulence for
electrically-conducting fluids in magnetic fields. The proposed work see ks to
develop the mathematical tools necessary to calculate the persistent,
predominant states of these fluid and magnetofluid systems without resolving the
full complexity of their detailed behavior. Tools of this kind, which are built
from basic concepts in statistical physics, are currently available only in some
simplified systems. The motivation for the investigations is to extend the range
of applications of these tools and to support them by complete theories and
effective computational methods. ***