* 9600105
* Transport in Unconventional Superconductors
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1996,06/30/2000
* Peter Hirschfeld, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 06/30/2000
* USD 156,000.00

9600105 Hirschfeld Theoretical research designed to aid in the identification of
the pairing state of the copper oxide and heavy fermion superconductors and the
development of a practical theory of transport below the critical temperature
will be conducted. The primary focus will be on the effect of disorder and
magnetic field on low-temperature properties. Previous theory has provided a
good description of experimental results reflecting the disorder-dependent
quasiparticle density of states in terms of a dirty d-wave picture. Calculations
of the scattering amplitude for a d-wave order parameter will be performed,
including self-consistent off diagonal scattering, in an attempt to address
inadequacies of the simplest models of this kind in the description of transport
properties. Such corrections to the theory may not be ignored and are likely to
introduce qualitatively new physics. At all stages, comparisons will be made
with anisotropic s-wave states to search for qualitative differences. Several
instances in the theory where deviations from the usual model spherical or
ellipsoidal Fermi surface can lead to qualitatively new effects will be
investigated. Examples include the breaking of spurious isotropy of transport
coefficients in the E2u pairing scenario for UPt3 by hexagonal anisotropy, and
the creation of matrix elements for off-diagonal scattering due to
orthorhombicity in the d wave model for YBCO and BSCCO. Finally, transport
properties of unconventional superconductors in a finite magnetic field will be
calculated, accounting for the most significant unusual features of the
unconventional vortex lattice, such as the large density of unbound
quasiparticle excitations over the entire vortex. This will involve a careful
analysis of the scattering cross-section for electrons from a single d-wave
vortex. A semimicroscopic transport theory including impurity scattering will
then be formulated and applied to measurements of thermal and electric al
conductivities and Hall coefficients in the superconducting state. %%%
Theoretical research will be conducted on various aspects of superconductivity
in the high temperature superconductors and the so-called heavy-fermion
superconductors. In particular, studies will be made of transport properties and
on the effects of disorder and magnetic fields on superconducting state
properties. ***