* 9600384
* Americas Program:  Receptor Modeling of Atmospheric         Deposition at the Great Lakes Integrated Atmospheric        Deposition (IADN) Stations
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/1996,08/31/1996
* Sheldon Landsberger, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 08/31/1996
* USD 7,891.00

9600384 Landsberger This Americas Program award will fund travel expenses to
Canada for Dr. Sheldon Landsberger, University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, to
conduct a study on the atmospheric deposition of toxic materials in the Great
Lakes. His collaborator will be Dr. Raymond Meyer Hoff, of the Atmospheric
Environment Service (AES) of Canada. The main objective is to develop a multi-
element data set on air samples collected by the U.S.-Canada Integrated
Atmospheric Deposition Network (IADN). The IADN has stations on site on each of
the Great Lakes to provide an estimate of overall regional inputs of toxic
materials, including trace metals, from the atmosphere to the Lakes. A program
of chemical analysis and receptor modeling is proposed in which samples obtained
at the IADN sites will be used to estimate the sources and source/regions of
trace elements deposition in the Great Lakes, and the effects of specific urban
areas on the airborne particulate matter compositions. The atmospheric
concentrations of many toxic trace elements in the Great Lakes area has risen
dramatically in recent decades to the point where they pose a potential threat
to public health and the environment. Atmospheric deposition of toxic materials
downwind from large urban areas is a potentially important input to the Lakes
which has not been addressed by the IADN. The proposed research will directly
address this problem through a source-receptor modeling program for particle-
size distribution. ***