* 9600394
* International Research Fellow Awards Program:  The Biotic   Consequences of Andean Uplift
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1996,11/30/1998
* Richard Madden, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Susan Parris
* 11/30/1998
* USD 41,651.00

9600394 Madden The International Research Fellow Awards Program enables U.S.
scientists and engineers to conduct three to twenty- four months of research
abroad. The program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the
use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions
abroad. This award will support a nine-month postdoctoral research visit which
will support Dr. Robert H. Madden of Duke University to work with Professor
Guiomar Vucetich at the Universidad Nacional de La Plata in Brazil. There
project is entitled, "The Biotic Consequences of Andean Uplift: Inferences About
the Mammalian Fossil Record Based on Living Rodents and Other Mammals." The
purpose of this research is to explore the influence of Andean orogeny on the
Mio-Pliocene faunal record based on estimates of rainfall and elevation from the
composition and structure of mammalian assemblages. Inferences about rainfall
and paleoelevation will be based on patterns in the organization of living
mammals distributed along elevation and rainfall gradients in South America
framed in terms of attributes that can be recognized in the fossil record. Of
the methods currently available for estimating rainfall and paleotemperature,
faunal methods are probably the least well-developed, and yet may provide the
best complement to methods based on stable isotopes and fossil flora. Faunal
methods have been undertaken to distinguish between major biomes (e.g.,
grassland vs forest) or to document departures from modern conditions. These
methods open the possibility of reconstructing the environmental history of
Andean uplift in South America through the late Neogene. The ability to
determine estimates of mean annual rainfall and paleoelevation using the
mammalian fossil record depends on the quality of that record, especially
adequate sampling and modern taxonomic revision to the species level. The best
available fossil records for the studies are those o f altiplano Bolivia and
northern Argentina. ***