* 9600294
* Japan JSPS Program:  Pressurized Gas Transport for          Intravascular Oxgenation
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/1996,05/31/1997
* Jon Moon, Fellowships
* Fellowship Award
* Larry H. Weber
* 05/31/1997
* USD 9,956.00

9600294 Moon This award supports a 12 month Japan Society for the Promotion of
Science (JSPS) Postdoctoral Fellowship for Dr. Jon K. Moon to work at Kumamoto
University Medical School, Kumamoto, Japan. Dr. Moon will collaborate with Dr.
Hidenori Terasaki, Chairman of the Department of Anesthesiology, on a project
entitled: "Pressurized Gas Transport for Intravascular Oxygenation'. The
proposed research will consist of building an efficient intravascular oxygenator
(artificial lung) to provide life support while allowing damaged lungs to heal
and will focus on developing materials and techniques for the pressurized
transport of oxygen into blood. Drs. Terasaki and Moon propose to exploit the
high strength and nonlinear gas- transport behavior of recently developed
microporous materials. Although these materials can withstand high internal
pressures, they have been used only under negative pressure in earlier
oxygenator designs. As positive pressure can substantially increase oxygen
delivered to the blood, thermal-mass flow controllers, originally developed for
the semiconductor industry, will be used to measure the pressure to flow
relationship of microporous materials when immersed in water, albumin plus
water, and blood. Data from the experiments will be developed into a
mathematical model to predict the "bubble-point pressure" of an implanted
oxygenator and, following this analysis, prototypes of extracorporeal and
intravascular oxygenators will be constructed for tests in animals by the
researchers in the laboratory. ***