* 9600013
* U.S.-Italy Dissertation Research:  Long-Term Natural CO2    Enrichment of a Mediterranean Mixed-Oak Forests
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/1996,06/30/1999
* Walter Oechel, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne E. Hudson
* 06/30/1999
* USD 10,000.00

This two-year award will support dissertation research on the effects of
elevated atmospheric CO2 on native ecosystems by Cara Hinkson at San Diego State
University in cooperation with Dr. Franco Miglietta at the CNR Institute of
Agrometeorology and Environmental Analysis for Agriculture in Florence, Italy.
The main objective of the research is to determine the effects of elevated CO2
on the plant-soil-microbe nutrient dynamics and carbon allocation patterns, and
to determine how these factors collectively affect native forest productivity.
The dissertation project will take place in a native coppiced mixed-oak forest
community in Tuscany, Italy, where a natural CO2 spring has enriched CO2
concentrations for several hundreds to thousands of years. CO2 springs provide
an opportunity to compare effects from naturally enriched communities to those
from previous short-term manipulations using seedlings and saplings in
controlled environments and to observe changes over different times scales and
spatial scales. The research will benefit from the work of the Italian institute
on Italian CO2 springs and from the Principal Investigator's work on the effects
of elevated CO2 and climate change on Mediterranean-type ecosystems in such
areas as California, South Africa, Australia, Chile, and the Mediterranean
Basin.