* 9600971
* Structural Motifs in RNA
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/1996,06/30/2001
* John Perona, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 06/30/2001
* USD 454,000.00

9600971 Perona Recent discoveries of new catalytic functions of RNA have greatly
heightened awareness of the pivotal role of this molecule in living organisms. A
full appreciation of the biological function of RNA must include a thorough
description of how its three-dimensional structure is organized, but to date
very few atomic-level descriptions of RNA molecules are available. Our previous
work on crystallization and structure determination of the glutaminyl-tRNA
synthetase-tRNAGIn complex provides a unique vehicle to rapidly determine the
structures of new domains of RNA, the focus of the proposed project. The pre-
existing crystal lattice of this large protein-RNA complex will be exploited by
inserting new domains of RNA into specific positions of the tRNA, so that the
new material is accomodated in the solvent interstices of the crystal. In-vitro
selection methods are employed to obtain novel hybrid RNA molecules which fold
correctly and retain biological activity. These new RNAs are chosen for their
potential to teach us the underlying rules of three-dimensional folding and for
their present-day biological significance. A rapid increase in new RNA
structures will provide fundamental insight into RNA-based cellular processes
and may have further implications to defining a new class of targets for
structure-based drug design. The establishment of a laboratory engaged in
Macromolecular Crystallography has been a long-awaited development at UCSB.
Consequently, a significant activity in the next five years will be the
education of students as well as other faculty members in related fields.
Because a joint appointment is held in Chemistry and in an Interdepartmental
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Program (BMB), the range of interactions will
be especially broad. A new graduate course in crystallography will be developed,
and an existing course in Physical Biochemistry has already been extensively
revised. State of the art data collection and computer graphics facilities
enhance the educat ional opportunities by providing hands-on experience in the
most important techniques. The arrival of crystallography also marks the onset
of a long-term growth phase in Biochemistry and Biophysics at UCSB. Thus, there
will be substantial participation in several new undergraduate curricula related
to Structural Biology: a new B.S. degree in Biochemistry to be awarded by the
Chemistry department, and an interdisciplinary program in Pharmacological
Sciences. The University also possesses strong commitments to supporting
undergraduate research opportunities, as manifested by programs funded by the
Howard Hughes Medical Institute and the Materials Research Laboratory. Direct
mentoring of undergraduates in the laboratory will be an important aspect of the
educational program. Collaborative projects inside the University, as well as
with senior scientists at other institutions, enhance the educational
opportunities for students in the laboratory. %%% The fundamental building-block
molecules in all living cells are DNA, RNA and protein. DNA encodes the genetic
information within its nucleotide sequence, but for the cell to function this
information must first be copied into a similar molecule, RNA, and then
translated into protein. Until recently it was thought that proteins were the
only molecules in cells capable of carrying out the necessary chemical and
mechanical life processes. However, new discoveries have shown that RNA has a
similar capability. We seek to understand how RNA can perform complex functions
historically attributed only to protein. To do this requires visualization of
RNA structure in three dimensions, a feat accomplished by inducing very pure
samples of RNA to form well-ordered crystals which are analyzed by Xray
diffraction. In our laboratory we are developing a new experimental system to
grow crystals of RNA molecules bound to protein rather than in the usual unbound
state. This system has the potential to allow us to rapidly determine many new
RNA structures. We expect that the structures will provide us with fundamental
insight into the functional roles of RNA in essential cellular processes. ***