* 9600968
* Dynamics-Function Relationships of Glyoxalase I
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2002
* Martin Stone, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 08/31/2002
* USD 495,000.00

9600968 Stone The goal of the research is investigate the functional relevance
of active site dynamics in the enzyme glyoxalase I (Glx I). Heteronuclear NMR
relaxation data will be used to calculate parameters describing the internal
motions on fast (ps-ns) and slower (-ms) time scales. Comparison of the free
enzyme with the enzyme bound to reaction product and to transition state analog
inhibitors will indicate the changes in active site dynamics that occur along
the reaction coordinate of the enzyme-calatyzed reaction. The role of enzyme
dynamics in controlling and limiting functional kinetics will be investigated by
correlating the rates of Glx I catalytic turnover and of ligand association and
dissociation with the millisecond time scale dynamics. The proposed educational
activities involve formal teaching responsibilities at Indiana University as
well as: (1) undergraduate biochemistry curriculum development; (2) graduate
level molecular modeling workshops; (3) graduate education in written
comprehension and expression of scientific ideas; (4) a practical course in NMR
relaxation and dynamics analysis for NMR professionals; and (5) mentorship of
graduate, undergraduate and high school students. %%% Enzymes are protein
molecules that catalyze (increase the rate of) chemical reactions. They are
involved in many important biochemical and industrial processes. The proposed
research will investigate the motions that occur in enzyme molecules and the
relationship between these motions and the function of the enzyme. In the long
term such studies may enable us to design new enzymes or to design molecules.
The proposed educational activities involve formal teaching responsibilities at
Indiana University as well as: (1) assessment and modification of the
undergraduate biochemistry curriculum to improve the preparation of students for
their target careers; (2) use of manual and computerized model building as
graduate level educational aids; (3) developme nt of graduate courses in the
critical reading of research articles and the clear, concise written
presentation of scientific ideas; (4) composition of a practical course for
scientists interested in studying motions in proteins; and (5) mentorship of
graduate, undergraduate and high school students including a specific focus on
minority students. ***