* 9600383
* NSF-CGP Fellowship:  The Influence of Interfacial Chemistry on Precipitate Growth and Stability
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1996,10/31/1997
* William Reynolds, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 10/31/1997
* USD 86,125.00

9600383 Reynolds This proposal supports the collaboration of Dr. William
Reynolds of the Department of Materials Science and Engineering at Virginia Tech
and Dr. Kazuhiro Hono of the Computational Materials Science Division of the
National Research Institute for Metals (NRIM). Project funding will enable Dr.
Reynolds to spend one year in Japan, resident at NRIM, in order to study the
interfacial chemistry of precipitates in metals using atom probe/field ion
microscopy. Dr. Reynolds has previously studied thermodynamic and
crystallographic aspects of phase transformations in metals. Dr. Hono has
applied atom probe/field ion microscopy to study the chemistry of aluminum
alloys, ferrous alloys, and magnetic materials at the atomic scale. Dr. Reynolds
will combine his expertise with that of Dr. Hono to study the influence of
atomic-scale chemistry on precipitate growth and stability. This proposal brings
together research scientists from two countries working in the area of physical
metallurgy and phase transformations. The U.S. scientist will have the
opportunity to become familiar with research techniques, equipment, and
facilities at NRIM while contributing to the overall research effort. Therefore,
this proposal fulfills the objectives of the Program in its exchange and
transfer of scientific knowledge through an international collaboration. ***