* 9600340
* Japan JSPS Program:  Global Magnetohydrodynamic Simulations of the Magnetosphere's Response to Variations in Upstream   Interplanetary Conditions
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/1996,08/31/1997
* Lee Bargatze, Fellowships
* Fellowship Award
* Larry H. Weber
* 08/31/1997
* USD 3,000.00

9600340 Bargatze The award supports for a 12-month Japan Society for the
Promotion of Science (JSPS) Postdoctoral Fellowship for Dr. Lee F. Bargatze at
the Solar-Terrestrial Environment Laboratory (STELAB), Toyokawa, Japan. Dr.
Bargatze will work with Dr. Tatsuki Ogino, Researcher at STELAB and Associate
Professmr at Nagoya University, on the research project entitled: "Global
Magnetohydrodynamic Simulations of the Magneto-sphere's Response to Variations
in Upstream Solar Wind Conditions." The proposed research entails the use of
computer simulations to study the interactions between the solar wind and the
Earth's magnetic field on a global scale. The simulations will be compared with
empirical data to study the structure and dynamics of the Earth's magnetospheric
system. In particular, the work will focus on the dynamical response of the
magnetosphere to sudden changes in the upstream solar wind conditions such as
interplanetary magnetic field rotations. The solar wind-magnetosphere
interaction, which generates the aurorae and produces magnetic storms and
substorms, is an area of common interest for Drs. Bargatze and Ogino. In
collaboration with scientists from Japan, Dr. Bargatze will utilize the results
of the proposed research to further the international understanding of the
coupling between the solar wind and the terrestrial magnetosphere and to improve
models describing the global system response to time variations of solar wind
input parameters that define the upstream interplanetary conditions. ***