* 9600391
* Genetic and Molecular Analysis of Strawberry Notch
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1996,07/31/2002
* Utpal Banerjee, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 07/31/2002
* USD 627,328.00

9600391 Banerjee The Notch signaling pathway has been found to function in
Drosophila, C elegans and mammals to promote cell-cell interactions that lead to
the adoption of specific cell fates. Notch is a transmembrane receptor; many
components of the Notch pathway have been identified, including ligands such as
Serrate and Delta as well as downstream cytoplasmic and nuclear components such
as Deltex and Suppressor of Hairless respectively. Previous studies in Dr.
Banerjee's laboratory have shown that the strawberry notch (sno) gene functions
as a positive component of the Notch signal transduction pathway. He has now
clmned the sno gene and shown that it encodes a novel nuclear protein expressed
in all epidermal cells. Analysis of expression patterns has suggested that sno
functions downstream of Notch in controlling the transcription of several
transcription factors that are important for the development of the wing margin.
These studies have suggested that Sno functions in a subset of Notch functions:
those that lead to induction of cellular identity, but not in those that involve
lateral inhibition. As part of this proposal, he will further investigate the
function of sno in the Notch pathway. He will test the hypothesis that Sno
responds to a signal from Serrate and therefore allows the regulation of wing
margin genes directly. He will determine if sno functions in a similar pathway
initiated by Delta during oogenesis. Additionally, proteins that interact with
Sno will be identified using biochemical and two hybrid screening approaches. In
particular, he will test the possibility, suggested by extensive genetic
analysis, that Sno may interact directly with the protein encoded by the
Suppressor of Hairless gene that also functions downstream of Notch to regulate
the transcription of the same proteins that are also controlled by Sno. He has
also devised a genetic selection technique for the isolation of other genes that
interact closely with Sno. One promising mutant has b een isolated and the
screen will be extended to identify other genes in the pathway. Finally, in an
exciting development, he has identified human and C elegans genes, isolated as
part of genome projects, that share a strong degree of similarity to the sno
gene. He plans to set up collaborations with mammalian and C.elegans
developmental biology laboratories to determine if a conservation of Sno
function in these diverse species is also evident, as seems to be the case for
many other members of the Notch pathway.