* 9600464
* 1996 FASEB Summer Research Conference on the Mechanisms of  Maturation, Function and Decay in the Prokaryotic RNA World to be held at Copper Mountain, CO  June 30 - July 5, 1996
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/1996,05/31/1997
* George Mackie, Federation of Amer Societies For Exper Biology
* Standard Grant
* Shiladitya DasSarma
* 05/31/1997
* USD 2,000.00

9600464 Mackie The 1996 FASEB Summer Research Conference on the Mechanisms of
Maturation, Function and Decay in the Prokaryotic RNA World will be held at
Copper Mountain, Colorado, June 30 - July 5, 1996. The principal aim of this
conference is to encourage the participants who are investigating biological
roles of RNAs in diverse prokaryotic organisms to address the key mechanistic
and structure- function questions which will dominate the field in the coming
years. The focus on mechanistic and structure-function problems is essential if
the specific biological processes mediated by RNA-RNA and RNA protein
interactions are to be thoroughly understood. %%% The meeting focus is timely in
view of the immense diversity and current relevance of prokaryotic organisms as
paradigms for translation, RNA processing, modification and decay, and their
regulation. Moreover, recent advances in elucidating the structures of RNA and
RNA-protein complexes by biophysical techniques are paralleling the rapid pace
of purifying the enzymes and substrates involved in RNA maturation, translation
and decay. Accordingly, presentations and discussions at the conference will
focus on RNA-RNA and RNA- protein interactions, formulation of mechanistic
questions, and the development of new experimental approaches to understanding
the structural basis for the biological functions of these interactions. In
turn, this conference will serve to spur future mechanism-centered
experimentation on these diverse systems. Attendance at the conference will be
limited to 155 participants. The speakers will be invited from among the most
productive and innovative individuals in the field. Time has also been allotted
to permit several selected outstanding younger scientists including junior
faculty, postdoctoral fellows and senior graduate students to give oral
presentations. The format at this conference has been chosen to allow a good
balance between the two 3 hour oral sessions eac h day and free afternoon time
for discussions and posters. Moreover, each participant is expected to attend
the entire conference. The organizers are encouraging speakers to avoid
presentations of previously published work but to focus on ongoing research,
problem areas, and emerging models. It is the expectation of the organizers that
this theme will encourage provocative presentations, lively discussion and will
accordingly focus each participant's future research. ***