* 9600219
* Dissertation Research:  Rescuing a Rare Endangered Body of  Knowledge:  A Field Study of Hoti Ethnobotany
* SBE,BCS
* 10/15/1996,09/30/1997
* Brent Berlin, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 09/30/1997
* USD 9,390.00

This project involves the dissertation research of an anthropology student from
the University of Georgia. The student will study the ethnobotanical knowledge
of a forest-dwelling group in the Venezuelan Amazon, and will document the ways
the community exploits, cognizes, and constructs symbolic and spiritual meanings
for the vegetable resources in their environment. The hypothesis to be tested is
that the predominantly foraging communities have a less developed knowledge of
their botanical environment than do fully horticultural peoples. The reasons
advanced in the literature are that the increased knowledge functions as
insurance against crop failure; that more sedentary residence allows greater
knowledge; and that human disturbance actually augments local biodiversity. The
project will examine these hypotheses through this test case, and the degree of
ethnobotanical knowledge of this group will be compared against that of other
native Amazonian groups in the literature. This project is important because it
will add to our knowledge about the rapidly disappearing tropical forest of this
region, as well as advance our understanding of how people construct cultural
images and understandings of the natural world. In addition it will add
understanding of this important region of the world to our nation's knowledge
base.