* 9600812
* RPG: Structural Studies of Yeast Spindle Pole Bodies        by Electron Microscopy and Image Analysis
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/1996,06/30/1997
* Esther Bullitt, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 06/30/1997
* USD 18,000.00

9600812 Bullitt This is Research Planning Grant for Women Scientists and
Engineers. The spindle pole body (SPB) is the microtubule organizing center of
yeast. Nuclear and cytoplasmic microtubules originate at the SPB, and thus this
complex structure plays a significant role in regulation of cell cycle. The
power genetic tools available for yeast, and the reduced number of microtubules
in the mitotic spindle (<50, versus thousands in mammalian centrosomes) make the
yeast an excellent system for studying the central question of how cells utilize
microtubule organizing centers for all aspects of cell division. Transmission
electron microscopy and image processing will be used to determine the three-
dimensional structure of the core portion, and to assess any underlying
symmetries. The SPB core is obtained by brief treatment of isolated SPBs with
heaprin, which disassembles the microtubules and removes the outer and inner
plaques of the SPB, leaving intact the central plaque and attached filamentous
structures. The presence of symmetry will be assessed, and, if applicable, used
in three-dimensional tomographic reconstructions from tilt series data. The
research to be conducted during the planning grant period will provide the basis
for more detailed structural studies of the yeast spindle pole body. The
objective is an understanding of the relationship between structure and function
of microtubule organizing centers. ***