* 9600682
* Archaeological Studies at the Chokepukio Site in the Valley of Cuzco, Peru:  An Investigation of Inca State Origins
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1997
* Gordon McEwan, Denver Art Museum
* Fixed Amount Award
* John Yellen
* 07/31/1997
* USD 11,245.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Gordon McEwan and his colleagues
will conduct one field season of excavation at the site of Chokepukio which is
located in the Valley of Cuzco in highland Peru. The capital of the Inca empire
was located as Cuzco and the goal of Dr. McEwan's research is to trace the
origins and development of this early state. Chokepukio covers a low hill and
adjacent region. Based on the distribution of architectural and ceramic remains
it extends over approximately one square kilometer. Dominating Chokepukio is a
series of huge enclosures which cover the crest of the hill in the center of the
site. The buildings are, in prehistoric terms, truly enormous - the largest
enclosure measuring 60 by 80 meters. Many of the walls are preserved to a height
of 10 to 12 meters. Associated with these structures are large numbers of small
and moderate-sized houses. Based on his previous work at the site, Dr. McEwan
knows that the buildings were constructed during the Wari period, likely
occupied during the ca. 500 year interval between the fall of the Wari and the
rise of the Inca empires and continued to be used during the Inca period. Thus
they span the interval when the Inca stated developed and will permit insight
into the relationship between Inca and Wari peoples. Based on ethnohistoric data
archaeologists know that Inca public buildings were designed to make symbolic
statements about social organization and therefore through their analysis it is
possible to gain insight into how this prehistoric society functioned. It
appears that the same use of architecture held true in Wari times. In his
excavation, Dr. McEwan will expose several buildings and analyze both
architectural form and the artifacts recovered with this reconstructive goal in
mind. Since the Inca empire was a functioning entity when the first Spanish
explorers arrived and written descriptions of it exist, the final stages of the
Inca are well known. However the Inca lacked writing and relatively little is
understood about the origins and development of this entity. What is
particularly intriguing are the similarities between the preceding Wari and Inca
empires. Although they appear to share architectural features in common, they
are separated by approximately 500 years in time and it is difficult to
understand how one may play a role in the rise of the other. Since Chokepukio
spans this entire interval, the site has the potential to shed light on this
question. This research is important for several reasons. It will provide data
of interest to many archaeologists. It will shed new light on one of the largest
pre-Columbian states in the New World and increase our understanding of how
social complexity arises.