* 9600867
* CAREER: Studies of Actin and Myosin Function During DirectedVacuole Movement
* BIO,MCB
* 10/01/1996,09/30/2000
* Lois Weisman, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 09/30/2000
* USD 375,000.00

96-00867 Weisman This project is concerned with understanding the molecular
basis of organelle movement during cell division, particularly with vacuole
movement from the mother cell into the bud, in the yeast Saccharomyces
cerevisiae. It has been demonstrated that Class V myosin and profillin are
required for the migration of vacuole from the mother cell into the bud. This
grant will investigate how Class V myosin interact with the membrane of the
vacuole and determine if as yet unidentified components are required for
vacuolar movement. Presumably, the myosin tail attaches to the vacuolar
membrane. This will be determined by generating mutants of the myosin tail,
expressing these in yeast, and examining the phenotype. Also, it will be
determined if actin can move along isolated and fluorescently-labeled vacuole.
This will be done using well established techniques for studying actin-based
motility. Differentiation of many cell-type involves the polarization of their
cytoplasmic organelles. It is likely that these studies will add to our
knowledge of organelle partitioning in higher eukaryotes. It is likely also that
the molecular basis of cellular polarization will bear some similarity with the
molecular basis of organelle partitioning. The educational component of this
CAREER grant involves the application of methods used mainly in small seminar
courses to large lecture class. The educational component is designed to
increase student motivation to learn and to make student learning a more active
process. This will be done by asking questions during the lecture and by
assigning scientific papers that will be discussed during the lecture. It is
hoped that by involving students in these discussions they will learn the value
of discovering new information and the ability to ask important, focused
questions. %%% During the budding of S. cerevisiae, how are organelles moved
from the mother cell into the bud? Are components of the cytoskeleton involved
in this process? These are questions that w ill be investigated by this grant.
Differentiation of various cell type involves the polarization of their
cytoplasmic organelles. As yet, we know little about the molecular mechanism of
this process. The goals of the educational component of this grant are designed
to give students the excitement of discovering new information and the ability
to analyze scientific data. ***