* 9600372
* NSF-CGP Fellowship:  VLSI Digital Signal Processing         and Multimedia Systems
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1997
* Keshab Parhi, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 08/31/1997
* USD 104,808.00

9600372 Parhi This proposal supports the collaboration of Prof. Keshab K. Parhi
of the Department of Electrical Engineering at the University of Minnesota and
Dr. Takao Nishitani at the NEC Computer and Communication Laboratories of NEC
Corporation at Kawasaki. This project funding will support Dr. Parhi to spend
nine months with the NEC Corporation in Japan. During his stay, he will perform
research on VLSI digital signal processing and multimedia systems. Dr. Parhi has
been studying design of high speed and low power circuit and system
implementations using VLSI technologies which can be used in multimedia
applications such as video compression and graphics manipulation and animation.
Dr. Nishitani's group is developing several multimedia products ranging from
video compact disc (CD) system design to RISC processors for digital signal
processing (DSP) to beamformer for audio applications to video coding and
conferencing. Dr. Parhi will combine his expertise on low power and high speed
design methodologies with applications and design activities carried out at NEC
to study high performance architecture development for multimedia systems. This
proposal brings together research scientists from two countries working in the
area of VLSI digital signal processing. The U.S. scientist will have the
opportunity to learn about algorithms used in and the applications of multimedia
systems. This cooperative research will allow Dr. Parhi to bring back expertise
with him which can lead to further research after his return leading to several
doctoral and master's degrees. Therefore, this proposal fulfills the objectives
of the Program in its exchange and transfer of scientific knowledge through an
international collaboration. ***