* 9600015
* Research on Gravitation, Relativity and                     Cosmology
* MPS,PHY
* 04/15/1996,09/30/2001
* David Wilkinson, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Isaacson
* 09/30/2001
* USD 3,061,692.00

The Princeton experimental program is centered on measurements of the angular
distribution of the thermal cosmic background radiation (the CBR) and its
spectrum and absolute temperature. These are a proving ground for scenarios of
galaxy formation; if the scenario is simple we may find encoded in the angular
distribution the values of key cosmological parameters. The spectrum at
wavelengths greater than about 3 cm should be better explored to improve
constraints on the history of interactions of matter and radiation. This group's
measurements from Saskatoon detect the power spectrum of irregularities in the
CBR on angular scales from about 0.5 to 3. They will improve these detections
with their ground-based telescope and to build a balloon-borne instrument that
produces a map of the anisotropy. Better measurements of the CBR anisotropy
require more sensitive and stable detectors and radiometers. They will build and
test a new 90 Ghz HEMT-based (High Electron Mobility Transistor) radiometer and
to develop a small array of broad-band SIS receivers for 90 Ghz. They will also
continue developing the techniques to search for long-wavelength distortions in
the spectrum. The objective of this research is to advance knowledge, through
both theory and experiment, of the evolution and large-scale structure of the
universe. New telescopes and improvements in detector sensitivities over a broad
range of energies have yielded a much enlarged fund of data that confront a
multitude of options within the standard cosmological model. The Princeton group
expects that within a decade additions to the data and a careful evaluation of
the theoretical options the data allow will yield a new test of general
relativity theory, and, through an improved check of consistency of the
cosmological model, will sharply restrict models for the formation of galaxies
and their large-scale distribution, and perhaps tell us whether the universe is
open or closed. Education is central t o this research. The group places a
strong emphasis on undergraduate teaching; on average, the group supervises six
undergraduates each summer and ten independent research projects during the
school year. Though many go on in physics, quite a few continue their education
in medicine, engineering, or law. Educating graduate students also has high
priority.