* 9600213
* U.S.-Netherlands Cooperative Research on the Structure of a Turbulent Boundary Layer with Suction
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1998
* Minami Yoda, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Mark A. Suskin
* 07/31/1998
* USD 10,240.00

This award supports Assistant Professor Minami Yoda of Georgia Institute of
Technology to collaborate in mechanical engineering research with Professor
F.T.M. Nieuwstadt of the Laboratory of Aeroand Hydrodynamics of the Delft
University of Technology, The Netherlands. Using particle imaging velocimetry,
they will carry out a study of a turbulent boundary layer with and without
suction in the vicinity of a few holes of a diameter of ten percent of the local
boundary layer thickness. The Dutch laboratory has excellent experimental
facilities for this research, and the experience with their set-up to be gained
by the US PI will provide the basis for deciding whether and how to establish
similar facilities at Georgia Tech. The two laboratories bring to the research
effort complementary expertise in both hydrodynamic systems and specialized
instrumentation: Delft in bounded flows and the application of particle imaging
velocimetry and Georgia Tech in free shear flow control and laser-induced
fluorescence. Turbulence increases drag (and operating cost) on moving surfaces
such as airplane wings. Suction is known to re- laminarize and delay the
separation of turbulent boundary layers, but too much suction can actually
increase the separation. Suction through large holes or slots has been widely
studied; smaller holes work better, but the cost of implementing has been found
not to be worth the savings in drag. While new technology now permits economical
production of minutely perforated surfaces, relatively little is known about the
effect of suction on such small holes on the boundary layer structure. This work
will help to clarify how such suction affects the coherent structures in the
boundary layers, and increase understanding of `aerodynamic roughness`, where
strong suction levels actually cause separation.