* 9600420
* VIIIth International Conference on the Na+/K+-ATPase        August 26-30, 1996, Mar del Plata, Argentina
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1997
* David Gadsby, Rockefeller University
* Standard Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 07/31/1997
* USD 10,000.00

9600420 Gadsby The VIIIth International Conference on the Na/K-ATPase (and
related transport ATPases), in Mar del Plata, Argentina, August 26-30 1996,
continues the series of Na/K-ATPase conferences that have been held in Europe or
America every three or so years since 1973. Following the tradition of the
previous conferences, the meeting will feature the latest information on the
molecular structure, transport mechanism, and regulatory properties of the
Na/K-ATPase. Appropriate knowledge gleaned from other cation transport ATPases
(e.g. Ca-ATPases, H-ATPases, and H/K-ATPase) will be included to inform progress
in Na/K-ATPase research. The conference program comprises nine symposia, each
addressing a particular topic, and three evening workshops, and has been
organized to promote critical discussion and interdisciplinary exchange among
the two hundred or so crystallographers, cryo-electronmicroscopists,
biochemists, cell biologists, molecular biologists, biophysicists,
physiologists, and pharmacologists registered. To encourage informal
intellectual interchange, the majority of the presentations will be in the form
of posters which will remain displayed throughout the entire meeting. To
facilitate broad dissemination of the topics and data presented, the conference
proceedings will be published in the widely read form of an Annals of the New
York Academy of Sciences. %%% Following the tradition of the seven previous
conferences, the VIIIth International Conference on the NalK-ATPase (and related
transport ATPases), to be held in Argentina this August, will highlight the most
recent advances in our understanding of what these ubiquitous, and vitally
important, microscopic pumps look like, how they work, and how their function
can be controlled. The Na/K-ATPase is perhaps more widely known as the sodium
(Na) pump, or the sodium/potassium (Na/K) exchange pump, since it extrudes Na
ions from cells while taking up K ions. The Na/K pump thus maintains the
concentration gradients of Na and K io ns across cell membranes that are
essential, for example, for all nerve and muscle activity, for signalling
between cells, for uptake of nutrients, and for salt and water balance. Relevant
information gleaned from studies of other, related, ion pumps (e.g. those that
transport calcium ions or protons) will be included in the conference where it
might help the progress of Na/K-ATPase research. This interdisciplinary
conference will last five days and will be attended by some two hundred
scientists from the international biomedical research community. To maximize the
potential for fruitful interactions and discussion, the meeting will feature
nine topical symposia, but the majority of the latest research results will be
presented in the form of posters which will be accessible all day, every day.
This format is intended to promote informal interchange and hence foster
international collaboration. To enable even non attendees to benefit from this
meeting, the conference proceedings will be published in the highly visible, and
broadly distributed, form of an Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences. ***