* 9600999
* Paleoindian Adaption in the Great Basin as seen from the    Sunshine Locality
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1996,01/31/1998
* Charlotte Beck, Hamilton College
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/1998
* USD 15,257.00

With National Science Foundation support Drs. Charlotte Beck and George Jones
will conduct archaeological research at the Sunshine Locality located in the
Great Basin in eastern Nevada. Prior archaeological and geological testing by
the investigators has revealed a stratigraphically delineated Paleoindian record
spanning as much as 1,000 years beginning by 10,700 years ago. Buried several
meters below the Sunshine Wash is a thick stratigraphic section that preserves
charcoal, pollen, plant macrofossils, bone and fossil shells as well as several
discrete levels with humanly produced artifacts. The most recent test
excavations at the site produced a number of significant finds, including a
fluted point, indicative of the earliest cultures in the New World and an
association of another point type and other lithic artifacts with the remains of
an extinct camel. During the 1996 field season, NSF and other funds will permit
extensive stratigraphic testing to locate areas where remains occur in primary
contexts. This will serve a geological goal to increase understanding of the
development of the Sunshine stream system which contains the materials. The work
will also provide additional exposures for sampling datable materials and
environmental specimens. It will provide essential information on the
depositional processes within the wash as they relate to strata containing
artifacts and extinct fauna. The work will also expand artifact and faunal
samples to permit detailed study of the vertical and lateral distributions of
each. The Great Basin of the Western United States has yielded plentiful
archaeological information which indicates that this semi-arid region was
inhabited by the first hunting and gathering cultures which entered North
America during the final period of the last glacial advance. Archaeologists are
interested in how humans at technologically simple levels adapted to different
environments and because of the difficulties posed by the varying arid and semi-
arid Great Basin region, they have focused on Paleoindian adaptations there.
While surface remains in the form of stone tools are common and widely
distributed, very few buried sites have been located and because these latter
preserve significantly more information than their exposed counterparts they are
especially important research targets. The Sunshine Locality is unique in the
superimposed artifact bearing stratigraphic layers it contains. The materials
Beck and Jones have recovered to date appear to have been slightly transported
by stream action. This suggests that an undisturbed site lies buried in the
immediate region and the team hopes to locate this. This research is important
for several reasons. It will provide information of great interest to many
archaeologists. It will shed light on how humans adapt to a harsh and varying
environment and will serve to improve teaching and education at an undergraduate
institution.