* 9600925
* RUI: Biophysical and Electron Paramagnetic Resonance        Studies:  Energetics of the Oxygen-Evolving Complex and New Curricula for Undergraduates
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2001
* Alice Haddy, University of North Carolina Greensboro
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 08/31/2001
* USD 340,000.00

9600925 Haddy The primary research goal is to characterize the oxidation state
changes of the manganese cluster of the oxygen evolving complex (OEC) of higher
plants in terms of energetics. This will be carried out by monitoring two
electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) signals, a multiline signal at g=2 and a
broad signal at g=4, associated with one of the oxidation states, S2. In
addition, the presence of an even spin EPR signal at g=4.8 associated with S1,
the state preceding S2, will be confirmed using parallel mode detection and
subsequently used to monitor S1. The specific research objectives include:
confirmation that the state associated with the S2 signal at g=4 (designated
S2-g=4) precedes the state associated with the S2 multiline signal (S2-mult);
determination of the activation energy barriers between the states associated
with S1 and S2-g=4, S2-g=4 and S2-mult, and S2-mult and S3, the state that
follows S2; determination of the relative free energies of the states associated
with S1, S2-g=4, and S2-mult; and investigation of the energy barriers and
relative free energies in the presence of the inhibitor ammonia. To achieve
these objectives, the magnitudes of the S2 signals and if present the S1 signal
will be measured in a series of equilibrium and kinetics experiments performed
over a range of illumination temperatures. The magnitudes will be related to the
population in each state. The educational activities proposed are in accord with
the Chemistry Department's current plans to develop a concentration or major in
biochemistry. The education objectives include the development of: a one-
semester biochemistry laboratory course; a series of lectures on biophysical
topics to be given as part of the second semester introductory course; and a set
of EPR experiments for use in undergraduate laboratories. The EPR experiments
for undergraduates will include some that have applications in biochemistry and
are not presently available in the chemical education literature. %%%