* 9600487
* International Research Fellow Awards Program:               Identification of AFLP Markers Linked to Disease Resistance Genes in the Commercial Strawberry
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1997
* Kenneth Haymes, Fellowships
* Fellowship Award
* Susan Parris
* 06/30/1997
* USD 42,900.00

9600487 Haymes The International Research Fellow Awards Program enables U.S.
scientists and engineers to conduct three to twentyfour months of research
abroad. The program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the
use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions
abroad. This award will support a twelve-month postdoctoral research visit of
Dr. Kenneth M. Haymes to work with Dr. ir A. M. P. den Nijs at the Centre for
Plant Breeding and Reproductive Research (CPRO-DLO) in Wageningen, Netherlands.
Dr. Haymes and Dr. den Nijs will use molecular techniques to obtain markers for
regions of the strawberry genome that are linked to genes Pfr1, Pfr2 and Pfr6,
which confer resistance to the pathogenic fungus Phytophthora fragariae Hickman
(red stele root rot). They will also look at existing strawberry stocks for the
presence of these markers to develop a rational breeding program for improved
resistance to Phytophthora infection. A powerful mapping technique, amplified
fragment length polymorphism (AFLP) will be used following bulked segregant
analysis to attempt to isolate markers closely linked to the Pfr1 marker. Bulked
segregant analysis and AFLP will then be applied to obtain markers near to the
other resistance genes. The commercial strawberry is octaploid and thus
molecular markers are the best hope for accomplishing rational linkage studies
of disease resistance and other traits. Once they obtain markers that are
tightly linked to genes which increase resistance to fungal infection, plant
stocks will be examined for the purpose of identifying appropriate breeding
stocks to produce strawberry plants containing multiple resistance genes. ***