* 9600724
* CAREER:  Visual Perception and Memory in Infancy
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/1996,07/31/2001
* Ramesh Bhatt, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Jasmine Young
* 07/31/2001
* USD 382,753.00

9600724 BHATT What information do infants extract from their environments and
how does this information affect their subsequent behavior? This research will
explore this question by examining basic mechanisms of object perception,
memory, and developmental changes in the interface between perception and memory
in 3- and 6-month-olds. One prominent class of models of object perception
assumes that a limited set of fundamental features underlies all of object
perception and that, in adults, information about such individual features is
registered in parallel across the visual field during the initial stages of
object perception. Evidence for these propositions comes from the extensive
study of pop-out effects in adults. The term "pop-out" refers to the phenomenon
that an object in a visual display that differs from surrounding objects in
terms of individual features is perceived effortlessly. A series of studies will
examine whether infants exhibit adult-like pop-out effects, the conditions that
engender pop-out effects in infancy, and whether the features viewed as building
blocks of object recognition in adults also play a similar role in infancy. In
addition to the detection of features, the perception of relations among
features is also critical for object recognition. A set of studies will examine
the stimulus conditions that facilitate the encoding and memory of relational
information in infancy. Also, prior research has revealed that, although infants
do remember both features and feature relations, they forget feature relations
sooner than the individual features that comprise these relations. A series of
studies will analyze possible memory retrieval and interference mechanisms that
underlie this dissociation. In addition to the physical aspects of stimuli,
object recognition is also mediated by "top-down" processes such as expectancies
and the ability to selectively inhibit responding to stimuli. A final set of
studies will examine devel opmental changes during the first half year of life
in these processes. This research will contribute to the generation of a
comprehensive model of early perceptual and cognitive development in normal
infants, against which comparisons can be made to describe, analyze, and
mitigate various disorders, such as attention deficit disorder and
hyperactivity. Exceptional education activities will include development of
audio-visual teaching materials and lab manuals to enhance both research methods
and survey courses in developmental psychology, and special activities designed
to provide minority high school and undergraduate students the opportunity to
participate in research projects. ***