* 9600273
* Japan JSPS Program:  Cross-Cultural Concepts of             Psychological Control
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/1996,11/30/1998
* B Morling, Individual Award
* Fellowship Award
* Larry H. Weber
* 11/30/1998
* USD 3,000.00

9600273 Morling This award supports a 24 month Japan Society for the Promotion
of Science (JSPS) Postdoctoral Fellowship for Dr. Beth Morling in the Department
of Psychology, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan. Dr. Morling will work with Dr.
Shinobu Kitayama, professor in the Division of Integrated Human Studies, on a
research project entitled, "Cross- Cultural Concepts of Psychological Control."
The proposed research will: 1) develop a positive, active description of self-
directed control by collecting examples of control in Japan; 2) examine cross-
cultural data to ascertain whether self-directed control is indeed more common
in Japan or in the United States, and; 3) investigate the positively framed
conception of self-directed control and its relationship to emotional and mental
well-being. Recent research in social psychology has established that feelings
of control over the environment contribute to mental and physical health, the
primary research question being which strategies individuals use to adapt to
external realities. Preliminary studies in Japan suggest that self- directed
control strategies are more widely used than other adjustment strategies, and
because these are not emphasized in Western culture, they remain understudied.
The research will provide significant insight into the creation of psychological
confidence, competence, and well-being in Japan, with the results likely to
provide lessons for strategies of social adaptation across cultures. ***