* 9600973
* The Political Economy of Stateless Societies During the Late Bronze and Early Iron Ages of Thy, Denmark
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/1996,06/30/1999
* Timothy Earle, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/1999
* USD 100,870.00

With National Science Foundation support Dr. Timothy Earle and his colleagues
will continue their archaeological research on the Thy peninsula which is
located I northeastern Jutland, Demark. Past work has indicated that the region
is rich in archaeological remains including large umber of barrows or burial
chambers. In his research to date, Dr. Earle has discovered and excavated a
umber of sites associated with the Neolithic Period whe settled agricultural and
village life emerged in Northern Europe. In this next stage of the project, he
and his team will focus on the later Bronze Age and Iron Age periods. They wish
to obtain detailed information on demography, settlement patterns and
subsistence practices. They will also reconstruct forms of social and political
organizatio and determine how these changed over time. To accomplish these
goals, they will conduct broad scale surveys to locate architectural features
and surface materials. These later will be collected and analyzed. The team will
then select the most promising sites for large scale excavation. Following the
development of agriculture and pastoralism in many parts of the world, one can
trace changes in social organization which led, ultimately, to the rise of
states. Early in this process chiefdoms arose and anthropologists still do not
understand the mechanisms through which this happened. Some ague that
populationn growth permitted by a more stable subsistence base provided the
driving force while others poit to other factors such as the developmet of log
distance trade. Over the course of the Broze and Iro Ages in Scandinavia,
chiefdoms underwent cycles of rise and decline. The data collected from this
area will allow compariso with cases from other parts of the world. From this it
should be possible to separate historical particulars from the move basic
underlying mechanisms. This research is important for several reasons. It will
provide data of interest to many archaeologists. It will also increase our
understanding of the processes which led to the rise of complex societies such
as our own.