* 9600866
* Folding of a Multidomain Ribosomal Protein
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1996,07/31/2000
* Daniel Raleigh, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas E. Smith
* 07/31/2000
* USD 376,060.00

Raleigh 9600866 Elucidating how the amino acid sequence determines structure,
the protein folding problem, is a central issue in modern structural biology.
This proposal describes an integrated approach to studying the folding of the
protein L9, a multidomain ribosomal protein. This protein forms an interesting
bilobal structure with a compact N-terminal domain connected by a long solvent
exposed a-helix to a compact C-terminal domain. The N-terminal domain is a
stable folding unit and represents one of the simpler examples of an important
class of layered sheet-helix structures. This type of structure is found in
other ribosomal proteins and in many small RNA binding domains. Relatively
little is known about the interactions which stabilize this important structure
or how it folds. The L9 protein also offers a excellent model system to study
the folding of multi-domain proteins. In recent years, considerable effort has
been devoted to elucidating the folding pathways of single domain globular
proteins but much less is known about the folding of multidomain proteins. The
folding pathway of this protein will be explored using kinetic measurements. The
equilibrium and kinetic folding transitions of the isolated domain and of the
full L9 protein will be studied. These experiments will indicate if interactions
between domains affect the folding or stability of the protein. The unfolded
state will be characterized by Nuclear Magnetic Resonance and Circular
Dichroism. Studies of peptide fragments will be used to address the role of
local interactions in stabilizing the N-terminal domain. These studies will also
identify any potential folding initiation sites. Fragment complementation
experiments will be used to probe the role of tertiary interactions in
stabilizing nascent secondary structure. Taken together, these experiments will
provide a detailed description of the folding pathway and of the interactions
which stabilize this interesting protein. One of the major challenges of
teaching at a lar ge university is balancing undergraduate education with
research. Many of the students feel that they are "lost in the shuffle" or that
undergraduate education is ranked a distant third behind research and graduate
education. On the other hand, the available research infrastructure has the
potential to allow undergraduates unique opportunities. The educational aspects
of this Career Award include a number of initiatives designed to integrate
undergraduate students into the research life of the department. A new course
"Current Trends in Biological Chemistry" is being developed. This course is
designed to introduce undergraduates to research areas in modern biological
chemistry and is built around the departmental seminar series in biological
chemistry. An informal seminar series designed to introduce students to the many
career options available to chemists and biochemists is also being developed.
One of the core undergraduate courses, physical chemistry laboratory is being
extensively revised and redefined. New, more relevant experiments have been
introduced and more interactive methods of teaching are being used. At the
graduate level, a new program in biological chemistry is being designed. This
includes a new seminar series, which also forms the basis of the course "Current
Trends in Biological Chemistry': the establishment of a new degree option in the
Department of Chemistry, the design of a new course on Protein Structure and the
writing of an interdepartmental training grant. %%% Elucidating how the amino
acid sequence determines structure, the protein folding problem, is a central
issue in modern structural biology. This proposal describes an integrated
approach to studying the folding of the multidomain ribosomal protein L9.
Considerable effort has been devoted to elucidating the folding pathways of
single domain globular proteins but much less is known about the folding of
multidomain proteins. The isolated domains of this molecule are also of
interest. The N-terminal domain is a st able folding unit and represents one of
the simpler examples of an important type of structure found in ribosomal
proteins and in small RNA binding domains. One of the major challenges of
teaching at a large university is balancing undergraduate education with
research. Many of the students feel that they are "lost in the shuffle" and that
undergraduate education is ranked a distant third behind research and graduate
education. The educational aspects of this Career Award include a number of
initiatives designed to integrate undergraduate students into the research life
of the department. These include the development of new courses and a new
undergraduate seminar series. At the graduate level, a new program in biological
chemistry is being designed. This includes the establishment of a new degree
option in the Department of Chemistry. ***