* 9600681
* Protein: DNA Interactions in Drosophila Mitchondrial        Regulation
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1998
* Laurie Kaguni, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 07/31/1998
* USD 100,000.00

9600681 Kaguni The long term objective of the proposed work is to understand the
regulation of mitochondrial function, in terms of the structure of the
mitochondrial chromosome and its expression and replication. Mitochondria are
required in higher animal cells, and mitochondrial biogenesis requires
expression and duplication of the mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) genome. Because both
transcription and replication are influenced by the structure of the DNA
template, the role of nucleoprotein complexes that are involved in maintaining
DNA conformation in vivo on these functions warrants detailed study. To begin to
elucidate the role of proteins associated with the mitochondrial chromosome in
maintaining its structure and to examine their influence on its function, we
will isolate the mitochondrial nucleoid from Drosophila melanogaster, purify and
characterize its protein components, and initiate efforts to clone them. Our
long-term goal will be to develop in vitro transcription and replication systems
from Drosophila mitochondria that employ mitochondrial enzyme fractions and
mitochondrial DNA in the form of nucleoprotein complexes. The isolation and
characterization of the mitochondrial nucleoid is an integral part in the
development of the Drosophila model for animal mtDNA function. %%% Mitochondria
are the energy-producing units in the cell and are essential to life. Because of
the limited size of the mitochondrial chromosome, all of the proteins required
for mitochondrial biogenesis are encoded outside the mitochondrion in the
nucleus. These proteins are comparatively rare in the animal cell, and are
therefore difficult to study. The fruit fly Drosophila is a higher animal that
has proven to be an excellent model for the study of cellular function by
biochemical, genetic and developmental approaches. The structure and
organization of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) is highly conserved in animals, and
current data suggest that the mechanisms of mtDNA packaging and gene expression
will also be. Our lo ng-term goal is to develop Drosophila as an animal model
system to study these processes. The isolation and characterization of the
mitochondrial chromosome and its protein components represents the first step in
the development of the Drosophila model for animal mtDNA function. ***