* 9600963
* CAREER:  Novel Subtype-Specific Peptide Ligands of the      Nicotinic Acetylcholine Receptor from Phage Display         Libraries
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/1996,07/31/1997
* Kathryn McLane, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Paul B. Farel
* 07/31/1997
* USD 0.00

9600963 McLane The details of how specific molecules imbedded in nerve cell
membranes (molecular receptors) mediate the signaling of nervous systems are
still not fully understood. One particular molecule, the nicotinic acetylcholine
receptor mediates neurotransmission in skeletal muscle, in the autonomic nervous
system, and in many areas of the brain. It is known that there are many
different nicotinic acetylcholine receptor subtypes in the brain, but their
function remains elusive because subtype-specific probes are not available. The
goal of the research project funded by this grant is to isolate artificial,
subtype-specific peptide toxins that can be used to study the function of
different nicotinic acetylcholine receptor subtypes. These peptides will be
selected from random peptide libraries using phage display technology. This new
technology allows the simultaneous selection of peptides that are displayed on
the surface of bacteriophage particles, which also contain the DNA encoding the
peptide sequence. Peptides displayed on phage will be selected for binding to
nicotinic receptor subtype-specific sequences. In addition, this grant helps
support a new laboratory course in molecular neurobiology. The research funded
by this grant is expected to provide important insights into the molecular
function of neurons and to lead to new tools for further research into the
molecular biology of neuronal receptors. The laboratory course to be developed
under this grant is expected to provide a novel approach to teaching molecular
neurobiology.