* 9600646
* Collaborative Research: Social Context of Fertility         Decisions in Tanzania
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2002
* Marida Hollos, Brown University
* Continuing grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 08/31/2002
* USD 199,569.00

This project is a collaborative study by an anthropologist from Brown University
and a demographer from Harvard, studying the process of fertility transition in
Tanzania in the context of global economic changes. The basic question is to
explain why a transition from high fertility and no use of birth control to low
fertility and the widespread use of birth control is happening in one ethnic
group, in the context of changes in the regional ecology and economy. The basic
economy is shifting away from hoe agriculture towards wage labor, which is
impacting social relations and shifting the traditional patriarchal lineage
authority towards more couple-centered relations. The major hypotheses of the
study is that a shift towards a conjugal union where partners communicate about
decisions and the interests of men and women converge is instrumental in
facilitating the acceptance of fertility limitation. Using techniques of
ethnography to establish the local manifestation of crucial social, kinship and
family relations as they are instituted on the household level, local surveys to
extend the micro-level ethnographic insights to a regional level, and intensive
interviews with a sample of couples on their joint decision-making and
communication styles, the project will show how these global changes are working
out in this one region of Kilimanjaro, Tanzania. Two villages will be compared,
a Muslim somewhat more traditional and a Lutheran somewhat less traditional
community. This research is part of a broad attempt to understand the linkages
between ecology, production activities and social relations which affect
fertility transitions from high to low reproduction. It follows a new wave of
research which links female autonomy and fertility to the social and economic
context. As such the results will be significant and useful to population
planners in other areas of the developing world which face similar situations.