* 9600696
* 1996 Cold Spring Harbor Conference on Mouse Molecular       Genetics; August 28-September 1, 1996; Cold Spring Harbor,  NY
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/1996,07/31/1997
* Terri Grodzicker, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 07/31/1997
* USD 8,000.00

Grozicker 96-00696 The use of the mouse as a model system for understanding
normal development and disease processes has increased dramatically over the
last few years. This is due to sophisticated techniques which enable the
manipulation of the mouse genome and the emergence of a high resolution map
which enables scans of the entire genome for loci of interest. The goal of the
proposed Cold Spring Harbor Conference on Mouse Molecular Genetics to be held
August 28 - September 1, 1996, is to bring together a diverse group of
scientists studying various molecular and genetic aspects of mammalian
development and disease. This conference is expected to attract approximately
400 scientists from around the world. This annual meeting (the ninth in a
series) will provide a format for the exchange of ideas and information among
both junior and senior scientists, for the discussion of the latest research
findings and technical advances towards the study of mammalian development and
disease, and fosters scientific collaboration. Seven topics (eight sessions)
have been selected for detailed discussion as a reflection of the most advanced
and interesting areas of study in mouse molecular genetics (Genetics,
Patterning, Signals & Receptors, Organogenesis, Tumorigenesis, Neural
Development and Embryogenesis). Two established scientists per session are
invited to present a relatively global perspective of their work (one of which
will also act as the chairperson for that session), while the remainder of the
talks will be selected from the submitted abstracts. Other participants will be
able to present their research in one of the two poster sessions to be held
during the conference. This format allows the participation of many junior
scientists, giving them a format to present their latest work.