* 9600759
* Solution NMR Study of the Electronic and Molecular          Structures of Hyperthermostable Ferredoxins
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/1996,06/30/2000
* Gerd La Mar, University of California-Davis
* Continuing grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 06/30/2000
* USD 315,000.00

9600759 LaMar The molecular and electronic structural and dynamic properties of
ferredoxins (Fds), from a series of hyperthermophilic archaea, Pyroccus
furiosus, Pf, Thermococcus litoralis, Tl, and the as yet unnamed ES-4 and JDF-3,
will be elucidated by NMR. These small electron transfer Fd possess paramagnetic
clusters at ambient temperature in both oxidation states. The appropriate
tailoring of 1D and 2D NMR methods, as augmented by 3D NMR on select N-15
labeled Fd, to detect and assign all paramagnetically influenced resonances is
expected to provide: the sequence-specific identification of the valence states
for he individual iron in the reduced cluster; elucidation of the influence of
ligand mutation and/or exogenous ligands in modulating the overall cluster redox
potential as well as the individual iron oxidation states; the spectral
signatures of non cysteine ligands for identifying protein ligands in other
iron-sulfur cluster enzymes; a protocol for utilizing various paramagnetic
spectral data for use as structural constraints to substitute for lost
conventional NMR constraints near the cluster; and, lastly, but most
importantly, robust molecular models for these Fds. The pf, ES-4 and JDF-3 Fds
also possess a pair of remote Cys which serve as 2e- 2H+ redox sites at
essentially the same potential as the cluster. The complete time resolution of
the resulting four Fd redox states at ambient temperature is expected to provide
unique insight into the influence of each step in modulating the protein
architecture both near and remote from the cluster, as well as the structural
basis of the large reorganizational energy for cluster electron transfer in
these Fd. The resulting molecular structures are expected to shed light on what
structural properties impart the remarkable thermostability (negligible
denaturation at 95(C over 24h) to these proteins in spite of significant
sequence homology to much less stable Fds from mesophiles. The identification of
"stabilizing structural motifs" i n the present Fds may permit future
introduction by mutagenesis of the "motifs" to increase thermostability of
industrial biocatalysts. The characterization of these ferredoxins will also
contribute to the understanding of these novel organisms (archaea) that are
proposed to be the most ancient and slowly evolving form of life and possibly
the closest living descendant to a universal life form. %%% The molecular
structures of a series of small ((60 amino acid residues) electron transfer
proteins called ferredoxins will be determined by solution proton nuclear
magnetic resonance and the resulting structures used to interpret properties
relevant to their role in electron transfer. The ferredoxins are selected from a
number of archaebacteria (i.e. Pyrococcus furiosus, Thermococcus litoralis) that
live in deep ocean volcano vents at temperatures of boiling water. The goal is
to define the interactions among the various pairs of residues in these
ferredoxins and to relate differences in these interactions in the high
temperature-state archaebacteria ferredoxins with similar proteins of more
normal eubacteria which are stable at 37(C, but rapidly denature at temperatures
much higher than 50(C. The understanding of the types of interactions that
contribute to the high temperature stability may provide clues as how to
increase by site-directed mutagenesis the high temperature stability of enzymes
used in the biotechnology industry. The proposed studies will also contribute to
the understanding of these relatively recently discovered archaebacteria which
are proposed to be the closest living descendants of the earliest forms of life
on this planet. ***