* 9600027
* Mathematical Science: SACNAS Mathematical Sciences Summer   Institute
* MPS,DMS
* 05/15/1996,04/30/1999
* Jose Escobar, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Continuing Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 04/30/1999
* USD 179,223.00

Castillo-Chavez 9600027 ABSTRACT The 1996 SACNAS Mathematical Sciences Summer
Institute (SMSSI) is a six-week summer program at Cornell University organized
in conjunction with the Society for Advancement of Chicanos and Native Americans
in Science (SACNAS) and the support of the National Security Agency, Cornell
University's Provost Office and the National Science Foundation. SMSSI will
bring between 20 and 30 Chicano, Latino and Native American undergraduates to
Cornell University for an intensive six-week summer program in mathematical
biology. The 1996 SMSSI will take place between June 17 - July 26, 1996.
Participants will receive round-trip transportation to Ithaca, NY, room and
board, and a $2000 stipend. The program is designed for undergraduates who will
complete their sophomore or junior year during 1996. Students majoring in
mathematics, biology, or related fields and who have had a year of calculus, are
eligible to apply. The academic content of the 1996 Institute has been designed
by Principal Investigator Professor Castillo-Chavez, a leading mathematical
biologist at Cornell University and a member of the Board of Directors of the
Society for Mathematical Biology. Emphasis will be placed on studying the
mathematical theory of population dynamics and its applications to demography,
ecology, epidemiology, and evolutionary biology. The SMSSI will include
dynamical systems and stochastic processes seminars, a writing seminar
intimately connected to the study of theoretical biology, analysis and numerical
simulations of mathematical models associated with group research projects,
workshops on applying for admissions and funding for graduate school, and
colloquia given by invited mathematicians and scientists. Applications may also
be requested from the SACNAS office by phone: 408-459-4272 or e-mail:
sacnas@cats.ucsc.edu. Additional information about the program may be obtained
by contacting Herbert A. Medina by phone at 310-338-5113 or via e-mail a t
hmedina@lmumail.lmu.edu or Carlos Castillo-Chavez by phone at 607-255-5488 or
via e-mail at cc32@cornell.edu.