* 9600030
* Collaborative Research:  Growth and Modification of the     Tanzanian Lithosphere
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/1996,12/31/1999
* John Chesley, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 12/31/1999
* USD 45,800.00

9600030 Chesley To investigate the influence of tectonic processes on cratonic
lithosphere, a detailed examination of xenoliths both on and off the Tanzanian
craton is planned. Investigation of the petrography, mineral chemistry,
thermobarometry, major and trace element geochemistry and, most importantly, Os
isotopic compositions on selected xenoliths will serve to characterize the
composition of the Tanzanian lithospheric mantle and the vertical and lateral
extent of cratonic mantle. Os isotopic measurements on whole rock and chromite
mineral separates will constrain the minimum age of melt extraction in these
rocks, hence timing of lithosphere formation. In addition, the effects of
silicate and carbonatite metasomatism on the Re-Os systematics in peridotites
will be evaluated by comparison of the chromite results (which should yield the
initial Os isotopic composition) with whole rock data, which may record
enhancement of the Re/Os ratio due to metasomatic re-introduction of Re. These
petrologic and geochemical data will help constrain models of lithosphere
structure derived from seismic and gravity surveys that are currently underway
in Tanzania. Furthermore, integration of these new geophysical data with the
petrological and geochemical studies outline here will allow delineation of the
important processes involved in lithospheric mantle growth and modification.