* 9600065
* Mathematical Sciences: Partial Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/1996,10/31/1999
* Michael Taylor, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 10/31/1999
* USD 64,998.00

Abstract Taylor 9600065 Prof. Taylor will investigate problems in partial
differential equations, with particular attention to four areas. One involves
the further development of microlocal analysis as a tool in nonlinear partial
differential equations. A basic component of this theory is the paradifferential
operator calculus, which allows one to represent a nonlinear function F(u) as
the sum of a linear operator applied to u and a remainder. Recent developments
highlight the desirability of extending the scope of this theory, in ways which
bear on the study of solutions to nonlinear partial differential equations with
low regularity. The second involves the use of analysis on Morrey spaces.
Created originally to analyze solutions to nonlinear elliptic equations, Morrey
spaces have proved useful for other sorts of equations, such as the Navier-
Stokes equations for viscous fluid flow. Taylor plans to pursue a systematic
study of the applicability of Morrey spaces to nonlinear PDE. A particular
example is the extension of the Morrey space analysis to Navier-Stokes equations
on a region with boundary. The third area concerns an inverse scattering
problem: the problem of describing an unknown obstacle in terms of observations
of how it scatters waves. Microlocal analysis is brought to bear on the problem
of describing features of such an obstacle, on a length scale comparable to the
wave length used to illuminate the obstacle. The fourth area concerns analysis
of diffraction of waves by a boundary. In particular, various Airy operators
arise in this study, and while many basic properties are well understood, a
number of natural problems from mathematical physics, including propagation of
electromagnetic waves, give rise to problems about the Airy operator calculus
which need to be resolved. A central theme in these studies is the propagation
of waves, both linear and nonlinear. A number of types of waves are considered,
including sound waves, waves in water, light waves and other electromagnetic
waves, and vibrations in the ground and in other solids. How these waves
propagate through space and interact with objects, often in the form of
boundaries, is a rich source of problems. Of equal interest are inverse
problems, how to tell about the space in which waves propagate, from a knowledge
of the nature of their propagation. Understanding these inverse problems is
helpful in a variety of practical problems, ranging from nondestructive medical
imaging to finding special structures under ground and under water.