* 9600243
* Japan JSPS Program:  The Observation of Non-Standard-Model  Physics at Lepton Colliders
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/1996,12/31/1998
* Robert Szalapski, MN Fellowships
* Fellowship Award
* Larry H. Weber
* 12/31/1998
* USD 12,000.00

9600243 Szalapski This award supports a 12 month Japan Society for the Promotion
of Science (JSPS) Postdoctoral Fellowship for Dr. Robert Szalapski at the
National Laboratory for High Energy Physics (KEK), Tsukuba, Japan. Dr. Szalapski
will work with Dr. Kaoru Hagiwara, Associate Professor in the Theory Group at
KEK, on a research project entitled "The Observation of Non-Standard Model
Physics at Lepton Colliders." The proposed research will examine a number of
theoretical calculations related to the so-called "Standard Model" in physics,
the goal being not only to test the Standard Model, but also to understand what
lies beyond it. It is believed that the behavior of all matter in the universe
is governed by four forces. These forces are electromagnetism, the weak nuclear
force, the strong nuclear force and gravity. The quantum theory of electromag-
netism, which we call QED, is well established. The current theory of the
fundamental forces, an extension of QED, is called the Standard Model. It
unifies electromagnetism and the strong and weak nuclear forces in a single
theory. One prediction of the Standard Model is the existence of additional
particles called W and Z bosons; the discovery and measurement of which have
provided strong evidence for the Standard Model. However, some of the most
important properties have not yet been measured. As it will be possible to make
these measurements in the near future, it is very important to obtain very
precise theoretical calculations to compare with experimental data. The proposed
research by Dr. Szalapski will expand upon ongoing collaborative experiments
with Dr. Hagiwara, with the primary intention being to test theories related to
the validity of the Standard Model. ***