* 9600036
* Dissertation Research:  Quantification of Enthesopathies and its Application to Labor Patterns in the Archaeological    Record
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/1996,03/31/1997
* Kenneth A Kennedy, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 03/31/1997
* USD 7,895.00

Under the direction of Dr. Kenneth Kennedy MS Cynthia Wilczak will collect data
for her doctoral dissertation. She will study MOS (measures of occupational
stress) enthesopathies to develop an analytic tool which may be useful in the
analysis of human skeletal material recovered in archaeological contexts.
Enthesopathies are changes to bone which result from repeated stresses. When
bone is subjected to stresses caused by muscle use it may respond by increasing
in size at the point of the muscle attachment. Because certain tasks or
occupations require repeated use of specific muscles, it is possible in some
instances to reconstruct muscle use and then infer task specific activities
through examination of bones. However no good techniques exist to quantify
enthesopathies and the most immediate goal of this research is to adapt
videoanalysis techniques to this end. In the attempt to identify enthesopathies
one must take into account that absolute size can affect bone configuration and
it is necessary to eliminate this cause of variation if one wishes to examine
MOS. MS Wilczak will use methods of regression analysis to elucidate the scaling
factors which affect muscle insertion size and determine if similar scaling
factors are seen at all insertion sites. She will then apply the technique to a
series of skeletal populations with different known subsistence technologies to
see if the approach can, in fact, provide useful archaeological information.
This research is important for a number of reasons. It will help to develop a
tool which can be employed not only in anthropology but in forensic sciences as
well. A number of archaeological questions can be directly addressed through
application of this technique and researchers, for example, will be able to
examine degree of occupational specialization and the development of social
hierarchies in cases where skeletal materials are available. Finally the grant
will contribute to the training of a promising young scientist.