* 9600334
* Microanalysis as a Supplement to Bulk Chemical Sourcing of  Archaeological Pottery
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1996,12/31/1998
* Hector Neff, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/1998
* USD 41,612.00

With National Science Foundation support Drs. Hector Neff and Michael Glascock
will conduct microprobe analysis of ceramic materials collected in
archaeological contexts and compare the results with those determined by
instrumental neutron activation analysis. Analyses will be undertaken with
wavelength-dispersive and energy-dispersive X-ray spectrometers attached to a
scanning electron microscope. The instrumentation available permits quantified
measurements down to ca. 100 ppm together with the generation of maps of
variation in the concentrations of determined elements across the scanned image.
Characteristics of elemental distributions such as uniformity; association with
particular kinds of mineral grains, pores or other features; or correlation with
other measured elements will permit some plausible sources of compositional
patterning observed in bulk data to be understood in greater detail. The
approach will be applied to at least seven pottery data sets representing
several world regions, time periods and levels of sophistication of pottery
technology.. This wide range and variety of example applications will afford a
comprehensive test of the potential of the method for improving the precision of
inferences derived from ceramic compositional analysis. Because different clay
sources often differ in mineral composition, it is possible to determine the
trace element composition of a ceramic recovered in an archaeological site,
compare it to chemical profiles of known sources and thus determine raw material
source. When sources are only poorly known, it is often still useful to
determine the degree of variation exhibited in the ceramics in a single site,
compare such data across sites and determine degrees and directions of
interaction. By such means archaeologists can reconstruct many aspects of
prehistoric social organization and therefore ceramic trace element studies play
an important research role. Most often composition is determined by neutron
activation analysis. A small amount of material is removed from a sherd, ground,
homogenized and measured. The difficulty with this technique is that it ignores
chemical variation within the sherd and assumes that the trace element pattern
observed is determined solely by source composition. Although they have not been
examined in detain it is unclear whether these assumptions are correct and the
value of Drs. Neff and Glascock's project rests on its evaluation of these. The
work will allow archaeologists to assess the results on neutron activation
analysis in a more realistic fashion and assist in the development of
archaeological analytic techniques.