* 9600055
* FASEB Conference on Enzymes that Act on Nucleic Acids to be held in Saxtons River, Vermont in June 1996
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/1996,05/31/1997
* Joseph Heitman, Federation of Amer Societies For Exper Biology
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 05/31/1997
* USD 6,500.00

9600055 Heitman The subject of this conference is the structure, mechanism,
biological roles and practical applications of enzymes that act on DNA and RNA.
Included are both protein and RNA enzymes that act on nucleic acids. While
focused on cleavage and modification of nucleic acids, the meeting is designed
to attract a broad cross-disciplinary spectrum of scientists from the U.S. and
abroad. These include chemists biochemists, structural and molecular biologists,
geneticists and cell biologists. This meeting will be the second meeting of the
Federation of American Societies of Experimental Biology (FASEB) in this general
topic area, the last having been held in 1993. Since then, there has been an
explosion in our understanding of the structure, mechanism and regulatory
potential of these molecules. The upcoming FASEB meeting is therefore both
timely and topical. The organizers have selected discussion leaders for the 9
sessions, in addition to the keynote speaker for an additional session. Speakers
range from Nobel prize-winners at the forefront of their fields to accomplished
young scientists destined to make inroads in their specialty areas. The topics
to be covered at the meeting are as follows: Nuclease Structure and Function;
Modifying Enzymes - Biochemistry and Genetics; Restriction Systems; Synthetic
Enzymes; Endonucleases of Mobile Elements; Endonucleases in Recombination and
Repair; Catalysis of and by RNA; Biological Roles of Nucleic Acid Modifications;
and Nucleases in Genome Research. Additionally, there will be a poster
competition which will give students and post docs with winning posters the
opportunity to present a talk. Although specialty meetings are held in the
different program areas, this particular interdisciplinary mix of topics is
unprecedented, and promises a unique opportunity for fertile scientific exchange
between scientists with interests in both basic research and biotechnology %%%
Nucleic acids, DNA and RNA, are the molecules of life. DNA forms the genetic
material, the blueprint of each living cell. Messages are sent from the DNA to
the cell via RNA. Biological catalysts called enzymes are required for the DNA
to be duplicated, copied into RNA, and modified to perform the cellular
functions in an orderly and coherent way. The enzymes that act on nucleic acids,
the pivotal molecules in cellular information flow, form the topic of this
meeting. Confirmed speakers include a broad cross-disciplinary spectrum of
scientists from the US and abroad. These scientists are at the forefront of
their field, be they Nobel laureates (of which there are two on the program) or
accomplished young researchers, starting to make breakthroughs in their
specialty areas. To promote the careers of young scientists, graduate students
and postdoctoral fellows will be selected at the meeting to also give platform
talks. In addition, poster sessions will accommodate work that cannot be
included in the platform presentations, thereby broadening the scope of the
meeting. The interdisciplinary mix of scientists at the meeting will include
chemists, biochemists, structural and molecular biologists, geneticists and cell
biologists from academic, government and industrial settings. The meeting, which
is sponsored by the Federation of American Societies of Experimental Biology
(FASEB), therefore promises a unique opportunity for fertile scientific exchange
between scientific exchange between scientists with a broad range of interests
in both basic research and biotechnology. ***