* 9600693
* The Dynamics of Economic and Sociopolitical Structure in    Late Prehistoric Hawai'i:  An Emergent 'Archaic State'
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1999
* Patrick Kirch, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 07/31/1999
* USD 96,711.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Patrick Kirch and his colleagues
will conduct one season of fieldwork at archaeological sites located on the
Hawaiian islands of Moloka'i and Maui. In past research this team and others
have located a number of house compounds and ritual structures which date from
the period between A.D. 1200 - 1795 and these will form the focus for
excavation. The team will collect both cultural and ecofactual data to:
determine variability in territorial settlement patterns over time; reconstruct
the chronology of settlement and land use; analyze architectural, food resource
and prestige-good variation within household units; determine the distribution
of non-local stone resources between territorial units; examine the agricultural
and marine resource production base which supported the economy; learn how
ritual architecture changed over time and space; and study the environmental
effects of intensive land use. For many years anthropologists have used
Polynesia as a unique test case to determine how state level societies evolved.
The Polynesian islands were settled by a single cultural group over a relatively
short period and at the time of contact they evidenced forms of social
organization which varied greatly in complexity. Through carefully controlled
comparisons scientists have attempted to place them in a developmental sequence
and to explain the different stages reached in environmental terms. The highest
degree of complexity was reached in Hawaii and ethnographers believe that in
late prehistoric times a state level of organization was achieved. Dr. Kirch
wishes to examine this process. He correctly notes that only archaeology can
produce the data which can trace this step by step, and the goal of the research
is to recover such information. This research is important for several reasons.
It will yield insight into the processes of state formation an will provide data
of interest to many archaeologists.