* 9600686
* Analysis of Formative Peruvian Materials
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1996,12/31/1997
* Tom Dillehay, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/1997
* USD 22,002.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Tom Dillehay will analyze
archaeological materials excavated from the site of San Luis which is located on
the northern coast of Peru and occupied between 1,800 - 900 B.C. In past work at
San Luis, Dr. Dillehay and his colleagues have uncovered two architectural
complexes, both apparently associated with religious functions. They consist of
a U-shaped structures with two wings which extend from a larger central mound.
In the course of the excavation of one of them, burned `C` shaped marks were
discovered on the ground of each wing and the investigators believe that pots
were inverted and offerings burned within them. The shallow but intact deposits
contained large amounts of ceramic and lithic remains; faunal and floral samples
were also collected. Dr. Dillehay believes that the structure reflects a form of
dual social organization and shall now examine the collected materials to test
this hypothesis. A variety of organics from each wing will be radiocarbon dated
to determine whether the two were occupied simultaneously. Typologies of lithic
and ceramic traits have already been developed during past seasons and these
will be applied to the ceramic and lithic remains. Ceramic attributes -
decorative motifs, decorative treatments and vessel shapes - will be carefully
recorded to determine whether significant differences between the two wings can
be discerned. To determine if trace element and neutron activation analyses can
be used to identify non-local vessels, a sample of sherds will be studied.
Examination of pollen and plant phytoliths should provide insight into diet and
ritual activity. Anthropologists wish to understand how, at relatively simple
level of technology, individuals can be organized to form functioning cohesive
groups. Ethnographic and ethnohistoric evidence from Peru indicate a widespread
form of dual social organization. Groups are divided into two opposing halves
with one dominant over the other. This dual form of organization provides the
basis for social identity and control. It establishes a mental template within
which individuals can situate themselves in relation to the rest of society.
Ethnographically this form is widespread and is also known, in somewhat
different variants, from other parts of the world. However anthropologists do
not know when the pattern was established and how it developed through time.
Based an architectural evidence, some archaeologists have postulated that
U-shaped structures relate to dual organization but no-one has analyzed
materials recovered through excavation to determine whether they support such an
interpretation. Dr. Dillehay's project will fill just such a gap. This research
is important for several reasons. It will shed light on an important form of
social organization and provide insight into how it developed over time. It will
also yield data of interest to many archaeologists.