* 9600023
* The Mathematics Teacher Development (MTD) Project
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/1996,12/31/2002
* Ron Tzur, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth VanderPutten
* 12/31/2002
* USD 1,074,311.00

9600023&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OVERVIEW: The MTD Project is
studying the development of preservice and inservice mathematics teachers of
kindergarten through grade 6 as they develop their teaching practices in the
direction of current mathematics education reforms. The research studies these
teachers in the context of an intensive instructional program and supervised
field experience. It seeks to identify patterns of teacher development,
obstacles for preservice teachers, and key issues that emerge during the
professional development process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;STRATEGIES: The project's
first instructional component is a series of five academic-year courses, for a
combined group of prospective and practicing elementary and middle school
teachers, taught by the project director. In 1996, participants completed the
first course designed to foster mathematical knowledge, confidence, and
competence and to provide an experiential base for mathematics instruction that
reflects the national standards. The second course (1997) will focus on
students' mathematical thinking; participants will conduct student interviews to
investigate students' understanding of mathematics. The third, fourth and fifth
courses (1997 and 1998) will provide an integrated look at the learning and
teaching of key concepts in the elementary school mathematics
curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; During the project's second component, each
inservice teacher is paired with a project staff member, who visits one of the
teacher's mathematics classes weekly to observe and provide feedback or teach
model lessons; they then meet to outline future action plans, discuss useful
resources, and address problems and issues that arise. Each preservice teacher
also works directly with an inservice teacher, with increasing responsibility in
the classroom culminating in a full-time student teaching experience in
1998.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IMPACT: Fifteen preservice teachers and 13 teachers
from five elementary schools and two middle schools in the State College Area
School District are participating.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The research focuses on
the individual and collective development of the teachers through whole-class
teaching experiments and individual case studies. Data collected through
classroom videotapes of participants teaching and being taught, notes taken
during site visits, student work, and audiotaped teacher interviews. The case
studies of the development of three teachers and three prospective teachers also
include audiotaped interviews every two weeks and videotaped observations in
their classrooms each month. In addition. these teachers' meetings with project
staff and preservice teachers are audiotaped. Beginning in 1997, annual meetings
with an advisory panel of university faculty, policymakers, and teachers will be
held to discuss the project's progress. A summative evaluation report will be
available upon conclusion. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The project has proposed a
paper about teachers' basic teaching models at the 1997 National Council of
Teachers of Mathematics annual meeting. Project staff and participants will
present their findings at additional national and international conferences and
will publish them in professional journals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL
INVESTIGATORS: Martin A. Simon, Ron Tzur&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;