* 9600617
* Rough Cilician Region Archaeological Survey
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/1996,06/30/1999
* Richard Blanton, Purdue Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/1999
* USD 103,148.00

With National Science Foundation support Drs. Richard Blanton, Nicholas Rauh and
colleagues will conduct a two year archaeological survey in the Antioch region
on the Turkish coast. During the period from ca. 139-67 B.C. this area, which
was peripheral to the Roman empire was controlled by Cilician pirate societies
which massed large numbers of sailors and ships to raid both seaborne commerce
and port cities. These exploits of these groups are well documented but
relatively little is known about the internal organization of these societies.
For several years Blanton and Raugh have conducted preliminary surveys in this
Cilician area and they shall now expand their survey to allow full coverage of
an area of approximately 800 square kilometers. Using methods developed both in
Middle America and in the Old World, crews will walk carefully over the entire
region and note and map archaeological occurrences. Materials from both all time
periods will be collected and analyzed. On this basis it will then be possible
to reconstruct demography and settlement patterns and gain insight into Cilician
social and economic organization. The historical character of the Mediterranean
reflects the importance of extensive long-distance sea travel that moved
commodities, culture and people and that figured into military strategy and
state-building. A growing number of archaeological researchers recognize the
utility of social theories that address the consequences of interaction at the
scales of world-system, area and region and are working to develop models of how
regional interaction occurs. During Roman times the study area while
environmentally marginal, and never the site of a major polity, was well
situated in a way other marginal regions were not, to intermediate in major sea-
borne commercial flows along the boundaries of important polities and along
major Mediterranean sea routes. It thus provides an excellent setting to study
what happens in semi-peripheral areas and to compliment an extensive literature
which examines interactions between core and true peripheral areas. Nations and
individuals today participate in, and are affected by, worldwide systems and
archaeologists wish to understand how such widespread interactions develop over
time. This study should provide new insight. The research is also important
because it brings together New World and Old World archaeologists and introduces
into a `classical` Old World setting survey and analytic techniques which have
proven highly effective in the Americas. The project will further intellectual
interchange which will enrich research in both regions. It will also provide
data of interest to many archaeologists.