* 9600253
* Internet Access to the Evolution of Terrestial Ecosystems Database
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1998
* John Damuth, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Paul Gilna
* 08/31/1998
* USD 90,000.00

This project will develop a World Wide Web interface for the Evolution of
Terrestrial Ecosystems (ETE) Database. ETE is an international project, designed
to allow broad-scale comparisons of the paleobiology and paleoecology of
terrestrial ecosystems and their plant and animal communities. Currently the
Database contains information on over 8,000 fossil localities and more than
5,000 plant and animal species. It is accessed through an X-Window graphical
interface, which allows one to plot fossil localities on maps displayed on
screen, to query the screen display, and to construct output data sets for other
analysis programs. Currently, the user interface application (called "Explorer")
runs only on the host that also runs the project's database management software
(Ingres). This makes the Explorer an effective tool in the context of a local
network, but a user at a remote site must operate the interface (maps, menus,
etc.) from across the Internet and must transfer via FTP any analysis output
files to use locally. Users outside of North America find international network
access too slow to use the Explorer during certain peak hours. This project will
port Explorer to the Java computer language (JavaSoft, Mountain View, CA). A
Java object file can be executed on any computer that has a Java interpreter
without recompiling. Java interpreters are available for all major PC and
workstation platforms, and are built in to WWW browsers such as Netscape 2.0 and
HotJava. From within a Web browser, a special form of a Java application (called
an "applet") is downloaded to the user's computer (via a standard WWW link to a
URL), where it is executed. The result is a level of interactivity and complex
behavior previously unavailable on the WWW. The new version of the Explorer will
thus take the form of a Java applet embedded within a standard WWW HTML
document. The result will be a robust, Internet-based, interactive, interface
providing the Explorer's GI S-style approach to data exploration. That
architecture will greatly increase the accessibility of the database to
paleobiologists world-wide and catalyze additional research community feedback
and professional interaction on the project. A WWW client for ETE will also
likely make the database a significant resource for formal and informal
education in paleobiology.