* 9600995
* Rural Responses To Early Urbanism:  Village Economy and     Ecology in the Jordan Valley
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/1996,08/31/1999
* Patricia Fall, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/1999
* USD 56,808.00

With National Science Foundation support, Drs. Steven Falconer and Patricia Fall
will conduct one season of archaeological fieldwork at the site of Tell Abu en-
Ni'ai in Jordan. This will be followed by analysis of faunal, floral, ceramic
and lithic materials collected and preparation for publication of the resultant
information. A brief test excavation by the investigators in 1985 suggests that
Ni'aj was a largely sedentary agrarian village during the Early Bronze IV
period, a time of dramatic city abandonment and increased mobile pastoralism
throughout the region. These soundings revealed three shallow strata with
readily accessible domestic architecture and abundant material remains. In their
current excavations the team will explore rural agrarian ecology and patterns of
household behavior. Substantial samples of material evidence will be collected
from all three of Ni'aj's strata and extensive lateral excavation in the
uppermost of these will provide detailed information of village and household
layout. While the Near East is seen as a cradle of one major civilization and
the process of development is often viewed as unilineal from small hunting and
gathering bands to a state level of organization, this in fact is not the case.
The Early Bronze Age is of particular archaeological interest because its close
marks a time of collapse when urban centers were abandoned and level of
complexity appeared to decrease. Little is know about the factors responsible
for this change. Although most people during the Bronze Age did not live in
urban settings, very little attention has been focused on smaller rural sites.
Ni'aj represents just such an occurrence and the proposed research is important
both because it will provide a more complete picture of Bronze Age society and
offer insight into the processes involved in the collapse. Previous work has
demonstrated that Ni'aj is rich in both faunal and floral remains and the
investigators will devote considerable attention to the collection and analyses
of these materials. Therefore they will learn a great deal about human-
environmental interactions in a semi-arid region. The results of their research
will be of significance to archaeologists and a wide range of environmental
scientists.