* 9600462
* U.S. Czech Plant Research on Subcellular Compartmentation   of Phytohormone Conjugation
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/1996,01/31/2000
* Natasha Raikhel, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 01/31/2000
* USD 42,490.00

INT 9600462 Raikhel This U.S.-Czech research project between Dr. Natasha Raikhel
of Michigan State University and Dr. Bretislav Brzobohaty of the Czech Institute
of Biophysics, Brno, will examine plant hormones that mediate features of plant
development. Specifically, the researchers intend to study the role played by
subcellular compartmentation in regulation of phytohormone activity. This will
be done by reversible conjugation, using a cloned maize cytokinin glucosidase
(cDNA, Zm-p60.1). The extent of the cytokinin release will be determined in the
process and the observed physiological responses caused by the released
cytokinins will be analyzed. Initial findings will contribute to the research
team's efforts to construct and molecularly characterize transgenic plants that
express accumulations of Zm-p60.1 in various subcellular compartments. The
research is expected to improve our fundamental understanding of the cytokinin
role in the developmental switch in plants from the vegetative to the
reproductive phase. New knowledge of various effects of released cytokinins on
activities such as floral transition, root development, seed production, and
photosynthetic capacity may lead to results that permit control of some
agriculturally important traits in crops. This project in plant cellular science
fulfills the program objective of advancing scientific knowledge by enabling
leading experts in the United States and Eastern Europe to combine complementary
talents and pool research resources in areas of mutual interests and competence.
??