* 9600555
* The Na+ Efflux Systems of Alkaliphilic Bacillus firmus OF4
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1997
* Terry Krulwich, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai
* Standard Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 08/31/1997
* USD 50,000.00

*** Li 9505412 This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project will
employ a state-of-the-art fabrication method "Pulsed Laser Deposition (PLD)" to
create single crystal layered structures of exotic materials (ferroelectrics and
conductive oxide) on micromachined silicon with integrated silicon circuitry.
These new fabrication methods and materials will permit the construction of
electronic devices and infrared (IR) detectors which are faster, more sensitive
and lower in cost than competing commercial technologies. The innovations of the
proposed program are: 1) advancing thin-film deposition technology to achieve
fully epitaxial growth of ferroelectric films on silicon substrates, by using
the highly successful pulsed laser deposition technique; 2) replacing the Pt
bottom electrode with the epitaxial conductive oxide material, La0.5Sr0.5CoO3
(LSCO); 3) applying emerging thin-film technology to the fabrication and design
of uncooled pyroelectric IR detectors, which are currently made only from bulk
pyroelectric materials; 4) achieving exceptional thermal speed performance by
using micromachined silicon wafers as substrates; 5) achieving fully epitaxial
pyroelectric IR detector arrays on Si, which can be monolithically integrated
with Si integrated circuits (ICs). In the Phase I program, the proposers
successfully demonstrated the feasibility of the critical component for the
multilayer technology. Heterostructures containing five epitaxial thin-film
layers, i.e. LSCO / BaTiO3 / LSCO / YBa2Cu307-x / YSZ or LSCO / (Pb, Zr)TiO3 /
LSCO / YBa2Cu307-x / YSZ, were deposited on Si(100) substrates by in-situ Pulsed
Laser Deposition (PLD). The proposers have fabricated and tested an uncooled
pyroelectric detector, based on the novel ferroelectric/conductive oxide
heterostructures. The Phase I research has laid down a solid foundation for
Phase II. The proposers expect that a prototype electronic device, the
pyroelectric infrared detectors or detector arrays, will be developed by the end
of the Phase II program. In Phase III, this prototype will be packaged and
developed into a commercial product. The development of high-performance, low-
cost, uncooled IR detector arrays will address future markets in applications
such as: infrared spectroscopy, gas analysis, fire detection, thermal imaging,
drivers' aid, pollution monitoring, medical thermograph, missile guidance, night
vision, target tracking systems, laser detection and range finders, airborne-
spaceborne scanners, space-based astronomy, and IR research. ***