* 9600663
* Somatic DNA Alterations of the 81 Locus of Oxytricha        trifallax: Mechanisms and Evolution of its Alternative      Processing
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/1996,06/30/2000
* Glenn Herrick, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 06/30/2000
* USD 214,559.00

9600663 Herrick A phylogenetic survey across a spectrum of ciliates will monitor
the genesis and molecular evolution of the processing of the 81 locus of
Oxytricha fallax. The 81 locus is of particular interest because it has been
shown that during the development of the somatic macronucleus it is processed to
form three overlapping macronuclear chromosomes. The phylogenetic survey will be
done with degenerate-primer PCR of macronuclear intervals representative of
alternative processing in the DNAs of ever more distantly related ciliates. The
amplified DNAs will be sequenced and analyzed for molecular and relational
insights as well as determining the design of further degenerate PCR primers to
permit detection of more distantly related sequences. %%% Ciliates process their
germline nucleus to produce a somatic nucleus by eliminating specific DNA
sequences in a programmed fashion. One particular locus, the 81 locus of
Oxytricha falfax, has been shown to be unusual in that it is alternatively
processed to produce three overlapping fragments with a total of three open
reading frames. This study will use this region for a comparison of the involved
sequence in DNA from related hypotrichous ciliated protozoa in the hope of
understanding the evolution of programmed gene rearrangements. Such programmed
DNA rearrangements are observed in immune-cell gene rearrangements and
stochastic rearrangements during tumorigenesis in mammals and insight into the
evolution of the process in these simple protozoa can provide a basis of
understanding of the process in more complex organisms. ***