* 9601042
* Sensory Exploitation and Epigamic Selection
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1996,07/31/2000
* Scott Sakaluk, Board of Trustees of Illinois State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jerry  O. Wolff
* 07/31/2000
* USD 156,500.00

ABSTRACT PI: Sakaluk Proposal Number: 9601042 Insects have a profound impact on
the human condition as vectors of disease organisms, pests of stored products
and agricultural crops, and pollinators of plants. An important facet of the
biology of insects that accounts for their remarkable abundance and diversity is
their ability to respond genetically to novel environmental challenges, be they
natural or man made (e.g., pesticides). This ability is predicated in part on
the extent to which females of a wide variety of species retain control of
gamete transfer and usage, and thereby influence the paternity and genetic
makeup of their offspring. But what characteristics of males influence this
cryptic selection process by female insects, and how do offspring benefit from
their particular genetic endowments: The proposal seeks to understand those
aspects of the reproductive physiology and behavior of female insects that leads
to increased survival and fitness of offspring. Although an understanding of
these reproductive processes has obvious practical ramifications for the
management and control of insects, they also address important biological
hypotheses concerning the coexistence of male traits and female reproductive
processes. One hypothesis proposes that certain male traits arise because they
exploit built-in sensory biases of females. A competing hypothesis suggests that
male traits arise because they accurately signal a male's genetic makeup. These
hypotheses will be tested through experimental exploitation of female sensory
makeup. These hypotheses will be tested through experimental exploitation of
female sensory capabilities, and by examining the reproductive success of
females whose offspring have been sired by different males and hence, differ in
their genetic makeup.