* 9601599
* Acquisition of a Scanning Laser Confocal Microscope
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1999
* Joel Sheffield, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory K. Farber
* 08/31/1999
* USD 135,000.00

PROJECT SUMMARY The Biology Department of Temple University requests funds to
support the purchase of a scanning confocal laser microscope, which will be used
to complement the other facilities that we have available for a combined
research/training program in advanced microscopy. For many years, we have been
assembling the components of a "virtual laboratory" for advanced biological
microscopy. These components include electron microscopes, low light
fluorescence microscopes, DlC/Side band microscopes, and a variety of image
analysis systems which are run on PC's, PowerMacintosh, and Silicon Graphics
computers. This distribution of the components will be discussed in the
management section of this application. It is our goal to complete this
laboratory by adding a scanning confocal system, which will allow us to add
three dimensional analysis to our repertoire. This laboratory will be used in
both research and training at all levels within the department. 1. Research.
Drs. Gruberg, Myers, Hilfer, Tompkins and Sheffield are interested in using a
scanning confocal microscope to visualize biological materials in three
dimensions during development. Drs. Gruberg, Myers, Sheffield and Tompkins are
particularly interested in nerve development, using several model systems, and
Dr. Hilfer is interested in the cellular basis of shape determination in
embryos, with particular reference to components of the sensory system. All of
these investigators have established research programs and significant
publication records. This instrument will be an important resource for the
University Neuroscience Program, which shares faculty from the Health Sciences
Campus and this one. 2. Training. The microscope will support our training
mission as a component of formal classes and the training of graduate and
undergraduate students. a. It will be incorporated into an
undergraduate/graduate course i n advanced microscopy. This course was recently
added to our curriculum, using the existing equipment. The confocal microscope
will be a critical addition to the available instrumentation . b. It will be
available for undergraduate and graduate student use during independent
study/research courses, and during thesis research. We have an active research
program supporting graduate students (about 50), and undergraduates (about 30).
In the undergraduate program, students work individually with faculty for
periods that average two years, during which they carry out independent research
projects. Many of these projects have resulted in the publication of research
papers with the student as co-authors. The undergraduate research program has
been supported by the NSF Research Experiences for Undergraduates program for
the past six years, and we have recently received a three year grant to continue
this effort. In addition, the major portion of the grant that we have just
received from the Howard Hughes Medical Institute is designed to support student
research. The major component of our graduate program, at both the Master's and
Doctoral level is research, carried out in close association with a faculty
advisor. The five faculty who are participating in the current application
currently supervise research of 23 graduate students.