* 9601056
* Conference on the New Economics of Science at Notre Dame, Indiana, March 1997
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1996,02/28/1998
* Philip Mirowski, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Lynn A. Pollnow
* 02/28/1998
* USD 20,458.00

The impression that science is undergoing a new phase of reorganization and
retrenchment is widespread, and in response there have been numerous appeals to
a revived "economics of science." Many commentators and analysts do not
recognize that there have been three different theoretical approaches to an
economics of science, dating from the 1930s, the 1950s, and a Newer school which
has only now been consolidating its position. Thus, just as philosophers,
science policy experts and scientists themselves have been calling for a
rationalization and reorganization of science along economic principles, or else
criticizing economists for their imperialistic pretensions, there has been very
little consensus over what a theory of the "marketplace of ideas" would entail.
The purpose of this conference is to bring together the major representatives of
each vintage of the economics of science, along with science policy experts,
sociologists and philosophers of science, and some representative scientists
concerned with these issues, in order to come to some agreement as to what might
be useful in notions of competition, accountability and the invisible hand when
applied to the process of scientific inquiry. One half of the conference will be
devoted to theoretical issues, such as the treatment of science as a public
good, the application of strategic game theory to the "industrial organization"
of science, and the relevant traditions of the treatment of knowledge in
economic theory and their bearing upon the portrayal of science; while the other
half will be concerned with more applied policy issues, such as the impact of
imposing accountability upon the structure of science, evidence of the decline
of a Mertonian "culture of credit" in increasing hierarchy and division of
labor, and the economics of the publication and dissemination of findings. The
major aim of the conference is to advance and consolidate the emerging field of
the economics of science by disseminating and evaluating the various approaches
in a systematic and comprehensive manner.