* 9601146
* Molecular Genetics of Sulfate Assimilation in Plants
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1999
* Thomas Leustek, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Judith A. Verbeke
* 07/31/1999
* USD 260,650.00

9601146 Leustek The proposal focuses on the mechanisms of sulfate reduction in
higher plants. Specifically in the focus are the two rate-limiting enzymes of
this pathway, APS-kinase and PAPS-reductase. Data submitted with the proposal
indicated a major breakthrough on the biochemical reactions that govern sulfate
reduction - indicating a paradigmatic change in how we have to view this
metabolic reaction in plants. The major goal of this proposal is to fortify the
preliminary data by an in-depth biochemical study of the enzymatic reactions.
Cloned genes are available, encoding the kinase (APK1) and reductase (APR1)
enzymes. They will be used to synthesize proteins for biochemical
investigations. A major part of the proposal is to over-express the enzymes and/
or to use antisense expression to reduce enzyme amounts in plants. One aspect
which may be highly significant is that APR1 is different from its bacterial
counterpart in that it has a thioredoxin domain attached - possibly indicating
that this enzyme is controlled by the redox state of the cell. This significant
new aspect of sulfate metabolism will be analyzed. Sulfate reduction is an
important plant metabolism. The reactions provide reduced sulfur for a number of
essential plant processes, best known may be sulfur-containing essential amino
acids. Effectively reducing sulfate to a less toxic form is also crucial to, for
example, trees because sulfate is the major damaging component of acid rain.