* 9601206
* Where the Water Meets the Land:  An Archaeological Case     Study of Two Millennia of Wetland Utilization at K'axob,    Belize
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2001
* Patricia McAnany, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2001
* USD 143,056.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Patricia McAnany and her
colleagues will conduct two seasons of archaeological fieldwork at the site of
K'axob, located in the tropical lowlands of Belize. Extensive prior work at the
site by Dr. McAnany has indicated an extensive Mayan settlement which spans the
development and the classical period of Mayan prehistory. Associated with the
settlement are a series of agricultural features, termed `raised fields` which
consist of raised elongated `fields` and canals or drainage ditches which
separate them. Dr. McAnany wishes to understand how and when these fields were
constructed, how long they were used and just what crops were grown on them. She
wants to compare changes in settlement pattern and size with development and
changes in the field system. To accomplish this she will: 1. construct a
complete ground-truthed map of the wetland canal and island-field system at
K'axob; 2. conduct archaeological excavation of a statistically significant
sample of island fields and canals drawn from a known sampling frame; 3. use
optical microscopy for micromorphological analysis of wetland sediments to
clarify formation processes; 4 apply magnetic susceptibility and total phosphate
analysis to sediment columns to facilitate the discrimination of depositional
sequences; 6. synthesize the chronology and stratigraphically derived
excavations with that of settlement excavations in the adjacent uplands. The
lowland Maya flourished and lived in large groups in a harsh tropical lowland
environment which is essentially uninhabited today. Archaeologists wish to
understand the agricultural practices which permitted this florescence and to
trace how these developed and changed over time. To date no consensus exists and
scientists disagree strongly on the age of these occurrences and just how they
functioned. Dr. McAnany's carefully designed project should provide an answer to
these questions. The work is also important for the insight it can shed on
wetland management and many of the data may be relevant to management practices
today. It appears that the Mayan people were able to utilize wetlands for
extended periods of time and use them for agricultural production without
destroying their essential nature. The results of this project will be of
interest to many scientists. It will provide data of potential use for wetland
management and shed new light on the subsistence practices of prehistoric Mayan
peoples.