* 9601760
* Impact of Military Downsizing on the Life Course of Russian Officers and Their Wives
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/1996,07/31/2002
* David Segal, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 07/31/2002
* USD 364,620.00

This is the second wave of a panel study of Russian army officers and their
wives, about half of whom are leaving the service as a result of downsizing.
Russian military downsizing is occurring under conditions of substantial
economic privation and social change. This is a quasi-experimental study of
changes in the life course of officers who will be discharged and their wives,
compared to officers remaining in service and their wives. Fieldwork for Wave 1
surveys was carried out between October, 1995, and January, 1996, or 3-6 months
prior to discharges. A total of 1,804 officers and 1,616 spouses were surveyed
through an interview that measured many dimensions of their career, attitudes
and beliefs concerning employment, plus the material and social-psychological
situations of their families. This study will administer a follow-up survey in
early 1997, approximately 15-18 months after the Wave 1 survey, thus greatly
enriching the data set. By early 1997, some officers will be unemployed, some
will be re-employed, and others who remain in the military will be witnessing
the plight of their former fellow officers. The respondent sample is anticipated
to include 1,530 officers and 1,374 spouses. This historically important
downsizing will facilitate testing hypotheses from the life course perspective,
the stress literature, and identity theories. The overall model includes (1)
tracing effects of job loss on officers' career paths, family life (e.g.,
marital satisfaction and wife's employment), and psychological well-being; (2)
exploring potential mediators (processes by which job disruption has effects)
and moderators (specifying the scope of effects); (3) assessing effects of
downsizing on "organizational survivors" (officers who are not discharged); and
(4) examining effects on the family, especially wives. This research builds on
American studies of the social psychological effects of job loss, thus
contributing to the fundamental literature on stress and the w ays that human
beings cope with it, with insights gained under conditions of greater tension
than usually has been examined in previous work. The project has implications
for foreign policy, because is vital to understand Russian military downsizing
and the struggle of this vast nation to become a modern, democratic state. The
success or failure of these transformations will determine the quality of the
world environment and the course of global change.