* 9601463
* Rapid Computational Analysis of Biomolecular Properties
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1999
* Barry Honig, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Gilna
* 07/31/1999
* USD 698,937.00

Project Summary The purpose of the research described in this proposal is the
development of rapid computational tools for the analysis of the three
dimensional structure of biological macromolecules. The goal is to combine
graphical techniques designed to highlight functionally important features of
macromolecules with numerical and theoretical methods that allow a user to
extract meaningful numbers about important physical properties from a three
dimensional structure. Capabilities of this type of have been incorporated into
the GRASP (Graphical Representation and Analysis of Structural Properties)
computer program which was developed in the current funding period. In the past
three years GRASP evolved into one of the most widely used analysis tools in
Structural Biology. A goal of the current proposal is to continue the
development of GRASP by making it more widely accessible and through the
incorporation of new functionalities and new quantitative analysis tools. The
major application of GRASP has been the calculation and representation of the
electrostatic potentials of proteins and nucleic acids on the molecular surface.
The potentials are calculated from finite-difference solutions to the Poisson-
Boltzmann (PB) equation obtained from essentially the same algorithm used in the
DelPhi program which was also developed in this lab. It has become commonplace
for the report of a new structure of a protein to include one or more GRASP
pictures representing solutions to the PB equation. However Silicon Graphics
workstations are required to depict these images, a factor which has to some
extent limited their use. In order to make GRASP images more widely available,
we plan to convert the graphical routines within GRASP to output graphical
descriptions in VRML, the 3D scene description language proposed for the World
Wide Web (WWW). We also plan to introduce interfacing tools which will
facilitate communication with other programs, will simplify the learning curve
for the use of current functionalities and will make it possible to integrate
new quantitative analysis tools within GRASP. A second goal of the current
proposal is the creation of a database of GRASP images for the entire Protein
Data Base (PDB). GRASP molecular surface images of electrostatic potential and
curvature will be created for each protein in the PDB will be stored in a
database. 2D and 3D GRASP images will be made available for viewing over the
WWW. It is anticipated that the wide availability of these images will lead to
the development of a new structure-function relationships and, ultimately, to
the creation of new surface-based data bases which will make it possible to
deduce function and functionally active regions given a three dimensional
structure. The final goal of the proposal is the integration of quantitative
analysis tools within GRASP. In particular, a user will be able, in real-time,
to obtain pKais solvation, conformational and binding free energies for any
structure depicted graphically on the screen. The significance of the proposed
research to the advancement of knowledge is manifest in the success of GRASP
which has demonstrated the impact of interactive quantitative analysis tools on
the analysis of macromolecular structure and function relationships. The
database of surface properties and the addition of new GRASP functionalities
should have comparable impact on the ability to exploit the vast amount of
information embodied in the three dimensional structure of proteins and nucleic
acids.