* 9601965
* ARI: Acquisition of Anechoic Test Facility
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/1996,03/31/2001
* Yves Berthelot, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 03/31/2001
* USD 440,000.00

9601965 Cunefare This Academic Research Infrastructure Grant provides funding
for the construction and instrumentation of an integrated structural acoustic
research facility, including an anechoic chamber, at the Georgia Institute of
Technology. The anechoic chamber will provide an echo-free environment for
acoustic research. The associated instrumentation and equipment, along with the
chamber, are intended to provide an integrated design, analysis and experimental
capability directed toward structural acoustics. The facility will include: a
scanning laser-bibrometer; a scanning acoustic intensity probe; a high-speed
multi-channel data acquisition and control system; engineering workstations for
modeling, control, and data acquisition; data acquisition and numerical modeling
software, microphones; accelerometers; structural exciter; and signal
conditioning components. The facility is intended for research and education
into the design of quiet, low vibration products. Vibration and noise are
significant contributors to perception of quality. Excessive vibration and noise
can lead to premature component failure, user fatigue, and stress. The facility
will provide the capability to numerically model the noise vibration, and
determine means to control or tailor these characteristics. The benefit of this
research is anticipated to be a better understanding of the generation and
control of noise and vibration. This improved understanding, if exploited by
U.S. manufacturers in the design of their products, should improve the
competitive position of their products. Other intended research uses include
experimental work related to the propagation mechanisms; transducer design and
testing for the development of new instruments and sensor; active structural
control, directed toward alternative means to control noise processes, and
acoustic emission studies, for improved condition monitoring of equipment.