* 9601453
* U.S.-China Cooperative Research: Nonlinear Terahertz        Spectroscopy Research and Educational Exchange Program
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1996,05/31/2000
* Xi-Cheng Zhang, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Alice C. Hogan
* 05/31/2000
* USD 100,000.00

9601453 Zhang This award supports continued development of a cooperative
research and education program between RPI and the Institute of Physics,
Beijing. This recommended award is supplemental to the PI's CAREER award through
the Division of Electrical and Communication Systems. The research involves
generation of intense terahertz radiation that will open new research areas in
the characterization of electrical, optical, and optoelectronics materials and
devices. Applications are also likely in characterization of biological
materials for medical applications. Many technical benefits are associated with
this cooperation with China. The Chinese group has acknowledged expertise
growing and cutting the nonlinear crystals which are essential to the research.,
and has state of the art laser facilities, enabling them to carry out
significant parts of the experiments. Chinese scientists, supported by Chinese
funding sources, will be trained further at RPI in ultrafast electronics. The
benefits to both sides are substantial and equitable. An important part of this
program is the participation of graduate and undergraduate US students. Based on
the success of a one-year pilot program, the PI proposes to extend the
opportunity to up to sixteen students over the next four years to participate in
a research program involving experiments conducted both at RPI and in China.