* 9601198
* Evolution of the Retrotransposons R1 and R2
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/1996,07/31/1999
* Thomas Eickbush, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 07/31/1999
* USD 360,000.00

9601198 Eickbush Transposable elements, abundant components of eukaryotic
genomes, have probably played a significant role in determining the size and
structure of these genomes. R1 and R2 are retrotransposable elements found
inserted in the 28S ribosomal RNA genes in all insect lineage's and in all
classes of Arthropods. R1 and R2 elements from modern and ancient insect orders,
as well as from each class of Arthropod will be isolated and sequenced in the
region of the open reading frame. That information will be used to construct a
phylogenetic tree with the goal of determining if the elements have been present
since the origin of arthropods. The origin and stability of highly divergent
families of R1 and/or R2 within the genus Drosophila will be studied. The
questions of whether each family can independently regulate its own level of
insertion and of horizontal transfer will be addressed. The population dynamics
of these elements in species where they are maintained at high and low average
levels will be investigated. These studies will be complemented by computer
simulations to determine whether simple models of recombination and
retrotransposition can explain the observed distributions. %%% Mobile elements
or their remnants represent as much as 30% of the genomes of most eukaryotes. It
is probable that these elements have had a significant impact on size and
structure of eukaryotic chromosomes and it is remarkable that many basic
questions concerning their evolution, regulation and costs or benefits to their
hosts remain unanswered. This study will add to the little we know of the
genetic impact of transposable elements in host genomes. ***