* 9601201
* Mating and Parasitic Behavior of Brown-Headed Cowbirds
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/1996,06/30/1998
* Scott Robinson, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 06/30/1998
* USD 50,000.00

ABSTRACT PI: ASHLEY PROPOSAL NUMBER: 9601201 Mating and Parasitic Behavior of
Brown-headed Cowbirds The breeding biology of the brown-headed cowbird,
Molothrus ater, will be investigated through a comprehensive field and
laboratory study. Both the mating system and the parasitism practices of
individual female cowbirds will be studied by assigning parentage to 450-500
cowbird eggs and nestlings collected at a field site at the Morton Arboretum in
Lisle Illinois from mapped nest locations. This will be done by DNA
microsatellite genotyping, which allows parentage to be determined by exclusion.
The genetic data will be used to determine whether cowbirds at this study site
mate monogamously, as has been previously reported, or promiscuously. Brood
parasites such as the brown-headed cowbird are freed from parental care, which
makes monogamy theoretically improbable. If it is determined that cowbirds are
indeed monogamous, prevailing theories of avian mating systems may need to be
reevaluated. The genetic analysis will also be used to test the hypothesis that
female cowbirds restrict egg-laying to definable areas that are largely non-
overlapping. Non-overlapping reproductive areas would suggest competition for a
limited resource, host nests. This will be done by mapping the locations of
offspring assigned to an individual female and comparing these to distributions
of other femalesU offspring. Previous field work at this study site demonstrates
that cowbirds differentially parasitize the nests of certain host species when
multiple hosts are available. Several ecological factors including habitat, nest
type, host size, and host defenses are strongly correlated with observed rates
of parasitism. The proposed study will examine the extent to which these
patterns reflect behavioral adaptations (e.g. host choice) of female cowbirds.
Two related field studies will be conducted to determine if fem ales
preferentially parasitize the highest quality host species and/or avoid low
quality host species such as those known to eject cowbird eggs from their nests
(RrejectorsS). The first field study will determine the relative abilities of
different commonly parasitized host species to successfully foster cowbird
nestlings. The relative qualities of different hosts as cowbird surrogates will
be compared to observed patterns of parasitism to determine if high-quality host
species are selectively parasitized. The second field study will determine
parasitism rates of RrejectorS species. At our study site we have observed
parasitism of three species of hosts known to eject cowbird eggs, indicating
that female cowbirds are not completely avoiding these host species. By
experimentally parasitizing the nests of these species, the rate of egg-ejection
will be determined. From this measure and the observed rate of parasitism, we
can ascertain whether cowbirds prefer acceptor host species over rejectors, or
alternatively, fail to discriminate against these low-quality hosts.
Demonstrating patterns of host choice is important both for understanding host-
parasite coevolution and for developing conservation strategies to protect host
species threatened by cowbirds.