* 9601515
* Acquisition of an Automated DNA Sequencer for The New York  Botanical Garden's Cullman Program for Molecular Systematics Studies
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1997
* Victor Albert, New York Botanical Garden
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 08/31/1997
* USD 9,275.00

This proposal seeks cost-sharing support for the purchase of an ABI PRISM 377
Automated DNA Sequencer and necessary peripherals. The Lewis B. and Dorothy
Cullman Program for Molecular Systematics Studies, which is a joint initiative
of The New York Botanical Garden and the American Museum of Natural History, was
formed through a charitable donation from the Lewis B. and Dorothy Cullman
Foundation. The New York Botanical Garden's Cullman Program occupies
laboratories at both locations, which includes entitlement to user-fee based
operation of the Museum's ABI 377 sequencer. The Cullman Program resides
primarily in newly renovated laboratory space in the Garden's Harding Laboratory
building. A matching challenge grant of $116,000 from the Cullman Foundation has
been used toward the total costs of equipping the new laboratories for molecular
systematics research. This proposal requests the balance of necessary funds from
the NSF. This proposal seeks matching funds from NSF to complete the planned
equipping of the Garden laboratories with automated DNA sequencing and DNA
fingerprinting capacities. DNA sequencing is not currently possible at the
Garden, although all other relevant molecular techniques (e.g., DNA and RNA
extraction and purification, Southern and northern blot analyses, PCR
amplification of DNA, in situ hybridization and in situ PCR against DNA or cDNA,
visualization of fluorochrome labeled in situ probes, and molecular cloning) are
supported with the newly purchased equipment. The sequencing facility at the
American Museum is crucial for present research initiatives, but it is no long
term substitute for in-house DNA sequence and DNA fingerprint determination at
the Garden. Aspects such as cost-effectiveness, throughput, flexibility, and
enhanced research and educational development argue strongly for the Garden's
completion of its own automated DNA analysis facility, as has been planned. The
general goal of the Cullman Program is to enr ich and invigorate the Botanical
Science Division of The New York Botanical Garden with the modern tools of
molecular systematics research. Molecular systematics not only entails DNA
sequence production for use in phylogenetic analysis; it also encompasses bold
new attempts to link systematics reasoning with the burgeoning field of plant
molecular development. The Cullman Program currently supports standard molecular
systematics projects as well as systematically oriented projects focusing on
flower and root development. Molecular systematic work in Lecythidaceae,
Arecaceae, Anacardiaceae, Neckeraceae, Gentianaceae, and Cactaceae is proceeding
in collaboration with Cullman Program Adjunct Curators, other staff, and
graduate students. These projects are primarily oriented toward classificatory,
character evolutionary, and biogeographic issues. Other projects focusing on
population level issues will profit from the ABI 377's capacity to perform rapid
genotype analysis (e.g., using the amplified fragment length polymorphism AFLP
approach). Likewise, the evolutionary-oriented developmental research of the
Cullman Program requires active DNA sequencing capacity. A Garden sequencing
facility will act much like a local workstation for plant molecular systematics
activity, especially given the Garden's academic collaborations with Columbia
University (The Center for Environmental Conservation and Research--CERC),
Cornell University, Lehman College--CUNY, New York University, and Yale
University. Immediate commitments for use of an automated sequencer are
substantial (16 investigators), and installation of this instrumentation at The
New York Botanical Garden should permit a considerable molecular systematics
research capacity in the years to come. The ABI PRISM 377 Automated DNA
Sequencer (manufactured by Perkin Elmer's Applied Biosystems Division) is a
sophisticated instrument representing the forefront of second-generation
sequencer technology. The instrument' s use of simultaneous, scanning-laser
detection of four different fluorescent dyes permits samples to be resolved in
single gel lanes (as opposed to the four gel lanes occupied by other vendors'
equipment, which have a single-dye approach). Throughput time has been increased
by a factor four from earlier models through refinements to the scanning
procedure. Combined with appropriate software (some software and hardware are
included within the base purchase price), gel-plate and loading comb
combinations, apparatus for PCR-based DNA labeling, and a dedicated water
purification system, the ABI 377 will complete the equipping of The New York
Botanical Garden's molecular laboratories.