* 9601408
* Exploitation and Domestication of Animals in Southeastern   Turkey:  The Faunal Remains from Neolithic Cayonu Tepesi
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/1996,12/31/2000
* Hitomi Hongo, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2000
* USD 80,408.00

With National Science Foundation support Drs. Meadow, Hongo and their colleagues
will analyze faunal remains recovered from the archaeological site of Cayonu
which is located in southeastern Turkey. Excavations at this early village site
were conducted between 1964 and 1991 and have uncovered a long sequence of
occupations spanning the period between ca. 8,000 and 5,000 years ago. They also
resulted in one of the largest exposures of architectural remains of any site
from this period in the Middle East (over 7,000 square meters) and thus provide
a rare opportunity to examine intra-site variability. The site particularly
important to researchers because it spans the period when animals were first
domesticated in the Near East and because of the large numbers of well preserved
faunal remains it contains. It can therefore shed light on the transition from
hunting and gathering to the use of domestic species. The research team will
select faunal samples from tightly controlled stratigraphic and architectural
contexts. Initial focus will be placed on animal exploitation and change through
time by documenting and comparing taxonomic abundances, kill-off patterns and
skeletal part distributions. A second stage of the research will relate to
animal domestication and the investigators will attempt to determine whether
this fundamental process took place at the site. Cayonu is located in a region
where the progenitors of several domestic species such as pig are located. A
third stage in the research will involve intra-site variability with the focus
on assemblages from areas of the site with different architectural
configurations. With such data it will be possible to examine questions which
involve social differentiation and the emergence of social hierarchies.
Specimens will be identified and characterized using standard zooarchaeological
techniques including morphological and metrical documentation. The `Neolithic
Revolution` is marked by the domestication of plants and animals and the origin
of pastoral and agricultural ways of life. Prior to this, peoples lived solely
by hunting and gathering and the Neolithic constitutes a fundamental watershed
in human cultural development. The more dependable and abundant resources
provided by domesticates paved the way for a settled village way of life, large
population aggregations and the eventual rise of the state. What makes this
transformation so interesting is that it occurred independently in many
different parts of the Old and New Worlds and therefore some underlying causal
process and not mere historical accident must be involved. Archaeologists wish
to understand this transformation and have postulated a number of possible
causes. To select among them it is necessary to have a series of well documented
cases and Cayonu because of the abundant and well dated remains it contains and
because it spans the relevant period of time is extremely important from an
archaeological perspective. Although portions of its fauna have been analyzed,
these materials have never been approached in a comprehensive and consistent way
and therefore Drs. Meadow's and Hongo's research is particularly important. This
project will provide data of great interest to many archaeologists and will be
widely used. It will increase our understanding on one of the most fundamental
transitions in human prehistory and will assist in the training of students.