* 9601773
* Acquisition of Instrumentation for Plant and Soil Nutrient  Analysis in Ecological Studies
* BIO,DBI
* 07/15/1996,12/31/1998
* Frank Gilliam, Marshall University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 12/31/1998
* USD 60,511.00

Studies of plant nutrient dynamics and ecosystem cycling require rapid,
accurate analytical instrumentation for dependable, routine elemental analyses.
Plant ecologists and their graduate and undergraduate students at Marshall
University (a non-Ph.D. granting institution) have been conducting this type of
research for at 1east the past six years. To date, however, the scope of many of
these projects has been significantly constrained by the limitations of our
current instrumentation-- ion-selective electrode (ISE) meters--or by the
considerable cost of shipping samples to other laboratories for analyses. Funds
are therefore requested in the amount of $60,511 toward the purchase of (1) a
computer-controlled, continuous-flow, wet chemistry analytical system, (2) a
multisample block digestor for preparing plant tissues and soil samples for
analysis by wet digestion techniques, and (3) two area meters (one portable, the
other a benchtop model) for measuring leaf areas as a comparative base for
determining foliar nutrient contents and fluuxes. Automated wet chemistry
analysis (auto-analysis) provides the level of accuracy and efficiency required
in nutrient research in ecology. The high degree of accuracy is the result of
several advantages over other analytical systems, including the ISE technology
currently available at Marshall University. The mixing of reagents and samples
in auto-analysis is continuous and uniform from sample to sample, reducing human
error. The colorimeter receives a continuous flow of reagent-sample and reagent-
blank mixtures, rather than one-at-a time analyses which can introduce further
error. In addition, auto-analysis is far more time-efficient than ISE when
numerous specimens are being analyzed, and requires very little sample in order
to obtain an accurate reading. These latter factors permit many more samples to
be analyzed, allowing better replication and making possible a number of
projects that would be impractical with more time-intensive methods. The smaller
sample requirements also make possible the analysis of tissue nutrient content
in plant species that occur infrequently in the field. Wet digestion and auto-
analysis thus comprise an accurate, efficient, reliable method for plant tissue
and soil organic nutrient analysis. The ability to measure leaf areas using the
requested area meters would further enhance the accuracy of plant nutrient flux
measurements. Because overall leaf mass can decline by more than 20% during
senescence, when important foliar nutrient movements are taking place, changes
in simple nutrient concentrations provide a misleading picture of nutrient flux.
On the other hand, structural components of leaves tend to maintain consistency
in leaf area throughout senescence, providing a significantly more stable basis
for ascertaining actual foliar nutrient contents and fluxes. The following two
research projects could be initiated shortly after acquisition of the requested
instrumentation. (1) The first study would assess the importance of nitrogen and
phosphorus resorption to the growth of a spring ephemeral plant community in a
nearby forest, with implications for the "vernal dam" hypothesis. (Resorption is
the mobilization of foliar nutrients during senescence and their transfer into
storage tissues for subsequent re-use.) If these plants resorb strongly, and if
their early spring growth depends largely on stored nutrients rather than on
concurrent uptake from the soil, then their role as a vernal nutrient dam may be
quite limited, adding to recent evidence that the soil microbial community may
be the primary agent in early spring retention of soil nutrients by forest
ecosystems. The additional labware and chemicals required to complete this
project can be funded by Marshall University lab fee moneys, with much of the
work being carried out by students in Marshall's Principles of Ecology
(primarily undergraduate students) and Plant Ecology (primarily graduate
students) courses, under the guidance of the PI and Co-PI. (2) The second
project would seek to determine the role of nutrient dynamics in sustaining the
health of central Appalachian forests, and would be carried out at the Fernow
Experimental Forest, Tucker County, WV. This study is motivated partly by recent
increases in mortality among native trees of this region, and would examine
specifically the relationships of soil nitrogen dynamics to the flux of soil
base cations (primarily calcium and magnesium), and the response of these
relationships to timber harvesting, nitrogen amendments, and base cation
additions, administered alone or in combination. Funding to support this
research is being sought through a grant application submitted by the CoPI to
the NSF/DEB Ecological Studies (Ecosystems) program in December 1995. The
requested instruments are of great relevance to enhancing plant ecological
research at Marshall University. In addition, their acquisition would strengthen
our ability to compete effectively for funding on other research projects of
interest to us. These instruments would also expand the ability of Marshall
University to provide graduate and undergraduate students with practical
experience in applying state-of-the-art research technologies to answering
significant ecological questions.