* 9601766
* Effects of Tooth Use on Tooth Shape, Structure and Wear
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1996,08/31/2001
* Peter Ungar, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 08/31/2001
* USD 250,914.00

Paleobiologists have long had a keen interest in the diets of prehistoric
creatures, because `diet` is the key to so many important questions in
evolution. Of the techniques currently available for making dietary inferences,
three (analyses of tooth shape, dental microstructure, and microscopic wear
patterns on teeth) stand ready to yield new insights, if only better data from
living animals with known diets can be gathered. The purpose of this study is to
push each of these techniques closer to their paleobiological potential through
a study of living primates with known diets. The animals to be studied will be
from 35 social groups of howling monkeys, Alouatta palliata, living in patches
of dry tropical forest at Hda. La Pacifica near Canas, Costa Rica. The howlers
at La Pacifica have been the subject of behavioral observation for over 25
years. Thus their diet is known to vary from season to season, and between
microhabitats at La Pacifica. It also includes a mixture of fruit and vegetation
making it a good model of the diet of medium to large-sized fossil primates.
Animals will be periodically captured and released, and while captured, high
resolution copies of their teeth will be made. Scanning electron microscopy and
3-D digitizing of the dental replicas will yield new measurements of tooth
microstructure, tooth shape, and tooth wear. In conjunction with analyses of
food samples, stomach contents, fecal samples, and dust collected from the
forest canopy, this study will document, once and for all, the functional
implications of tooth wear in these animals. This work should lead to new
insights into (1) changes in tooth use associated with both growth and
development and changes in diet, (2) variations in dental microstructure, (3)
causes of tooth wear, and (4) physical properties and phytolith content of
Neotropical plants.