* 9601865
* ARI: Acquisition of Equipment for Fabrication of            Microelectromechanical Systems and Microelectronics
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/1996,09/30/1999
* Eric Ganz, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 09/30/1999
* USD 300,000.00

9601865 Polla This Academic Research Infrastructure award provides funding for
research equipment in the area of microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) and
general microelectronics at the University of Minnesota. The capital equipment
to be acquired includes a photolithography aligner, a thin film deposition
system, a reactive-ion etching machine, and computer controls for semiconductor
furnaces. The equipment will be acquired to support new research opportunities
in sensors, actuators, electronics, and optoelectronic devices. The specific aim
of this research is to develop smart electronic systems on a silicon chip that
can sense physical, chemical, and biological variables; process the resulting
signals in real-time with on-chip electronic circuits; and actively do
responsive work based on currently sensed conditions. Applications include
biomedical analysis and surgery, environmental monitoring, industrial process
control, and safety monitoring devices such as those used for automotive air-bag
deployment. For example in one application, MEMS devices will be designed to
sense human tissue properties during surgery, interpret these inputs, and guide
a surgeon to remove only the intended tissue while leaving healthy tissue
unaffected, thus providing minimal tissue disruption, improved safety, and a
better outcome for the patient. The equipment to be acquired in this program
will help in the education and training of approximately 130 graduate students
in 11 academic disciplines carrying out graduate research in MEMS,
microelectronics, and integrated circuits at the University of Minnesota and
other midwest universities. It will also provide an opportunity for
approximately 50 undergraduate students to learn about MEMS and
microelectronics. These educational aspects are vital to maintaining a highly-
trained and innovative U.S. high technology workforce.