* 9601287
* Auditory Anchoring
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2000
* Jamshed Bharucha, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Rodney R. Cocking
* 08/31/2000
* USD 205,610.00

9601287 BHARUCHA In perception, some objects or features seem more stable than
others. For example, edges that are slightly oblique are perceived as
aberrations of perfectly horizontal or vertical edges, as when we attempt to
straighten a painting that appears to be hanging askew. Against a background of
oblique lines of the same orientation, however, a horizontal or vertical line is
perceived as unstable. Perceptual stability and instability are thus context
dependent. Stable elements serve as cognitive reference points, and unstable
elements are perceived in relation to (are perceptually anchored to) their
closest stable elements. This research will explore mechanisms underlying the
perceptual anchoring of auditory events in familiar auditory contexts. In music
that utilizes culturally familiar patterns, for example, some tones are heard as
more unstable, unfamiliar or dissonant than others. Unstable tones seem to
demand resolution to (are anchored by) stable tones that are pitch neighbors.
This research will develop neural net models to account for how learned auditory
patterns are heard in terms of stable and unstable elements, and how unstable
elements are anchored by stable neighbors. When a tone is heard, a mechanism
called auditory selective attention focuses processing in a narrow band of
frequency-tuned neural units around the frequency of the tone. The neural units
that are most active within that band then capture auditory selective attention.
Thus when an unstable tone is heard, the stable tones that are closest in
frequency capture auditory selective attention, resulting in the anchoring of
the unstable tone. This research will include the detailed development and
computer simulation of the neural modeling outlined here. It will also include a
set of perceptual experiments that test the model that will vary the frequency
distance of unstable tones to their stable neighbors. The work should lead to a
better understanding of the perce ption of unfamiliar events in familiar
perceptual environments, with implications for the design of artificial
perceptual recognition systems. ***