* 9601479
* Acquisition of Diffraction Equipment for Interdisciplinary  Research at Northwestern University
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1999
* Theodore Jardetzky, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory K. Farber
* 08/31/1999
* USD 212,500.00

This proposal requests funds for the acquisition of an X-ray diffractometer to
be located in the Analytical Services Laboratory (ASL) at the Evanston Campus of
Northwestern University and for data collection equipment for the
macromolecular/small molecule crystallography station at the Advanced Photon
Source (APS) at Argonne National Laboratory. These instruments will greatly
facilitate the research and teaching efforts of Northwestern University
researchers in two very basic ways. First, the ASL X-ray diffractometer will
greatly improve productivity by providing the numerous advantages of "electronic
film", including significant reduction in data collection times. Second, the APS
equipment will provide a unique tool not only for the rapid collection of data
from macromolecular crystals but also for the collection of data from
microcrystals of inorganic and organic materials. Structure determinations of a
wide range of inorganic and organic materials with the use of our present X-ray
diffractometers typically require several days to several weeks for data
collection, limiting the number of structures that can be analyzed. A more
severe problem arises owing to the inherent limitations in signal-to-noise of
our point detectors in front of sealed tubes. The major users listed in this
proposal all encounter "difficult" problems: the availability of only very small
crystals, superlattice/sublattice considerations, twinned crystals, diffuse
scattering, crystals with very large unit cells, and crystals that are sensitive
to radiation. With the current diffractometers many of these problems are not
resolved. An X-ray diffractometer equipped with a lK CCD or image-plate area
detector and a rotating anode generator is ideally designed to address the
crystallographic needs of the major users. With the increased signal-to-noise
available from such an instrument, data collection times for routine crystals
will be greatly reduced. This will significa ntly improve turn-around time for
most samples, will reduce the costs involved, and hence will make the facility
available for a wider range of problems to a larger number of users. This is
especially important to our students, who will have far greater access to modern
X-ray instrumentation than they do at present. In addition, most of the
"difficult" problems will be amenable to solution on such an instrument. Some
will remain, for example the existence of only microcrystals, and these will be
addressed at the APS facility. The APS facility is also used for macromolecular
crystallography. The requested CCD detector will enhance and upgrade the current
capabilities of the beam line operated by the Collaborative Access Team formed
by Northwestern University in collaboration with DuPont de Nemours &amp; Co. and
The Dow Chemical Co. (DND-CAT). At present, there are no facilities for
macromolecular crystallography at the DND-CAT beam line. The proposed two-
dimensional data collection instrument will be mounted on a kinematic table that
will have built-in capabilities to accommodate a CCD detector. The necessary
computer hardware to operate the detector and to process data on-site are also
part of the proposed facility. Indeed, these complementary facilities will
provide a truly one-of-kind learning environment for both students and faculty.
Personnel from the Department of Chemistry and the Department of Biochemistry,
Molecular Biology, and Cell Biology on the Evanston Campus and the Department of
Molecular Pharmacology and Biological Chemistry of the Medical School Campus in
Chicago will interact with both academic and industrial scientists from a
variety of fields.