* 9601995
* Early Labor Market Careers of Black, White, and Hispanic    Women
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/1996,07/31/1998
* Marta Tienda, National Opinion Research Center
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 07/31/1998
* USD 170,053.00

This is a study of the early labor market careers of black, white, and Hispanic
women. Although the growing volume of research about the school-to-work
transition based on the experiences of young men has generated several new
insights and questioned previous conclusions, many of these new insights will
have to be qualified to account for the experiences of women. The overarching
objective of this project is to identify the factors conducive to achievement of
mature work careers of young women during the 1980s and early 1990s. The 1980s
are distinctive in U.S. economic history because they represent a period of
rising inequality and increased returns to skills. Educational attainments of
men and women have converged during the past three decades and are near parity
for many demographic groups. For young adults, gender differences in wages also
narrowed. However, race and ethnic differences in education and earnings
persisted during the 1980s, and for some groups even widened. This research aims
to amplify and re-direct an ongoing program of research on employment
experiences of minority populations from its current focus on males toward the
early work careers of young women. The study will analyze 15 years of the
National Longitudinal Survey of Youth, a nationally representative longitudinal
survey which includes oversamples of black and Hispanic youth who were aged
14-21 in 1979. Researchers will characterize the early labor force experiences
of black, Hispanic and white women during the 1980s and early 1990s by
addressing three general objectives: (1) to document the timing, nature and
determinants of young women's early labor market activity, and to evaluate the
returns to early experience on subsequent employment and wages; (2) to assess
the influence of adolescent employment activity on school continuation decisions
of young women; and (3) to document the prevalence, nature, and determinants of
labor market instability, and to assess its influence in the achie vement of
stable labor market careers during young adulthood. In developing the requisite
empirical models, the researchers will pursue a fourth objective that is more
methodological in character, namely, (4) to assess the direction and magnitude
of bias due to selective sorting and unobserved heterogeneity on the estimates
of returns to school and work experience. Hypotheses to be tested suggest that
there are moderate to strong linkages between early work careers, school
continuation decisions, and later adult labor market outcomes. In particular,
(1) adolescent work experiences may have lasting effects on young adult
outcomes; (2) under some circumstances (i.e., excessive weekly hours during
periods of school enrollment), adolescent employment can truncate educational
attainment even as youth accumulate work experience; (3) extremely unstable
youth employment experiences that involve frequent visits to jobless states (as
opposed to merely frequent job changes) slow the rate of entry to stable
employment; and (4) the character and consequences of employment instability
differ between men and women. Given the current high levels of women's labor
force participation, research on the early careers of women will contribute
greatly to our understanding of the American labor market. This project is
fundamental research in at least three of the social contexts identified by the
Human Capital Initiative: education, workplace, and disadvantage. Thus it will
provide information that can improve policy decisions aimed at maximizing the
value of the nation's human resources.