* 9601066
* Support for Computerization and Stabilization of            Archaeological Collections at the Fort Burgwin Research     Center
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1999
* Michael Adler, Southern Methodist University
* Continuing Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/1999
* USD 72,761.00

The Fort Brugwin research center was established in 1956 and is a permanent
research and education facility operated by Southern Methodist University and
located outside Taos, New Mexico. Its central focus is on archaeological
research and it has for many years conducted summer field schools which focus on
sites located in the northern Rio Grande region of New Mexico. Excavated
materials are curated at the center and collection holdings include over
1,000,000 cataloged objects from prehistoric and historic contexts in the Taos
region. Associated materials include a catalog card inventory of collection
holdings (22,000 cards) and approximately 45,000 pages of documentation,
including unpublished excavation reports, field notes, maps and associated
individual photographs, negatives and slides relating to the collection and site
excavations. Because they are currently stored at Fort Burgwin in a non-
environmentally controlled area, they are subject to potential deterioration and
destruction. The data are not computerized and very difficult to use. This NSF
grant will serve to remedy the situation. The materials will be moved to
Southern Methodist University and rehoused in a controlled environment. The
accessibility of these resources will then be enhanced by transferring
collection documentation and photographic materials to microfilm and electronic
formats. The collection catalog will be computerized and microfilms, CD-ROM
discs and the computerized catalog inventory will be made available at SMU and
Fort Burgwin and several other facilities. Eventually these data will be made
available electronically to all interested researchers. The Fort Burgwin
archaeological materials are important because they document the rise of complex
cultures in the Southwestern U.S. Covering a span of thousands of years, they
can be used to trace the change from a small band hunting and gathering form of
social organization through the introduction of domestic plants and animals to
the development of social entities which organized peoples on a tribal level.
The materials also shed light on how people at a simple level of technology
coped successfully with a harsh and unpredictable semiarid environment.
Archaeological materials are only as useful as the documentation which
accompanies them and therefore these records must be carefully preserved. To
conduct effective research it is necessary to know what collections contain and
where specific artifacts are located. To do this, computerization is necessary.
This project is important because it will both preserve important records and
make information rapidly available to researchers.