* 9601262
* Engineered Cementitious Composites for Ductile R/C Columns
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/1996,09/30/1999
* Victor Li, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Vijaya Gopu
* 09/30/1999
* USD 124,433.00

Serious damages in buildings were reported in the disastrous earthquake which
occurred in Kobe, Japan on January 17, 1995. Those damages has raised concern on
the design of columns. Specifically, the adequacy of the current design code in
preventing brittle failure of columns is called into question. This problem is
not limited to the Japanese building code (AIJ 1989) but also extends to the US
code (ACI 1995). Both codes are constructed on similar fundamental concept, in
which structural collapse is prevented by ensuring ductility in structures under
excessive seismic load by means of closely arranged transverse reinforcement.
However, structural damage observed in Kobe revealed that transverse
reinforcement does not necessarily provide the elements with sufficient
ductility, and that further design consideration is necessary to enhance seismic
safety. The Advanced Material Research Laboratory at the University of Michigan
has developed super ductile cementitious composites with ultimate tensile strain
capacity over 5%. These engineered cementitious composites (ECC) have been
applied to shear beams and beam-column joints. The initial experimental
investigations demonstrated that ECCs contribute extensively to enhancing
structural performance especially in terms of ductility. It is reasonable to
expect that the application of ECCs could lead to substantial improvement in
ductility of columns synergistic with transverse reinforcement, resulting in the
reduction of seismic risks. This project is aimed at establishing the proper
design of a ECC material specifically for use in weak columns. The research
involves analytic components on seismic design of structures with ECC columns,
as well as experimental verification of ECC and ECC column response.
Applications of ductile cementitious composite and its design procedure to other
critical structural elements for improved seismic safety of buildings and civil
infrastructures will be investigated. This is a project supported under the
second year program of NSF initiative or `Composite and Hybrid Structures`,
NSF-94-154.