* 9601048
* U.S.-Australia Cooperative Research: Chromophore-Quencher   Complexes for Studies in Photochemical Redox Splitting
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2000
* Thomas Meyer, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* W. Y. B. Chang
* 08/31/2000
* USD 32,750.00

9601048 Meyer This award, for a duration of three years, partially supports a
cooperative research activity between Dr. Thomas J. Meyer of the Department of
Chemistry at the University of North Carolina and Dr. F. Richard Keene of the
Department of Molecular Sciences at James Cook University of North Queensland.
The funds will primarily be used to support the travel expenses yearly for two
graduate students from the University of North Carolina to spend two months in
Dr. Keene's laboratory. The project focus is the design, preparation and
exploitation of molecular systems which take advantage of new techniques
developed at James Cook University. The new synthetic methodology allows the
preparation of ruthenium complexes incorporating three different bidentate
ligands. Using separate and overlapping electronic transitions involving each of
the three ligands, molecules will be developed which absorb light from the UV
through the visible and into the near-infrared. The collaborative development of
novel chromatographic protocols will allow the preparation of molecular
assemblies incorporating these antenna chromophores and energy transfer
quenchers in a spatially defined manner, with an eye toward practicality in
light to chemical energy conversion. The collaboration builds upon the expertise
of Dr. Keene's laboratory which has developed synthetic techniques utilized in
the manipulation of isomeric octahedral complexes and the North Carolina group
under Dr. Meyer with expertise in molecular design and photophysical
characterization. The combination of the two group's strengths should contribute
to advances in understanding the conversion of light to chemical energy. The
work in Australia is supported through the Department of Industry, Science and
Tourism (DIST).