* 9601399
* Shape Determinants of Protein Structure and Function:  A New Approach Based on Ray-Representation Methodology
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/1996,03/15/1999
* Michael Prisant, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Gilna
* 03/15/1999
* USD 331,847.00

Questions of chemical reactivity can often be cast as questions of molecular
geometry. In particular, space filling models are often invoked to rationalize
the chemical behavior of proteins. Some of the physio-chemical properties which
have been treated by geometric methods include: packing density, folding
energetics, and molecular recognition. New methods are presented - based on the
idea of the ray representation - for manipulating molecular shapes and computing
their geometric properties. The ray representation formalism provides a unified
means of dealing with geometric issues in molecular modeling. Computation of
ray-representations for use in molecular analysis were initially accomplished on
special purpose computers in the Principal Investigator's laboratory. However it
has been recently shown that molecular ray-reps can be computed with high speed
on general purpose single and multi-processor work-stations. The proposed work
will further develop ray-representation techniques for the study of proteins
structure and function. Three separate areas of research will be pursued. First,
algorithmic enhancements to rayrepresentation calculations will be studied.
There will be particular focus on improvements in accuracy and speed. General
purpose tools based on ray-casting algorithms will be developed for use in
molecular modeling. Second, working with ray-representations, the details of
building space-filling models for predictive analysis of protein physio-chemical
properties will be studied. In particular, models will be calibrated with
respect to prediction of water bearing cavities and surface solvation
potentials. A survey of protein packing properties based on high resolution data
will be undertaken. Third, simulations will consider the role of cavity dynamics
in protein ligand uptake.