* 9601351
* Visual Control of Posture Within the Normal Range of Motion
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1996,02/29/2000
* Thomas Stoffregen, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing grant
* Rodney R. Cocking
* 02/29/2000
* USD 194,605.00

9601351 STOFFREGEN Most people don't have to think about standing up; we just do
it and are very successful at it. We are not aware of our stance, so much so
that the average person is unaware that s/he sways very slowly back and forth
1-2 inches. The control of posture, unconscious for most of us, is a critical
issue for many people. People with neurological problems sometimes have unusual
postural motion, or increased instability. In addition, postural instability is
a cause of falling in elderly persons. This can have catastrophic effects, since
it often leads to broken hips and lengthy hospitalization. At the beginning of
life, toddlers fall frequently in the process of learning to stand and walk. How
does postural control work? A common belief is that postural motion is perceived
by the inner ear (the vestibular system). However, scientists have learned that
vision plays an important role in the perception and control of our own
movement. This is most clear to people at Omnimax or Imax theaters, in which
visual stimulation causes a powerful feeling of self-motion. This visual-based
feeling of self motion is critical in state-of-the- art flight simulators used
in civilian and military aviation. This research will investigate relations
between vision and the control of ordinary standing posture. People will stand
inside a "moving room", a large box mounted on wheels and moved back and forth
under computer control. The moving room does not have a floor; subjects stand on
the concrete floor of the laboratory. Thus, motion of the room produces only
visual stimulation. The visual stimulation is similar to what we normally create
during ordinary postural sway in stationary rooms. Earlier research has shown
that visual motion can cause people to sway, fall down, or develop motion
sickness. But that research has used very large visual motions, sometimes
several feet, motions which are not representative of the visual stimulation
caused by ordinary sway, in which the body moves less than two inches. This
research will investigate relations between vision and posture when visual
stimulation is nearly identical to the natural stimulation caused by our own
movements. Motion of the participant will be compared to motion of the room to
determine how closely the body responds to different kinds of visual motion. A
fuller understanding of the control of ordinary postural sway should help us to
develop interventions to prevent falls in the elderly. This research also has
promise for understanding the development of stance in children, particularly in
special populations, such as children with physical or mental disabilities.
Finally, this research will help us to understand perception and control of body
motion in general, so that we can design better, more effective simulations of
self-motion, especially in the area of flight training. ***