* 9601600
* Acquisition of a Computer Imaging System for Geological and Biological Research
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/1996,07/31/1997
* Bart De Stasio, LAWRENCE UNIVERSITY OF WISCONSIN
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 07/31/1997
* USD 61,064.00

Instrumentation requested in this proposal will provide a comprehensive
computer imaging and analysis system for use by the faculty and students of
Lawrence University in multiple research projects. The proposed system will be
based on a Macintosh central processing unit (CPU) and will consist of software
and a number of peripherals that will allow for collection, storage, analysis,
and communication of experimental results. Such a system will enable
investigators in a biology and geology tm utilize cuffing edge technology to
enhance and extend existing and planned research programs. The CPU for the
proposed system will have a 2GB harddrive with 768MB RAM. A 21 inch high
resolution color monitor will be used with the CPU. A graphics card and DOS
compatibility card will be added to the CPU. Data collection peripherals will
include a digital color camera for field work and a CCD camera for use with a
compound and stereomicroscopes (these microscopes will be dedicated for computer
imaging use only), a flatbed color scanner, a projection-slide color scanner,
and a gel scanner. Data storage peripherals will include a magneto-optical drive
and ten rewritable, magneto-optical cartridges. Various types of software will
be used for data collection and analysis as well as communication of research
results. Peripherals to be used for production of various media for
communication of research results will include a projection slide printer, a
laser printer, a large-document color printer, and a photographic-quality color
printer. Several investigators engaged in different types of research would
benefit from the use of a computer imaging system. In biological research,
applications will range from ecological field studies to molecular biology. In
ecological field studies, digital image capture and morphometric analysis will
enable quantification of size and shape variations within Lake Winnebago prey
fish populations. In molecular biology applications, densi tometry will be used
to quantify the amounts of myosin mRNA in wild type versus mutant C. elegans.
Another research program will use densitometry for quantification of gene
induction in chick embryos treated with the growth factor, bFGF. Additionally, a
number of future research applications will be possible, such- as the use of
morphometric analysis of histological preparations from physiological research
involving sex specific circadian rhythms in crickets as well as from cell
biological research involving in vitro cell culture. As is the case with
biological research, the requested equipment will have a wide variety of
applications in geological research. Applications will range from landscape to
microscopic scale. At the landscape scale, a specific use in ongoing research
will be to analyze satellite and aerial images to map the distribution of late
Quaternary landforms in eastern Wisconsin. At the microscopic scale, computer
imaging will be used to quantitatively analyze microstructures in deformed rocks
from the upper midwest.