* 9601417
* Ethnonationalism and Democratization in the Russian         Federation
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1996,12/31/1999
* Gail Lapidus, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 12/31/1999
* USD 195,739.00

Of all the challenges in post-communist transitions, none has been more
difficult to manage than the resurgence of ethnonationalism. The unraveling of
Yugoslavia, Czechoslovakia, and the USSR speaks of the risks of opening the
political arena. The rise of ethnic conflicts underscores how easily claims for
sovereignty can spread across groups and regions, and from central to regional
and local governments. Even when the breakup of the state has involved
relatively little violence, as in the USSR, the conflicts raise serious
questions about whether multiethnic successor states can survive the post-
communist transition intact. In Russia, many of the same problems that dissolved
the Soviet Union now challenge the federal government. Liberal reformers have
come to see ethnonationalism as a major threat to democratization -- inimical to
the spirit of tolerance and the concern for individual rights that liberal
democracy requires. Yet the level and character of ethnonational mobilization in
non-Russian territories is far from clear and its connection to support for
democratization even less so. This project examines the nature and level of
ethnonationalism and support for democratization in three regions of the Russian
Federation: Northern Ossetia, Tatarstan and Sakha. Mass surveys will be
conducted and contextual data will be attached to all individual level
responses. The project will produce a dataset of 3,000 individual interviews to
be archived at the completion of the research project.