* 9601664
* Acquisition and Development of High Resolution Digital      Imaging Facility for the Investigation of Cytoskeletal and  Membrane Protein Molecular Dynamics
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2001
* Joel Rosenbaum, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 08/31/2001
* USD 608,316.00

Project Summary Instrumentation is requested to support the interactive research
efforts of the four laboratories comprising the Yale Cell Motility and
Cytoskeletal Group. This proposal is aimed at complementing ongoing
collaborative research efforts and extending our technical capabilities in the
area of molecular dynamics and confocal laser scanning microscopy. Specifically,
we have requested funding for acquisition of a state-of-the-art confocal laser
scanning microscope and requisite components for design and construction of a
high resolution digital imaging system for studying molecular dynamics. This
system will implement: fluorescence photobleaching and photoactivation analyses,
single beam gradient laser trapping, cell ablation and quantitative low light
level imaging of fluorescent probes in real time. Research activities
facilitated by this award will include investigation of the molecular dynamics
of neuronal growth and target recognition (Forscher); molecular and functional
analyses of actin and microtubule-based molecular motors (Mooseker, Wolenski and
Rosenbaum). The requested instrumentation will also significantly augment the
research and training mission of the Department of Biology's Training and
Research Facility for Imaging. This includes advanced courses in optical methods
and their use in molecular cell biology at both undergraduate and graduate
levels.