* 9601772
* Acquisition of a 200KV Microprocessor-Controlled            Transmission Electron Microscope
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1998
* Marc Kastner, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Carmen I. Huber
* 08/31/1998
* USD 320,250.00

9601772 Kastner A high-performance transmission electron microscope will be
acquired by the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. The instrument will be
part of the Shared Experimental Facility (SEF) of the Center for Materials
Science and Engineering at MIT. The SEF serves a large research community both
inside and outside MIT. The instrument will provide several capabilities
required for current research that are not currently available, including
convergent beam electron diffraction with good simultaneous microanalytical
capabilities, and low dose and cryo-microscopy. Major research projects that
will use the new electron microscope include: the study of nanostructured
polymers, synthesis and characterization of ultrafine conducting oxides,
oxidation and sulfidation of metals and alloys, characterization of
superconducting oxide films, and design of GeSi superlattice detectors. %%% The
new electron microscope will benefit not only researchers at MIT but also at
other universities and industries in the Greater Boston area. The instrument
will also be used in undergraduate and graduate courses, and in MITOs outreach
program for minority students from local schools. It will thus allow for
research training of future scientists and engineers from diverse backgrounds in
current techniques of electron microscopy and state-of-the-art instrumentation.
***