* 9601472
* U.S.-India Cooperative Research: Sea Breeze Convection,     Storm Surge Modeling and the Land/Ocean Processes AssociatedWith the Indian Ocean
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/1996,07/31/2000
* Leonard Pietrafesa, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 07/31/2000
* USD 57,903.00

Description: This award is to support a collaborative research between Drs.
Sethu Raman and Leonard Pietrafesa of the North Carolina State University
(NCSU), Raleigh, and Dr. P.A. Aswathanarayana of the Indian Institute of
Technology, Madras (IITM), India. These scientists, in collaboration with the
Indian National Institute of Ocean Technology (NIOT) on the IITM campus, plan to
study Indian sea breezes, atmospheric convection along the see breeze front, and
to also study the storm surge processes along the East coast of India (Bay of
Bengal). In the first part, the scientists plan to investigate the horizontal
extent of the sea breezes in relation to land-sea temperature differences and
the ambient wind, and to study the formation of deep convection along the sea
breeze front and its dependence on other factors such as land use pattern and
upper air stability. They plan to primarily use a hydrostatic numerical model
developed at NCSU and transferred to the IITM. This model will be extended to a
3-dimension state and used with atmospheric observations in India that is taken
every three hours, and dating back for 30 years. The model may be supplemented
with a non-hydrostatic model as needed. In the second part, the scientists will
utilize a storm surge model available at the NIOT and based on Sea, Lake and
Overland Surges from Hurricanes (SLOSH) model originally developed in the United
States. They will develop methods to prescribe meteorological forces that drive
the ocean model, and will also use a simple hydrodynamic model developed at NCSU
and used in North Carolina during the occurrence of Hurricane Emily in 1993,
with satisfactory results, in predicting this tropical storm surge. Scope: This
award is to allow cooperation between a U.S. team that is quite active in
modeling various atmospheric-sea-land phenomena, and an Indian team at the
Madras campus that has excellent analytical capability as well as access to
extensive data sources from numerous Indian research organizations. These
governmental organizations operate radar, satellite, and other atmospheric and
ocean measurement instrumentation on a continuous basis. The research is of
significant scientific benefit to the United States and India, and is of
particular importance to the meteorological activities of the Indian authorities
in predicting severe climatic and weather conditions. The project involves
eminent scientists and graduate students on both sides.