* 9601465
* Latent Network Analysis of Central Processing
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1996,07/31/2000
* Richard Schweickert, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Guy Van Orden
* 07/31/2000
* USD 195,278.00

9601465 SCHWEICKERT Someone performing a task such as searching a screen for a
symbol of a certain size and shape must carry out mental processes, such as
perceiving, remembering, and deciding. In some situations the processes must be
carried out in a certain order, for example when the output of one process is
the input to another. In other situations, there may be several ways in which
the processes could be ordered, for example, if two responses are to be made and
there is a choice about which response to make first. These choices sometimes
lead to scheduling problems. Major scheduling conflicts arise from competition
for space in working memory, where information relevant to an ongoing task is
held for a short time. All evidence points to the conclusion that working memory
space is very limited, so that usually only one process can use it actively at a
time. For example, there is evidence that mental arithmetic cannot be carried
out simultaneously with a search of memory. This research will explore the
possibility that certain processes can use working memory simultaneously. The
main processes of interest are those that prepare or set up the working memory
space for processes that are immanent. These preparation processes operate
behind the scenes, so to speak, and may not make intensive demands for space
themselves. Preparatory processes of special interest are those that schedule
the upcoming processes. One hypothesis to be tested is whether preparation of
upcoming processes can be carried out simultaneously with other ongoing
processing. This research would not be feasible if it were not possible to
figure out whether covert mental processes are executed concurrently or
sequentially, and, if they are sequential, what the order of execution is. A
methodology for doing this, Latent Network Theory, was developed in previous
research. It is based on reaction time and other performance measures. While
this research is fundamental in na ture, it will help us understand the
performance of humans in the sorts of speeded tasks that arise in all manner of
practical arenas, such as the operation of complex equipment, and the design of
those tasks (and the relevant equipment) so that they build on the capabilities
of the humans who will have to perform them. ***