* 9601285
* Allele Specific Gene Regulation in Maize Floral Organs
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1999
* Thomas Peterson, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 08/31/1999
* USD 372,000.00

9601285 Peterson The maize P gene encodes a Myb-homologous transcriptional
regulator of three genes for flavonoid pigment biosynthesis in certain maize
floral organs. The P-rr allele specifies pigmentation of both the kernel
pericarp and cob glumes, while the P-wr allele pigments the cob glumes but not
the kernel pericarps. The mechanism(s) leading to organ-specific expression of
the P-wr allele will be investigated. It has been found that both tissues
contain P-wr transcripts although the pericarps are colorless and the cob glumes
are red. It has also been determined that the proteins encoded by these two
alleles differ at two positions outside the Myb DNA binding domain and by a
truncation and replacement at the C-terminus. A particle-gun based transient
assay system will be used to determine which changes in the P-wr protein are
responsible for organ-specific expression. In addition to transient assays the
in vivo expression pattern of the P-wr allele will be studied by expressing the
P-wr cDNA in transgenic plants. It has been found that the P-wr locus contains a
repetitive DNA consisting of approximately 5 copies of a 12.6 kb DNA sequence
and the genomic organization of the locus will be further investigated. The
functional P-wr gene will be identified by the use of a Ds insertion. cDNA
clones from two additional P gene alleles will be sequenced and their
responsiveness to UFO, a trans-modifier of P-wr expression, will be studied. %%%
The results of this study will help to elucidate fundamental regulatory
mechanisms which produce specific patterns of gene expression during plant
development. ***