* 9601006
* Energy Functions for Spectroscopy and Dynamics Studies of   Proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1999
* Samuel Krimm, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 06/30/1999
* USD 285,000.00

9601006 Krimm A new and systematic method has been developed for optimizing
potential energy functions for molecular mechanics (MM) and molecular dynamics
(MD) studies of macromolecules. By analytically transforming scaled ab initio
force fields of conformers of model systems, an MM function is obtained that
reproduces the structures, energies, and vibrational frequencies of the ab
initio calculation. This is called a spectroscopically determined force field
(SDFF), and the approach has been successfully implemented for saturated
hydrocarbons. This proposal will develop an SDFF for the polypeptide chain of
proteins, based on analogous ab initio calculations of conformers of dipeptides.
In this process, an explicit hydrogen-bond component of the energy function will
be developed. This SDFF will be applied to MM, MD, and spectroscopic analyses of
proteins. *** The availability of more accurate energy functions for proteins
will have a major impact on areas from structural molecular biology to
biotechnology. The significance of this development is that one will be able to
predict physical properties of proteins with much greater confidence in their
reliability than is possible at present. This means that knowledge will be
advanced of how proteins interact with each other and with other molecules,
which is the basis for understanding a wide range of biological processes. %%%