* 9601840
* Automated DNA Sequencer
* BIO,DBI
* 07/15/1996,06/30/1998
* Paul Schedl, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 06/30/1998
* USD 103,000.00

During the past ten years DNA sequencing has become one of the major
cornerstones of biological and biomedical research. Although more than 40
research groups on the Princeton campus must sequence DNA as part of their
ongoing research programs, the procedures currently used by these groups are
inefficient, time consuming, and increasingly antiquated. For this reason, the
Department of Molecular Biology is requesting funds for the purchase of
automated DNA sequencing instrumentation. This instrumentation includes the
following items: ABI Prism Automated DNA Sequencer, Model 377-01, including
installation and on-site training, data collection software, Macintosh power
Mac, two (2) Gel Cassettes, top and bottom gel pouring mixtures (1 set), and
user manual Sequencing software module, including sequencing analysis software,
Manual and Chemistry Guide, two (2) 36 Well Sharkstooth combs, and the
sequencing installation kit Fast sequencing or high resolution GeneScan glass
plates/ spacers kit, including 36cm W-T-R Glass plates (2 front/2 back), and
36cm Spacers HP 1200c Printer GeneAmp PCR System 9600, including user manual,
Quick Reference Manual, Instructional Video, Consumables Start-up kit Auto
Assembler, 5-pak, user installed, includes Factura and Auto Assembler
Application software, tutorial, User and Reference Manuals, On-line animation
software, reference mouse pad Sequence Navigator 5-pak DNA and Protein Sequence
Comparison Software, including Factura and Sequence Navigator application
software, tutorial, User and Reference Manuals This instrumentation will be
housed in an existing Departmental Service Facility, and it will be operated by
specially trained personnel in this facility. The daily operation of the
instrumentation will be under the direct supervision of the Syn/Seq Facility
Director, Mr. S. Kyin. The automated DNA sequencing instrumentation in the
Syn/Seq Facility will be used to achieve four major goals. The first is to
provide efficien t and rapid DNA sequencing. The second is to provide a DNA
sequencing service that will benefit the entire Princeton biological and
biomedical research community. This will include not only all members of the
Molecular Biology Department, but also biological and biomedical research
scientists in several other Departments on campus. These departments include
Chemistry, Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Physics and Material Sciences. The
third is to substantially reduce the time and effort that scientists and
technicians must now devote to DNA sequencing. The aim here is to enable members
of our research community to direct their efforts along other potentially more
productive, technically difficult and/or innovative lines of investigation.
Fourth, the DNA Sequencing Facility will also be incorporated in our
undergraduate training programs.