* 9601555
* Energy Conservation as a Form of Technological Citizenship: Implication for the Energy Future
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1996,02/28/1997
* Andrew Zimmerman, Individual Award
* Standard Grant
* Linda Layne
* 02/28/1997
* USD 15,000.00

This planning grant will enable the investigator to develop further the concepts
and methods to guide an evaluation of energy conservation as a form of
technological citizenship, and support conclusions about the roles lay citizens
could perform in shaping the energy future. The long term research goal is to
formulate strategies for energy citizenship based on environmental, political
and social values consistent with a sustainable energy future and democratic
participation in the governance of the energy system. In this planning period,
the following conceptual areas will be further developed: characterization of
the energy system as a political system or system of governance; consideration
of how the technological citizenship framework could be adapted to studying the
beliefs, attitudes, values and behaviors of energy users; compilation of the
range of meanings which are given to the practice of energy conservation;
incorporation of sociopsychological knowledge about the relationship between
attitudes and behavior into the technological citizenship model; and an
elaboration of what is known about processes of energy choice and energy
transitions. The methodological tasks to be undertaken involve development of
survey instruments and implementation plans for two surveys: a survey of key
informants; and a national survey of energy users. The first survey would be
relatively unstructured and assist in identifying areas of knowledge, attitudes
and behavior most directly associated with the notion of energy citizenship.
Planning would identify the appropriate sample, important questions, and weight
to be given to this input versus other input. The second survey would be more
structured; the planning phase of its design involves answering questions such
as how to operationalize indexes of `energy citizenship;` what sample is
appropriate; what socioeconomic variables to include for individual and
institutional respondents; and how to undertake the analysis. Results of the
planning grant should include several presentations and publications.