* 9601572
* Acquisition of a Widebore 500 MHz Solid-State Spectrometer  for the Penn State NMR Facility
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1999
* Karl Mueller, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Joan M. Frye
* 08/31/1999
* USD 450,000.00

University Park This award from the Academic Research Infrastructure (ARI)
Program will assist the Department of Chemistry at the Pennsylvania State
University (PSU) acquire a widebore 500 MHz NMR spectrometer. This equipment
will enhance the solid-state chemistry and materials science research at PSU in
a number of areas including the following: (1) synthesis and applications of
novel boron-containing polymers (2) design, synthesis and characterization of
microporous, mesoporous, and macroporous materials (3) atomic connectivity and
local structure in a variety of lamellar and microporous materials (4) amorphous
alkali phosphates and aluminophosphates, crystalline zeolites and
aluminophosphates and solid-state biomolecules (5) amorphous materials and
surfaces (6) characterization of catalytic materials, and (7) elucidation of
mechanisms and intermediates in catalytic systems Nuclear Magnetic Resonance
(NMR) spectroscopy is the most powerful tool available to chemists for the
elucidation of the structure of molecules. It is used to identify unknown
substances, characterize specific arrangements of atoms within molecules, and to
study the dynamics of interactions between molecules in solution. Access to
state-of-the-art NMR spectrometry is essential to chemists who are carrying out
frontier research. The results from these NMR studies are useful in the areas
such as polymers, catalysis, and in biology.