* 9601991
* Learning in an Invertebrate
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1996,07/31/2000
* M. E. Bitterman, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Byers
* 07/31/2000
* USD 179,000.00

ABSTRACT PI: Bitterman PROPOSAL NUMBER: 9601991 Learning in an Invertebrate
Although invertebrates comprise more than 95% of all animal species, there has
been almost no systematic study of their intelligence. Few invertebrate species
actually are suitable for the purpose, which requires that they be inexpensive
and abundant, live well in or near the laboratory, and have manageable sensory,
motor, and motivational properties. The investigators have been studying
honeybees, highly evolved invertebrates which do meet those requirements and
which are also of great economic importance (in honey production and the
fertilization of crops). For the most part, they use individual foragers that
come of their own accord to the laboratory, where they work for a highly
concentrated sugar solution to take back to their hives- a solution that is
preferred to the nectar provided by flowers in neighboring fields. The
experiments carried out thus far point to close similarities in the learning of
honeybees and vertebrates, which are surprising in view of the vast differences
in brain structure and the remoteness of the evolutionary relationship. (The two
lines of animals have evolved independently over a half-a-billion years from a
simple common ancestor that seems to have had hardly any brain at all). If the
similarities are to be understood in terms of random genetic variation in
structure and natural selection based on similar environmental demands, those
demands must be general indeed, since the environments vary widely in detail. It
is possible, however, that evolution is a more organized process than is
traditionally assumed and the avenues of change are more limited. As the tasks
set for the animals become increasingly complex, the investigators can expect to
find differences in performance that reflect the absence in A honeybees of
certain advanced vertebrate capabilities-differences that should further their
understanding both of the common and of the a dvanced capabilities. The present
phase of the research deals with questions about the nature of reward;
competition among concurrent sensory inputs; the relation between short-term and
long-term memory; and the inhibitory control of behavior.