* 9601987
* Sustainable Knowledge About the Global Environment
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1996,07/19/1999
* Clark Miller, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 07/19/1999
* USD 325,658.00

Effective international policymaking about global change requires `sustainable`
scientific knowledge that can 1) promote shared and robust understandings of
nature and society across disparate cultures and political demands, and 2)
create a long-term balance between human and natural systems while accomodating
social and environmental change. The task is further complicated by the
proliferation of new international expert bodies and advisory processes in which
many domestic tools used to incorporate scientific knowledge into policy
decisions are weak or absent. Problems of data quality and standardization, and
related issues of trust and accountability, are intensified in the arena of
global policymaking. To assess these difficulties and assist in their
consideration, this project undertakes a comparative study of the way scientific
knowledge develops and is used in four international treaty frameworks: climate
change, ozone depletion, endangered species, and biodiversity. Preliminary work
will also be done on conceptual underpinnings for research on the environmental
dimensions of two further treaties: NAFTA and GATT. In testing and developing
their theoretical position on the co-production of knowledge and social order,
leading to new forms of politics and science, the investigators expect to refine
concepts -- including participation and governance -- currently used in
different ways in the literatures of science studies, international relations,
and environmental policy. The study focuses on two distinct but interconnected
questions: one concerning understanding in the social sciences about the
processes by which scientific knowledge and social order evolve and sustain each
other in international environmental politics, and another asking how this
understanding should influence future institutions and processes for undertaking
and disseminating science relevant to international policy. It examines
knowledge production in each of the regimes, investigating: the development of
international expert committees; procedures for standardizing assumptions,
parameters, techniques, and methods; the incorporation of knowledge into new
market arrangements; legal decisions involving scientific knowledge; and public
participation in expert institutions. The project team uses a variety of
qualitative research methods, including archival research, textual
interpretation, legal analysis, case studies, elite interviews, and participant
observation, in a cross-temporal and cross-sectoral comparison. As a cooperative
team, they will exchange information throughout the grant period and meet once
each summmer for intensive review. Advisors at Cornell and other institutions
will also provide critical guidance. The project will create and maintain an
archive of the materials relevant to each of the four treaty regimes, and make
an electronic index of archived materials available to interested outside users.
Project results will be presented at professional and policy meetings, and in
peer-reviewed journals as well as more widely circulated publications.