* 9601068
* Acquisition of a Uranium-Daughter Laboratory at the Berkeley Geochronology Center
* NONE,NONE
* 11/01/1996,10/31/1997
* Kenneth Ludwig, Berkeley Geochronology Center
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 10/31/1997
* USD 167,879.00

With National Science Foundation support the Berkeley Geochronology Center will
purchase a state-of-the-art high abundance sensitivity thermal ionization mass
spectormeter(TIMS) with multiple collectors, to be used for Uranium series and
U-Th-Pb geochronology. The precision and small sample size required will permit
the system to analyze samples and address questions which are not possible using
more standard instrumentation. The techniques are particularly accurate in the
20,000 to 500,000 age range and it was during this period that many important
events, including the emergence of anatomically and behaviorally modern humans
occurred. Many sites which fall in this time period are undatable by the most
reliable methods - radiocarbon and argon-argon - and provision of this TIMS will
provide information of value not only to paleoanthropologists but to geologists,
geophysists and ecologists. These techniques can be applied to a range of
pedogenic material, speleothem or travertine carbonate, teeth/bones and volcanic
zircons. Many of these are present in paleoanthropological situations and the
ability to analyze teeth means that the techniques can be applied directly to
specimens of interest and are not limited to associated geological materials.
The Berkeley Geochronology Center will provide matching funds to construct a new
high-quality clean laboratory and a new TIMS laboratory. The resultant servicves
which these provide will have a direct and major benefit in a wide range of
sciences.