* 9601595
* Acquisition of Instrumentation for the Development of a     Protein Characterization Laboratory to Serve the Needs of   the Texas A&amp;M Scientific Community
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1999
* Thomas Baldwin, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Gregory K. Farber
* 07/31/1999
* USD 132,478.00

The purpose of this proposal is to establish the instrumentation base required
for initiating a protein chemistry laboratory to serve the needs of PIs involved
in protein research at Texas A&amp;M University. Texas A&amp;M has made a long
term commitment of $195,000/year to hire and retain an exceptional Ph.D. level
working director ($45K start ) as well as a senior (25K) and junior technician
(18K) to support the laboratory. The remainder of the annual budget will be for
supplies and maintenance ($107K). Sufficient space has been provided in the
department of chemistry so that the established Laboratory for Biological Mass
Spectrometry and the proposed Protein Chemistry Laboratory will located in
contiguous space allowing a MALDI mass spectrometer to be shared between the
facilities. The Ph.D. working director of the biological mass spectrometry
laboratory, which is already serving over 100 PIs on campus, will be
instrumental in training the Ph.D. level director of the Protein laboratory in
mass spectrometry to take advantages of the emerging mass spectrometric
characterization and sequencing methods. The new laboratory will be advertised
by seminars in various departments by the faculty director and by a home page on
the world wide web. The analysis of typical protein samples will be handled by
purchasing a ninhydrin-based Amino acid analyzer for protein and peptide
composition analysis as well as for concentration determinations and a protein
sequencer which utilizes phenylthiohydantoin (PTH) chemistry for sequencing
peptides of less than Ca thirty residues. The required separations capabilities
will be met initially by the purchase of a variable temperature HPLC fitted with
a dual wavelength UV-Vis recorder and a capillary zone electrophoresis set up.
These will be used for determining the number of chemically different
polypeptide chains in a given sample (after disulfide reduction and
denaturation) and for purification of samples which are not of the required
purity. The capillary zone electrophoresis set up is particularly important as
it can separate polypeptides that cannot be separated by routine RP-HPLC.
Classical SDS-PAGE / electroblotting technology will also be incorporated into
the Protein laboratory to allow PTH sequencing directly from a 1- or 2D-SDS PAGE
gel. Eventually peptide synthesis services will be offered, but only after the
research community at A&amp;M is pleased with protein sequencing and related
services which is where we are severely deficient. Our logic here is that
peptide synthesis can be accomplished with outside vendors and in collaboration
with several research laboratories with expertise, although this situation is
still not ideal. When the time comes the Kelly Laboratory will donate their 1995
vintage ABI peptide synthesizer to the Protein Chemistry laboratory in return
for weekend privileges. This instrument is currently being utilized by several
groups whose use would be best accommodated under the auspices of the laboratory
for protein chemistry. In addition to handling and delegating responsibilities
for routine samples (70% effort) the director of the laboratory will be
responsible for bringing emerging technology into the laboratory after
consulting with the faculty advisory committee which oversees the laboratory
(15% effort). We envision significant interaction between the working directors
of the mass spectrometry and protein laboratories, particularly with regard to
making edge of the envelope methods available to non-experts. The director in
collaboration with the faculty advisory committee would also be responsible for
advertising and teaching mini-courses periodically to train undergraduate,
graduate students and post-doctorals how to best use the technology available in
this facility(l5% effort). Laboratories who make extensive use of the facility
may elect to have their graduate students become more intimately familiar with
the opera tion of the equipment m a supervised manner. As a result of this
policy in the mass spectrometry laboratory the graduate students at A&amp;M
understand these techniques well enough that there now is a walkup MAIDI
instrument for their use. The long term objective is to build a superb protein
chemistry laboratory which serves the needs of A&amp;M faculty in a variety of
departments interested in various aspects of protein chemistry. An important
feature of such a facility is that the faculty, graduate students and post-
doctorals in a wide range of disciplines become intimately familiar with
classical and emerging technology for protein characterization. In addition
students and faculty in various departments end up talking to one another often
leading to substantive collaborations between research groups.