* 9602595
* Renovation of Research Facilities in Geology/Biology,       Brooklyn College
* O/D,OIA
* 11/15/1996,10/31/1998
* Stephen Aja, CUNY Brooklyn College
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 10/31/1998
* USD 188,885.00

Brooklyn College of The City University of New York is the recipient of ARI
funds for the renovation of the science building, Ingersoll Hall. Constructed 59
years ago and never renovated, the structure is home to the Departments of
Biology and Geology. This project is the second phase of the College's
renovation effort to improve research facilities focusing on environmental
science. Specifically research laboratories in the Geology Department, devoted
to the study of clay minerals and of benthic invertebrate ecology and
paleoecology will be renovated to help link the functioning of the Aquatics
Institute and Environmental Sciences laboratory. The bridge will provide a basis
for mounting a unified research position within both departments with respect to
important local and national environmental issues. This linkage will also
improve the departments' research position in the more traditional areas of
paleobiology and clay mineralogy. Renovations include modernizing three
laboratories by upgrading electrical and plumbing services, installing new fume
hoods, and replacing lab benches with new ones. An old preparation room will be
converted into a clean room, and the rock and sediment processing lab will be
upgraded. Once completed, the renovated space will contain aquarium facilities
for investigating Hudson River benthic ecology; areas for cleaning, preparation,
study, and storage of invertebrate specimens and sediments; and a satellite room
housing computer and analytic tools. This project accomplishes several goals: 1)
provides an infrastructure for novel research interconnections between
geologists and biologists; 2) improves effectiveness and efficiency of research;
3) provides facilities needed to support studies on Hudson River benthic
environments: and 4) consolidates the ability to support meaningful graduate
student research and research training. Located in an urban setting, the
institution serves a large population of minority students. Providing first
class research facilities for such students constitutes an effective means of
attracting the best of these students, promoting higher quality, and ensuring
their competitiveness in the evolving marketplace in the earth and environmental
sciences.