* 9602433
* The Telecommunications and Networking Engineering Technology Education Project
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/1996,12/31/1998
* Chandra Roychoudhuri, Springfield Technical Community College
* Continuing Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 12/31/1998
* USD 400,000.00

The Telecommunications and Networking Engineering Technology Education Project
Springfield Technical Community College (STCC) is undertaking an Advanced
Technological Education (ATE) in Telecommunications and Networking Engineering
Technology Education. The project is a collaborative effort with STCC joined by
partners: the University of Connecticut, the University of Hartford (CT), and
the City of Springfield (MA) Public Schools. Its purpose is to develop an
integrated curriculum, a teacher training model, and a model laboratory which
meets the training needs of the telecommunications and networking industries in
the 21st century. Development of the project also includes the active
involvement of both private industry and other public sector agencies. STCC
currently offers highly successful programs in Electronic Systems Engineering
Technology, Computer Systems Engineering Technology, Laser Electro-Optics
Technology (which also includes photonics and fiber optics) and a variety of
other cutting-edge high technology programs. The project is developing a
national innovative model featuring traditional test equipment, evolving
equipment, a "virtual instrumentation" lab and simulation software to present to
students both real and simulated field experiences. Further, STCC is developing
articulation agreements with secondary schools and baccalaureate institutions,
providing instructors and facilities for teacher training workshops, evaluating
and assessing the project, and disseminating project results. The Project
includes a concerted effort to involve women and minorities as students in this
new technology offering.