* 9602664
* Benedict College Science Research Renovation (Relocation)   Project
* O/D,OIA
* 06/01/1997,11/30/1999
* Juanita Scott, Benedict College
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 11/30/1999
* USD 544,190.00

Benedict College, a Historically Black College in South Carolina, is the
recipient of ARI funds to renovate biology and chemistry research and research
training facilities. The Department of Biology and Physical Sciences has been
instrumental in producing under-represented scientists, and in order to sustain
this course, it is imperative that the physical infrastructure is improved.
Alumni Hall, a structure constructed in the mid 1960's, is home to the
department where the majority of the laboratories reside. Dispersed space
consisting of modified classrooms, shared between research and instructional
activities will be consolidated, relocated, and upgraded as designated research
laboratories. Funds will be used to reconfigure space, remove asbestos, upgrade
utility infrastructure, and install fume hood, casework and benches in the
building. The renovations are required to support research programs that
concentrate on molecular biology, genetics, biochemistry, and analytical and
environmental chemistry. Upon completion, this project will provide modern space
for instrumentation and technology to support present and future research and
training activities. Beneficiaries include five faculty members and their
students who will utilize five research laboratories, a research training
facility, and research support laboratories consisting of a cold room, a tissue
culture room, and storage space. Consolidating scattered space in a centralized
location will promote shared usage of equipment and facilities more effectively,
and facilitate collaborative projects. This project will increase the College's
potential to attract, retain and develop a high caliber of faculty; recruit and
retain high achieving students, and increase of number of minority students
entering and succeeding in graduate school, and subsequently pursuing research
as a career.