* 9602390
* An Innovative Approach for Advanced Technological Learning  in Distinctive Manufacturing
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1996,12/31/1998
* Rick Allison, Oklahoma State University
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 12/31/1998
* USD 600,000.00

Title: An Innovative Approach for Advanced Technological Learning in Distinctive
Manufacturing For employers to compete successfully in the increasingly complex,
technological, entrepreneurial global competition, they must have an ample
supply of high-performance technicians. The traditional educational approach
does not supply sufficient numbers of qualified employees to meet the demand. In
response, OSU-Okmulgee and its partners are reengineering technological
education to prepare technicians to add customer value in world-class,
competitive distinctive manufacturing firms. To build a larger base of more
competent technicians, the program is recruiting members of underrepresented
groups and other students who typically overlook career opportunities in
advanced manufacturing. The partnership consists of advanced technological
employers, educational institutions, national resource organizations, and Native
American tribes. The innovative approach infuses the content of a 90-semester-
credit-hour Associate in Applied Science degree into a set of systematic
learning experiences that occur in a real-world manufacturing environment to
form a holistic, simultaneous, synergistic learning program; demands mastery of
rigorous competencies in mathematics, science, and technology; ensures a
competent faculty by selecting capable candidates and professionally preparing
them to implement their roles in the new approach; recruits and capacitates
members of underrepresented groups; articulates the program across secondary and
vocational schools, associate degree and bachelor degree granting institutions;
and disseminates and communicates the project's deliverables and lessons
learned. The depth and breadth of this 90-semester-credit-hour Associate in
Applied Science degree program will prepare high-performance technicians for
distinctive manufacturing.