* 9602403
* ChemCore:  An Interdisciplinary Approach to Real-World      Laboratory Chemistry
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/1996,12/31/2002
* Mary O'Brien, Edmonds Community College
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Grushow
* 12/31/2002
* USD 440,137.00

In response to local needs, Edmonds Community College proposes a 42-month
curriculum development/pilot project impacting ca 250 participants. It 1)
reconfigure the 12.5-credit laboratories for general and organic chemistry as
project-based modules and 2) creates a new ChemCore curriculum, part of a
combined Associate of Technical Arts/Associate of Arts and Sciences Laboratory
Technician program. Developed in close cooperation with government and industry
through an advisory board, ChemCore would integrate the lab chemistry with 5 new
applied academics courses, 25 credits in all: instrumental analysis, information
technology, management, and tech writing/applied communications (2). The project
would also introduce a new laboratory setting simulating the tasks, customer
requests, on-the-job skills training, and working conditions of a commercial
laboratory performing chemical analyses; create a series of increasingly
sophisticated and open-ended requests for services to replace traditional
laboratory exercises; and use outside professionals offering demonstrations and
related instruction. The project targets high school recruits, pre-professional
science and engineering, Work Force Training, and other vocational students,
with special efforts to enroll women and students of color. Its principal goals
and objectives are to 1) develop an up-to-date, interdisciplinary, transferable
laboratory curriculum at EdCC; 2) attract additional chemistry students,
especially from underrepresented populations, through the appeal of applied
chemistry in real-world situations; 3) prepare students in a 2-year program with
the interdisciplinary knowledge, skills, and experience required for full-time
employment as lab technicians and/or part-time jobs while they pursue further
study; and 4) if the project is successful, submit ChemCore and the technician
program design to the NSF-funded Northwest Center for Emerging Technologies for
approval as a model Associated of Advanced Technology degree program.