* 9602063
* Dissertation Research: Mayan Ideology and Power
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1997
* Richard Leventhal, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/1997
* USD 7,160.00

Under the direction of Dr. Richard Leventhal MS Julia Sanchez will collect data
for her doctoral dissertation. She will study glyphs present at a number of
Mayan archaeological sites. The Mayans were one of the few prehistoric New World
societies to develop writing and their glyphs are preserved in stone and plaster
in many places. Because they reached an advanced level of social complexity,
built elaborate temples and survived in lowland tropical environments with few
or no inhabitants today they constitute a focus of intense anthropological
interest. Many archaeologists and eipgraphers have translated and studied Mayan
writing for insight provided into the elite elements of the society which
produced them. In her analysis MS Sanchez will examine not only the content of
glyphic messages but also the physical context in which they are located. She
has realized that contexts vary markedly and that some inscriptions are in
public places and thus visible to large and diverse numbers of people while
others are located in areas such as temple interiors where access was limited.
She will visit five archaeological sites, plot inscription positions and
categorize them in terms of public access and visibility. She will relate this
variable to the message which these writings contain and determine how the
message varies in relation to intended audience. Archaeologists wish to
understand how social hierarchies emerge and how, in traditional societies,
elites and rulers maintain social control. The political organization of the
prehistoric Maya is not well understood and MS Sanchez's study is important
because it should shed new light on mechanisms of control. The work is also
important because it will assist in the training of a very promising young
scientist.