* 9602080
* Perception of Stereoscopically-Defined Surfaces and Motion
* SBE,BCS
* 12/15/1996,10/31/2000
* Martin Banks, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Guy Van Orden
* 10/31/2000
* USD 329,455.00

9602080 BANKS We use our eyes to determine the layout of the scene before us and
to assess the desirability of our path of motion with respect to stationary and
moving obstacles in the scene. The ease with which we perceive 3-D layout and
carry out visually-guided navigation belies the underlying complexity of these
tasks. The primary stimulus information for determining scene layout is
binocular disparity (the differences in the two eyes' images which creates the
sensation of depth seen in, for example, the Magic Eye Stereograms) and motion
parallax (differences in the speeds at which images stream across the retina
when a person moves the head). Binocular disparity and motion parallax are
provided in retinal coordinates, but the positions and orientations of surfaces
must generally be determined in body- centered coordinates in order to guide
appropriate actions of the limbs and torso. Similarly, the information needed to
judge the direction of an object's motion (or one's own motion) is contained in
the changing pattern of light falling on the retinas, but motion direction must
generally be estimated relative to the body in order to be useful in guiding
motor responses to objects in the scene. This research will examine how
comparisons of the two eyes' images are used to determine surface orientation
and curvature and to determine the direction of an object's motion. This
research will be important to our understanding of human space perception, but
it may well also have practical consequences. First, biological systems have
evolved robust mechanisms for estimating surface orientation, shape, and
position and for estimating object velocity. A better understanding of how
biological systems perform may lead to better algorithms for mobile robotic
systems. Second, the perception of an object's motion relative to the self is
crucial for action, including the control of a motor vehicle. Thus, a better
understanding could lead to improved procedures fo r assessing driving and
flying capability. Third, a better understanding of the retinal and extra-
retinal information used in the perception of 3D layout and motion may well aid
construction of virtual reality displays. ***