* 9602526
* A Consolidated and Enhanced Molecular Biology Facility for  the Whitney Marine Laboratory
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/1996,09/30/2000
* Peter A. V. Anderson, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 09/30/2000
* USD 135,000.00

The Whitney Marine Laboratory is a research institute of the University of
Florida. It was established in 1974 and dedicated to a traditional role of
marine laboratories; the use of marine animals as experimental models with which
to address fundamental questions in cellular and neurobiology. This particular
approach to marine biology has come to characterize the Laboratory within
Florida, the Southeast region, and nationally. In 1989, the Laboratory initiated
a program in molecular biology. This program proved to be enormously powerful
and popular, so much so that nine of the twelve resident research groups at the
Whitney Laboratory now use molecular cloning as a routine component of their
research. To accommodate this growth, the Laboratory assigned additional space
to molecular biology- the facilities currently consist of 21/2 functionally
separate rooms, occupying a total of 630 ft2 , and a separate isotope lab.
However, on given day, 12 individuals vie for bench space in any given room, and
during peak times, visitors and students might raise this number to as many as
20. This heavy demand inevitably raises problems of scheduling and, most
worrisome, contamination of cultures and PCR by extraneous DNA and RNA.
Moreover, several essential items of equipment are already quite old, and, in
many cases (e.g.,) the autoclave, shaking incubator and ice machine) they are
the only item of their kind in the Laboratory, making the whole program is
vulnerable to stoppage should one item break down. Finally, because the existing
facilities are spread across four widely spaced rooms, the use of the facilities
is inefficient. To correct these problems this project will support a
consolidated molecular biology facility, organized and equipped so as to as to
maximize its usage and utility to the resident faculty of the Whitney Laboratory
and to visiting scientists and students. This consolidated facility would
continue to operate under the skilled s upervision of the Laboratory's molecular
biologist.