* 9602128
* U.S.- Egypt Cooperative Research:  Particle Dynamics and Jet Noise in Two-Phase Supersonic Nozzles
* O/D,OISE
* 12/01/1996,11/30/2000
* Widen Tabakoff, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 11/30/2000
* USD 30,000.00

Description: This award supports a collaborative research project between Dr.
Awatef A. Hamed and Dr. Widen Tabakoff, both professors at the Department of
Aerospace Engineering and Engineering Mechanics at the University of Cincinnati,
with Dr. Reda Mankbadi, Professor of Mechanical Engineering at Cairo University
in Egypt. The research deals with the particle dynamics and jet noise of gas-
particle flows in supersonic nozzles. The U.S. team will conduct experimental
studies and develop models for simulating the particle dynamics and their
interactions with the high Reynolds number flow through the convergent-divergent
nozzle. The Egyptian scientist will develop the techniques for calculating the
noise from the ensuing supersonic particle-flow jet. Scope: This project
involves collaboration of a U.S. experimental fluid mechanics team with an
Egyptian expert in computational fluid dynamics and acoustics research. The
complementarity in this cooperative research is expected to be beneficial to the
two sides and should lead to a better research output. Both teams have,
independently, done extensive work in the field, with very strong records of
publications. This project is to have them combine their skills, competence, and
facilities to advance the knowledge in an area of great importance in aerospace
engineering, and in environmental engineering in various industries. The
beneficiaries in advances in this field include, in part, designers and
manufacturers of aircraft engines, ground-based gas turbines and other
propulsion and power plant systems. This award is being funded jointly by the
Division of International Programs and the Division of Chemical and Transport
Systems.