* 9602652
* Renovation of Biology Research and Research Training        Facilities at Loyola Marymount University
* O/D,OIA
* 03/01/1997,01/31/1999
* Mary McElwain, Loyola Marymount University
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 01/31/1999
* USD 425,000.00

Loyola Marymount University, located in Los Angels, CA, is the recipient of ARI
funds for the renovation of selected biology research and training laboratories
in the Seaver Hall of Science. Erected in 1963, the building is the principal
laboratory building on campus, which houses the Departments of Biology,
Chemistry and Biochemistry, and Physics. No improvements have been made since it
was built and many infrastructure systems and equipment, original to the
facility, have reached their life span. Poorly designed laboratories do not
provide enough space for large instrumentation required for research activities.
Therefore securing equipment in small spaces create crowding conditions that are
inefficient and potentially unsafe. To rectify the problems, the National
Science Foundation and Loyola Marymount University will jointly provide funds to
modernize research and research training space for the Department of Biology.
The renovations are part of a major effort to enhance the laboratory-based
research environment and expand student research training in the biological
sciences. The project will maximize the use of limited available space by
establishing laboratories which can be shared by faculty whose research programs
have common equipment needs and fundamental similarities in approach.
Renovations will include the reconfiguration of existing space, the installation
of new fume hoods and laboratory benches, and the upgrade of the stockroom and
preparation room. Once completed, a shared genetics research facility, and a
shared plant biology research facility will be created. The increase in
available research space and the increased efficiency of space is expected to
significantly increase the productivity of research-active faculty and improve
the quality and quantity of research training available in the Biology
Department.