* 9602488
* Instrumentation of New York University's Politics Data      Center
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/1996,08/31/1998
* Russell Hardin, New York University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/1998
* USD 37,973.00

With National Science Foundation support Drs. Russell Hardin and Alexander
Schuessler will purchase a Sun Ultra 1 workstation, Model 170E with a 167 Mhz
Ultra SPARC Processor for use by the Political Science Department at New York
University. They will also acquire relevant software and the video machines and
monitor required to perform specific experiments. This instrumentation will be
used most immediately for two research projects. The first involves the role of
public opinion in further shaping public opinion. In other words, is an
individual's opinion influenced by the reported opinions of others? Public
opinion specialists have long assumed that the publication of poll results and
of other public opinion information in the media will in itself to some extent
determine public opinion. While this claim is frequently made and agreed upon,
social scientists have not been able to actually provide empirical tests to
substantiate it. Since public opinion in this case constitutes both a dependent
and independent variable, such a question is very difficult to address. Drs.
Hardin and Schuessler have devised an experimental protocol in which subjects
will be exposed to a controlled body of information as well as other's
evaluations of this information; through the manipulation of relevant variables
will be possible to collect relevant experimental data. A second project
examines the impact of political regimes and political institutions on economic
performance using a database of 135 countries between 1950 and 1990. The
question to be addressed is whether democracy in the political realm, as well as
its particular institutional arrangements, fosters or hinders economic
performance and economic growth. The impact of the instrumentation extends
beyond these two immediate projects. It work with involve graduate students and
thus serve a training function. Both projects will play a direct and significant
role in the development of graduate and undergraduate curricula and the
instrumentation will raise the level of ongoing statistical research by students
and faculty who use social science data.