* 9602478
* Instrumentation for Landscape-Oriented Human Origins        Research at Olduvai Gorge
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/1996,01/31/1998
* Robert Blumenschine, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/1998
* USD 51,433.00

With National Science Foundation support Drs. Robert Blumenschine and Fidelis
Masao will purchase a new four-wheel drive vehicle to supplement existing
vehicles used by their large, multidisciplinary Olduvai research project field
team. They will also acquire a mirror stereoscope for interpretation of large-
scale color aerial photographs to be obtained in the course of 1996 research as
well as a desktop mapping software and associated hardware for the production of
high resolution topographic maps from digitized aerial photographs. For several
years this team has conducted archaeological research at this site in northern
Tanzania. This area has yielded important hominid fossils as well as
paleontological and cultural remains and the goal of the research is to
reconstruct the prehistoric landscape at just under 2 million years ago and
determine how early hominids distributed their activities over it. The team has
followed a distinct geological horizon in lower Bed II which represents a
limited period of time and excavated small test units at carefully selected
intervals both to determine variation in landscape and the pattern of hominid
use of it. Because of the large size of the field team and the isolated and
rough terrain dependable four wheel drive vehicles are necessary. Likewise an
accurate map derived from aerial photographs will provide an essential basic
research tool. The research itself is important because it will shed important
light on how early hominids behaved and help to determine the factors which
shaped development of this species. The work will also yield new approaches to
landscape analysis and the resultant techniques will be applicable in many
archaeological situations in many parts of the world.