* 9602553
* A Planning Project to Further Develop a Multidisciplinary   Approach to Great Lakes Environmental Studies. May, 1997,   Buffalo, New York.
* BIO,DBI
* 12/01/1996,11/30/1999
* Stephen Brandt, SUNY College at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 11/30/1999
* USD 25,000.00

The structure and function of scientific research and education at academic
institutions in the United States is in a period of great change. Many academic
institutions are considering plans to down-size in terms of staff and funding,
such that a reevaluation of their overall mission is necessary (Selvin 1995).
One common theme is to focus the efforts (and talents) of multiple
investigators, departments, and institutions in an integrated manner towards
problem-solving. This development may be both a necessity of limited budgets,
and a reality of the types of scientific problems that exist today. This is
particularly true of studies on large ecosystems like the world's Oceans and
Great Lakes. Environmental changes in these systems can often be related to
human activities (climate change, eutrophication of exotic species), that often
manifest themselves over large spatial and temporal scales with global
implications. In this way, centers of multidisciplinary academic excellence may
be valuable now more than ever. The State University of New York, College at
Buffalo supports one of the few academic field facilities on the Laurentian
Great Lakes. The field station is operated out of the Great Lakes Center (GLC),
which is affiliated with the School of Natural and Social Sciences. This project
will help refine the mission statement of GLC establish collaborative
connections with other institutions in the Great Lakes region, and to plan and
further develop the physical facilities at our field station. Objectives for the
project are three-fold: 1. To obtain feedback and suggestions regarding the
mission statement for the GLC's multidisciplinary Great Lakes Environmental
Studies Program. 2. To facilitate communication and potential collaborations
between the GLC and other institutions in the Great Lakes region, including
scientists (particularly from field stations), regulatory agencies, and local
government. 3. To produce a written 5- year Strate gic Development Plan to help
guide the further development of physical facilities that support the GLC's
program.