* 9602544
* Pulsed Power Plasma Discharges Used for Materials Processing
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/1997,01/31/1998
* Michael Lieberman, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Alexander P. DeAngelis
* 01/31/1998
* USD 16,921.00

9602544 Lieberman This project is a collaboration between the University of
California-Berkeley group under the direction of Professor Michael A. Lieberman,
and Australian National University group under the direction of Professor Rod
Boswell on experiments, analytical modeling, and computer simulations of pulsed
power high density plasma discharges used for materials processing, to obtain a
better understanding of the dynamics of these discharges and their utility for
various processing applications. The U.S. and Australian investigators will
develop analytical models and computer simulations of such discharges and will
perform experiments on high density pulsed power helicon discharges. High
density sources, such as electron cyclotron resonance discharges (ECR's),
inductively coupled plasmas (ICP's), and helicons are regarded as powerful tools
that can replace conventional capacitively coupled, parallel plate plasma
reactors. A major advantage is that much higher manufacturing throughput can be
expected because much higher plasma densities than those of parallel plate
reactors are obtainable. Another advantage is that aspect ratio-independent
anisotropic etch processes are possible because of lower gas pressures. It is
also a great advantage that the ion bombarding energy can be controlled
independently of the ion flux. High density, low pressure plasma sources
utilizing modulated power have been attracting much attention recently. By
modulating the power, it is possible to further optimize and control the
performance of processing plasmas by changing the pulse frequency and duty
ratio.