* 9602290
* Renovation of the Biology &amp; Chemistry Research and Research Training Space at USI
* O/D,OIA
* 03/01/1997,08/31/1999
* Jerome Cain, University of Southern Indiana
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 08/31/1999
* USD 1,193,947.00

The Southern University of Indiana is the recipient of funds from the Academic
Research Infrastructure Program to remodel research and research training space
for the Departments of Biology and Chemistry. This space is located in the USI
Science Center, a facility that was constructed in 1969. In the absence of an
organized space utilization plan, laboratories were carved out of non-research
space that resulted in the haphazard dispersal of research space throughout the
building. The present arrangement impairs research efficiency and inhibits
productive communication between faculty and student research groups. Usage of
several laboratories for both teaching and investigative activities, severely
limits the time research can be conducted and compromises security of
experiments and equipment. As an outdated facility, the Science Center suffers
from gross inadequacies in heating ventilation, air conditioning, electricity,
plumbing, and poor design. These deficiencies impede on the types of
experimental work that can be accomplished by research personnel. Award funds
will be used to upgrade the HVAC system, improve plumbing and electrical
systems, and reconfigure space to improve efficiency. Fixed equipment consisting
of fume hoods and casework will be installed. The overall project effect will
strengthen biological and chemical research in the following areas: behavioral
ecology and environmental studies, microbiology, molecular biology, physiology,
organic and inorganic chemistry, physical, and analytical chemistry. Renovated
facilities will significantly enhance the University's ability to prepare women
for advanced degrees and careers in biology and chemistry since both departments
have a high proportion of women students. Modernized laboratories will alleviate
the need for students to conduct research at other sites during the summer, and
provide additional opportunities for students to participate in the research
enterprise.