* 9602707
* Modernization of Facilities for Geoscience Research at the  University of Florida
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/1996,09/30/2000
* Paul Mueller, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 09/30/2000
* USD 1,000,000.00

The University of Florida is a land grant university with a student enrollment
of more than 40,000, and is the largest university in the Nation's fourth most
populous state. It is a diverse institution with a primary obligation to educate
future scientists. Research and graduate education in the Department of Geology
are integrated activities, and research is the critical component that provides
the venue in which future professional geologists are trained. Turlington Hall
is currently home to the Department where research performed is categorized in
four primary areas: Paleo-environmental studies; Chemical Geodynamics,
Geomagnetism, and Environmental geology. Investigations in these areas represent
multidisciplinary efforts of faculty from Geology, Chemistry, Biology,
Agriculture, and the Florida Museum of Natural History. The basis for
collaboration is not only mutual scientific interests, but the need for high
quality analytical data. Turlington Hall in its existing condition cannot
support or accommodate the growth of the research program. Space, originally not
designed for research, has been encroached upon for research purposes. A window
of opportunity has been offered to the Department to relocate and consolidate
programs in Williamson Hall, formerly the home of the Physics Department.
However, the 1953 structure requires major renovation in order to house the
Geology program. The NSF will participate with the University of Florida in
renovating a portion of Williamson Hall by converting former physics research
space to geology research space. Specific renovations will consist of: replacing
electrical, HVAC, plumbing, and mechanical systems, upgrading fire protection
systems, installing fixed equipment, and removing asbestos containing materials.
Renovations to the building will ensure that safety, health, and ADA standards
are met. Development of the research infrastructure will increase research
capabilities needed to accommodate more affiliate faculty. Since women and
minorities are an under-represented group within the geosciences, it is
anticipated that scientists and students will be attracted to the discipline.
Consequently, the Department will be able to extend relations with the private
sector, and provide graduates who will be versatile and well-trained members of
the nation's scientific and technical workforce.