* 9602108
* U.S.-Nordic Cooperative Research on the Dynamics of         Disoriented Chiral Condensates (Theoretical Physics)
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/1996,08/31/2000
* Paul Ellis, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Mark A. Suskin
* 08/31/2000
* USD 20,000.00

This award supports Professors Paul Ellis and Joseph Kapusta , plus a
postdoctoral associate and two graduate students from the University of
Minnesota, to collaborate in theoretical physics research with a group of
scientists from the Universities of Bergen and Oslo in Norway and the University
of Copenhagen in Denmark, under the coordination of Eivind Osnes of the
University of Oslo. The Nordic scientists are part of a large Northern European
Collaborative `Project on Relativistic Heavy Ion Collisions.` The general
objective of that regional project is a better understanding of high-energy
heavy-ion collisions, with particular emphasis on the properties of excited
nuclear matter. It is providing theoretical support for experimental work by
others dealing with energetic collisions of complex atomic nuclei. The specific
involvement of the US researchers is studying the dynamical mechanisms of
hadronization of the quark gluon plasma. Ultimately this will lead to a detailed
description of hadronization, allowing conclusions to be drawn regarding the
observable signals of hadronization. Broadly speaking, this research involves
the theoretical study of nuclear collision at the highest energies available to
experiment, which are expected within a few years to produce a Quark-Gluon
Plasma. There is little basis yet for predicting reaction dynamics in the
presence of a phase transition, and this research is attempting to provide
theoretical insight into the evolution of the Quark-Gluon Plasma. It will also
seek to define possible signals of hadronization and chiral symmetry breaking
and restoration, and evaluate the sensitivity of the signals to underlying
assumptions about the equation of state and correlation functions. Results of
the proposed studies will increase knowledge of the structure of extended,
stronglyinteracting matter at very small scale, which is relevant to
understanding of the early universe, among other phenomena. The results will
also be very useful in planning and evaluating future heavy ion experiments in
large accelerators.