* 9602072
* CAREER:  Contracts and Incentive Schemes for Coordinating   Production and Sales
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1996,07/31/2000
* Karen Donohue, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing grant
* Hal R. Arkes
* 07/31/2000
* USD 200,000.00

Contracts and Incentive Schemes for Coordinating Production and Sales The
purpose of this project is to develop a comprehensive set of incentive and
contractual schemes to coordinate forecasting, sales, and manufacturing efforts
in industries characterized by uncertain demand, short product life cycles, and
long production lead times. Recent market trends favoring increased product
variety and virtually zero customer lead times have escalated the need for
coordination in fashion industries such as apparel, personal computers, and new
title publishing. The benefits of coordination are numerous. Coordinating a
firm's sales targets to reflect the actual capabilities of its manufacturing
facilities helps avoid unfilled orders and wasted sales efforts. Coordinating
production to match the arrival of early demand information from customers
reduces costs by eliminating excess inventory and wasted production efforts. The
obstacles to coordination also are numerous. Most conflicts stem from a
disagreement over the timing and quantity of products produced. Manufacturing
may complain that sales sets unrealistic production goals or deviates from
forecast, leaving them with excess inventory or scrambling to meet unplanned
orders. Sales may complain that manufacturing is unresponsive to customers needs
and produces too little, too late. This project examines the source of these
conflicts and develops a series of normative models to realign the behavior of
manufacturing and sales organizations. The project consists of four integrated
components: (1) an empirical investigation of how coordination within and
between firms differs in selected industries plagued by uncertain demand, short
product life cycles, and long production lead times, (2) an analytical study of
internal incentive schemes which avoid problems of moral hazard and promote
optimal profit for the firm, (3) an analytical study of external supplier
contracts which encourage risk sharing and promote optimal profit for the
channel, and (4) a simulation study which integrates results of the two
analytical studies by testing the behavior of various incentive schemes across
multiple echelons of a supply chain. The project's educational goals follow in
the spirit of improving coordination efforts between sales and production.
Currently, industry demand is at an all time high for undergraduate students
with expertise in information technology and decision analysis tools such as
simulation, math programming, risk assessment, and process analysis. The
`production` of such students has not risen to meet this demand. My primary
educational goal is to build-up our department's undergraduate program so
enrollments are more in line with this exciting demand trend.