* 9602296
* Renovation of Research and Research Training Laboratories at City College of CUNY
* O/D,OIA
* 01/15/1997,01/31/2001
* Dennis Weiss, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 01/31/2001
* USD 1,000,000.00

Founded in 1847, The City College of New York is nationally and internationally
recognized as an institution with a diverse student body and strong graduate and
undergraduate programs in basic and applied research in science and engineering.
To maintain research excellence, the City College has made a commitment to
improve the scientific infrastructure by renovating and refurbishing 40 research
laboratories and support facilities in the Marshak Science and Physical
Education Building, home to the Departments of Biology, Chemistry, and Physics.
With assistance from the NSF, laboratories and support facilities utilized by
two highly successful research centers, the Center for Analysis of Structures
and Interfaces (CASI) and the Center for the Study of the Cellular and Molecular
Basis of Development will be modernized. CASI scientists are currently
interested in three areas involving the usage of light and its properties to
study the structure and dynamical processes of molecules adsorbed on surfaces of
materials; the development of new materials composed of small numbers of
elements; and the usage of ultrafast laser techniques for light based, optical
computers of the future. On going research in the Center for the Study of the
Cellular and Molecular Basis of Development focuses on biological structure and
function, gene expression and regulation, and cell and organism function.
Current infrastructure conditions negatively impact research and research
training activities by creating an environment incompatible with quality
research, thus limiting the prospect of expanding research opportunities.
Renovations will include redesigning space for greater utility, replacing and
installing lab benches, fume hoods, storage cabinets, and other fixed equipment.
Upon completion, the renovations will provide an environment conducive to
academic and scientific pursuits and one that is attractive to researcher
scholars. In addition to enhanced productivity, students underrepresented in
science will be better trained and therefore able to compete in an increasingly
competitive job market.