* 9602456
* Reformed Mathematics Pedagogy and Laboratory/Technical      Activities in Support of Aeronautics and Space Technical    Education for Community and Technical College Students
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1999
* John Pazdar, Capital Community College
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 08/31/1999
* USD 259,914.00

National Aeronautics and Space Administration - American Mathematics Association
of Two-Year Colleges Project Coalition: A Reform Mathematics Pedagogy and
Laboratory The reform pedagogy advocated by the Standards of AMATYC's (American
Mathematical Association of Two-Year Colleges) "Crossroads In Mathematics"
implies significant shortcomings in the way mathematics is currently taught in
community/technical colleges. Two-year college students do not have sufficient
access in their mathematics courses to real world applications from aeronautics
and space technology. The goal of this project is to develop a collection of
laboratory/technical activities (LTAs) that significantly contribute to the way
in which mathematics from prealgebra through calculus is perceived, taught, and
learned in community/technical colleges. The LTAs will be developed by
community/technical college faculty working with NASA Scientists/Engineers at
the Kennedy Space Center. The LTAs will be based on a wide range of technical
problems generated from the science of aeronautics and space. In addition, the
project will develop Spinoffs from the LTAs that extend them into other related
mathematical areas. The targeted audience includes all community/technical
college students of whom significantly more than 50% are women and minorities.
"NASA-AMATYC PC" is a project coalition involving three organizations: NASA
(National Aeronautics and Space Administration), AMATYC (American Mathematical
Association of Two-Year Colleges), and CC-TC (Capital Community-Technical
College). This project will provide community/technical college students with a
collection of real world technological applications. These applications will be
embedded in a pedagogical structure that supports AMATYC's Standards.
Evaluation, occurring at every stage of the development process, will articulate
the LTAs with mathematics education at the secondary school, two and four-year
college levels. Dissemination will take place nationally via brochures, booklets
and presentations, and globally on the Internet.