* 9602189
* U.S.-Bulgarian Cooperative Research:  Metastable States of  Exotic Helium Atoms and Delayed Annihilation of Antiprotons in Helium
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/1996,08/31/2000
* Krzysztof Szalewicz, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Dudka
* 08/31/2000
* USD 44,930.00

INT-96 Szalewicz This U.S.-Bulgaria Cooperative Research award will study
"Metastable States of Exotic Helium Atoms and Delayed Annihilation of
Antiprotons in Helium." The principal researchers are Dr. Krzysztof Szalewicz of
the University of Delaware and Dr. Dimitre D. Bakalov of the Institute for
Nuclear Research and Nuclear Energy of the Bulgarian Academy of Sciences. The
purpose of the project is to provide a high accuracy of ab initio quantum
mechanical description of the metastable states of antiprotonic helium and of
the phenomenon of delayed annihilation of antiprotons in helium. The project
will give precise theoretical values for the energy levels of the few-body bound
systems that are formed when stopping negative muons or antiprotons in helium,
as well as the rates of various transitions (Auger, radiative, and laser
stimulated) between these levels. The Coulomb energy levels of the muonic and
antiprotonic helium-like atom will be calculated with a relative accuracy of 10
to the -7 using variational methods. The relativistic and quantum
electrodynamics corrections -- including the fine and hyperfine splitting --
will be evaluated in the first order of perturbation theory. The Zeeman
splitting of the levels in external homogeneous magnetic field of intensity up
to 10 to the 4th Gauss will also be evaluated. Finally, the effect of molecular
clusters will be estimated. This work should answer very important current
questions about antimatter which could not be accomplished without this
collaboration. This research in physics and astronomy fulfills the program
objectives of bringing together leading experts in the U.S. and Bulgaria to
combine complementary efforts and capabilities in areas of strong mutual
interest and competence on the basis of equality, reciprocity, and mutuality of
benefit. *** ??