* 9602161
* U.S.-Turkey Cooperative Research: Guided-Wave Polarization  Sensitive Couplers and Polarization Converters in           GaAs/AlGaAs
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1999
* Nadir Dagli, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 08/31/1999
* USD 29,185.00

Description: This award is to support a collaborative project between Dr. Nadir
Dagli, Department of Electrical and Computer Science at the University of
California, Santa Barbara (UCSB) and Dr. Atilla Aydinli, Department of Physics,
Bilkent University, Ankara, Turkey. The purpose of this research is to develop
guided-wave polarization sensitive couplers and polarization converters in
GaAs/AlGaAs material system, and eventually to use these components in the
realization of polarization independent ultra fast traveling wave electrooptic
modulators. Current work at UCSB has produced traveling wave electrooptic
modulators with electric bandwidth in excess of 40 GHz. These modulators have
relatively high switching voltages, excessive loss in coupling with optical
fiber, and work only for TE polarization. The planned work will seek the
production of devices with low switching voltage and low fiber coupling losses.
The work proposed includes transfer of software developed at UCSB to the Bilkent
team to use it in producing the modulator devices. These devices, and others
produced at UCSB, will be subjected to optical tests such as loss measurements,
and DC electrooptic tests such as the DC modulation response. Scope: This award
allows for collaboration by two laboratories with complementary capabilities who
are currently carrying out similar research independently. The award will allow
visits by Dr. Dagli to Bilkent U. to provide the software and the required
initial training and to help the Turkish scientist and a graduate student start
the fabrication process. In the second year Dagli will again visit Bilkent U. to
work on the testing process and to transfer the technology developed and the
experience gained to his laboratory at UCSB. This award is funded jointly by INT
and the Division of Electrical and Communication Systems.