* 9602951
* A Microinjection Apparatus and Associated Equipment for     Creation of Transgenic Mice
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/1997,03/31/1999
* Kevin Jones, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 03/31/1999
* USD 73,179.00

Funds are requested for the purchase of an embryo microinjection apparatus and
associated equipment to be used in the production of transgenic mice. This
apparatus is to be used primarily for production of transgenic mice using two
technologies: pronuclear injection of DNA and blastocyst/morula injection of
embryonic stem cells. These are now well-established methods with which all of
the primary users are quite familiar. The apparatus will also be used for
transplantation experiments (e.g. mitochondrial transplantation). This apparatus
is to be housed in a new transgenic facility, the construction of which is to be
completed by July 1, 1996. This facility will serve faculty members of the MCD
Biology and other departments on the University of Colorado Boulder campus
including Biochemistry and the Institute for Behavioral Genetics. As a
reflection of the diverse research interests of these faculty in multiple areas
of biology, the animals to be created will address a wide range of scientific
issues. Areas under investigation include the functions of neurotrophic factors
in the development and maintenance of the nervous system, the function of Wnt-
family genes in the morphogenesis of the limb and nervous system, the molecular
basis of muscle formation and contractility, the function of homologues of the
Drosophila mago nashi gene in mouse germ-cell development, and the localization
of quantitative trait loci. This apparatus will be a core piece of equipment and
is essential in the production of transgenic mice. The analysis of transgenic
mice makes feasible the investigation of gene function in a mammal through
creation of animals having a defined genetic perturbation. Creation of
transgenic mice by pronuclear injection is the only widely used method of
integration of cloned DNA into random sites in the mouse genome. Production of
transgenic mice using embryonic stem cells modified by gene targeting through
blastocyst injection is presently favored (ove r morula aggregation) by most
practitioners. Thus, a microinjection apparatus is an essential feature of any
facility for the production of transgenic mice.