* 9602141
* U.S.-India Cooperative Research: Studies of Fiber Matrix    Bonding and Physical Properties of Carbon-Carbon Composites Made with Carbon Fibers of Different Morphologies.
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2000
* Danny Edie, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 08/31/2000
* USD 33,161.00

9602141 Edie Description: The proposed research "Photoinduced Degradation in
Doped Hydrogenated Amorphous Silicon (a-SiLH)" is a collaboration in condensed
matter physics between Professor Taylor, University of Utah and Professors
Mathur and Mahra, University of Delhi. This research adds an international
dimension to domestic research programs on electronic and structural properties
of disordered semiconductors, and on the electronic properties of thin-film
photovaltaic materials. The proposed research is a logical extension of that
research and will concentrate on the photo-induced degradation and transport
properties of n-type doped silicon-sulfur alloys. Taylor has made significant
progress in understanding metal chalcogenide glasses as a model system linking
tetrahedrally- coordinated amorphous materials and traditional chalcogenide
glasses. Scope: This is a new collaboration linking two university research
laboratories in the US and India. The research combines the expertise at the
University of Utah on growth, optical characterization and magnetic resonance
characteriation with the expertise at the University of Delhi on transport
measurements and structural measurements. The research plan is designed to make
progress on ultimately improving the stability of devices such as thin-film
transistors and solar cells. ***