* 9602491
* A Computerized Laboratory for Study of Status Generalization and Social Network Group Processes
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1998
* Murray Webster, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/1998
* USD 30,311.00

With National Science Foundation support Drs. Murray Webster and Joseph
Whitmeyer will purchase computer and related instrumentation of equip a
laboratory to study social processes. The relevant part of the laboratory
complex consists of eight small rooms. Participants in experiments are seated in
separate rooms which also contain a computer terminal, a video camera and a
monitor for all communication. In this way, communication can be completely open
or limited networks can be created as needed. Information content, from
experimenters to participants and between participants can either be veridical
(true) or controlled. For example controlled disagreements can be created to
measure performance expectation states. The NSF grant will provide the necessary
instrumentation including a Gateway P5-200 computer, 8 Gateway P5-120 computers
for terminals, cables to connect the terminals to server, 8 Sony video cameras
and Panasonic video monitors and other related software are equipment. With this
laboratory, the researchers will study two basic social process. The first
involves status generalization which structures face to face interaction around
the status characteristics individuals bring with them to group situations. Its
effects occur in task-focused interaction situations, where individuals are
together for the purpose of solving problems or achieving a goal, such as on a
team or a jury. Based on observed characteristics, individuals develop
performance expectation states which are roughly equivalent to ideas of ability
to perform whatever task is relevant to a group. A number of theories postulate
on how these expectation states form and can be altered over time and these can
be evaluated in controlled situations which the laboratory permits. The second
research area involves exchange networks and how structural power originates and
is maintained and expanded within them. Again the laboratory will allow the
investigators to create controlled experimental situations. This research is
important for the light it will shed on interaction among individuals This state
of the art laboratory will also provide a model which is likely to be reproduced
in other universities and research settings.