* 9602639
* Facilities Renovation in Arey Life Sciences Building for    Advanced Molecular Biology, Cellular Biology, and           Microbiology
* O/D,OIA
* 01/15/1997,06/30/1998
* Arthur Champlain, Colby College
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 06/30/1998
* USD 230,107.00

Colby College, in Waterview, Maine, is the recipient of $230,107 from the
National Science Foundation for the renovation of advanced research training and
research facilities for cellular and molecular biology and microbiology. This
project represents the capstone of the College's five year Plan for the Sciences
that calls for a new science curriculum focused on -education through research.`
In support of the Plan, the Biology Department has established an
interdisciplinary Cell and Molecular Biology and Biochemistry Program (CMBB).
Critically needed reconfigured space appropriate for research and advanced
research training, suitable for a variety of research projects, is not
available. ARI funds will be used to aid Colby in its endeavor to improve the
physical infrastructure needed to support the CMBB Program. Constructed in 1959,
renovations will occur on the third floor of the Arey Life Sciences Building.
Spaces dedicated to investigative activities of three laboratories and support
facilities including a cell culture room, an advanced microscopy suite, and a
radioisotope laboratory will be reconfigured and utilities upgraded. New
casework, benches, and fume hoods will be installed, and laboratories will
comply with ADA regulations. Consolidating laboratories for interrelated
disciplines of cellular and molecular biology and microbiology, and locating
them near related biochemistry laboratories, will facilitate efficient use of
space, equipment, and foster interdisciplinary collaborations among bioscience
students and faculty. This modernization will strengthen the biology curriculum
by enhancing research training and by increasing the number of research
opportunities for students through independent projects and research
collaborations with faculty.