* 9602496
* Japan STA Program:  Quenching of Gaseous Fluroescence by    Large Magnetic Fields and Magnetic Field Effects on Reaction Products After Excitation
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/1997,03/31/1999
* Wade Sisk, NC Fellowships
* Fellowship Award
* Larry H. Weber
* 03/31/1999
* USD 6,900.00

9602496 Sisk This award supports a 24 month Science and Technology Agency of
Japan (STA) Postdoctoral Fellowship for Dr. Wade Sisk at the The Institute of
Physical and Chemical Research (RIKEN), Wako, Saitama, Japan. Dr. Sisk will work
with Dr. Hisaharu Hayashi, on a research project entitled, "Quenching of Gaseous
Fluorescence by Large Magnetic Fields up to 10 T and Magnetic Field Effects on
Reactions Products After Excitation". Research on the chemical reaction of gas
phase molecules has previously been carried out at ordinary fields (H<2.5 T).
The proposed study will investigate the chemical reactions of gaseous molecules
with large magnetic fields (H>2.5 T). When a molecule is excited, e.g. via laser
light application, it may relax to its intial state through the emission of
light (fluorescence). Accordingly, the examination of levels of fluoresence is
an effective way to monitor reactants or products of a chemical reaction. When a
molecule is excited in the presence of a defined magnetic field, the magnitude
of the fluorescence is also altered. In the proposed research, fluorescence
quenching and time- resolved absorbance spectro-scopy will be carried out under
the influence of different applications (the emphasis on magentic fields) in
order to: 1) gain a more comprehensive understanding of how large magnetic
fields quench fluorescence in gasphase candidates; 2) ascertain the long- term
effects that large magnetic fields have on complicated reaction mechanisms. ***