* 9602317
* Computer Information Systems Research Facilities            Infrastructure Modernization Project
* O/D,OIA
* 07/01/1997,12/31/1999
* Franklin Hamilton, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 12/31/1999
* USD 277,645.00

Founded in 1887, Florida A&amp;M University (FAMU), a Historically Black
University, is one of the three oldest institutions of higher education in the
State of Florida. FAMU has been successful in producing minority students
interested in pursuing advance degrees in scientific and engineering
disciplines, including computer science. Faculty and students of the Department
of Computer and Information Science are currently engaged in basic research
involving software engineering, real-time systems, parallel computing,
artificial intelligence, object-oriented databases, computer architecture, data
encryption and stimulation. Research and training activities are performed in
the Benjamin Banneker Building Unit A, a facility that was constructed in 1966.
Present conditions, such as the lack of required communication and utility
infrastructure impedes progress in conducting state of the art research in
computer science. Inadequate ventilation, and air conditioning often results in
equipment failure and poor network connectivity does not facilitate access to
computer equipment. To rectify these problems, the National Science Foundation
and FAMU will establish a partnership to renovate research and research training
laboratories in the Banneker Building. Renovations will not only consist of
remodeling lab space, upgrading the electrical and telecommunications
infrastructure, and improving the HVAC and lighting systems, but will provide
the necessary modifications to ensure the facility is compliant with ADA
regulations. Upon completion, the project will enhance the ability of faculty to
compete for extramural funding, continue to attract outstanding student scholars
and faculty, and facilitate in the increase of the nation's minority doctorates
in the sciences, engineering, and mathematics.