* 9602792
* Renovation of Research Laboratories in Carver Hall
* O/D,OIA
* 08/01/1997,10/31/2000
* Chester Jordan, Grambling State University
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 10/31/2000
* USD 715,666.00

Founded in 1901, Grambling State University (GSU), a historically black
university, is the recipient of an award for the renovation of Carver Hall.
Constructed in 1958, Carver Hall is home to the Departments of Biology,
Chemistry, Physics, Mathematics and Computer Science. Realizing the importance
of providing students with opportunities to gain research experiences, GSU
continues to develop research programs that have been key to their success in
preparing students for graduate studies. However, current research laboratories
in Carver Hall are inadequate to support modern research and research training
activities. Deficiencies include: the improper functioning of fume hoods,
insufficient electrical outlets, poor ventilation, antiquated plumbing, and
inadequate bench space that places severe constraints on research personnel and
hinders productivity. Funds from the ARI Program will be used to renovate
thirteen laboratories and relocate two labs that are housed in a portable
building. The renovations involve removing asbestos, upgrading existing and
installing new fume hoods, correcting structural problems, upgrading heating and
cooling systems, and installing communication wiring. Extensive plumbing and
electrical work will be performed as well as installing gas, compressed air and
vacuum lines. Improvements will be made to the drainage system of the animal
facility and the animal housing area will be partitioned to allow for the
housing of more than one species. This project will allow faculty to continue to
conduct innovative research, assist in the recruitment of outstanding faculty
and students, and aid in increasing the number of underrepresented scientists in
the nation.