* 9602508
* FSML: Oceanographic and Meteorological Monitoring System at Bodega Marine Laboratory
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/1997,12/31/1999
* Victor Chow, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 12/31/1999
* USD 70,759.00

The Bodega Marine Laboratory (BML) is a research unit of the University of
California (UC)located on the Sonoma coast 70 miles north of San Francisco.
Since 1966 the Laboratory has provided unique opportunities for field research
on a rich flora and fauna in close proximity to the Laboratory buildings. BML
has well-equipped laboratories, strong on- site support staff and a firm
commitment from the Davis campus to continue developing the facilities and
support needed by the growing number of resident and visiting researchers. The
Laboratory is located on the Bodega Marine Reserve (BMR), a 362-acre protected
field site with a diverse set of marine and terrestrial coastal habitats.
Adjacent subtidal areas are protected and available for study within the Bodega
Marine Life Refuge. Oceanographic and meteorological data are essential
components of many of the field studies conducted at the site. Environmental
monitoring systems at BML have incurred problems in recent years, and now
require replacement and upgrades to improve reliability, flexibility and
accessibility to researchers. The oceanographic pressure sensor, operating in
the severely adverse conditions of a shallow water, high energy nearshore
environment, has been inoperable since winter storms two years ago. This project
will significantly improve the monitoring system to provide automated, quality-
controlled, oceanographic and meterological data and a processing and management
system providing improved access to researchers. System will provide researchers
with measurements of wind speed and direction, air temperature, relative
humidity, barometric pressure, rainfall, total solar radiation,
photosynthetically active radiation, surface seawater temperature, and seawater
salinity, all in real time. With data logger technology, tidal heights,
directional waves, directional currents, bottom temperature, and bottom salinity
will be monitored nearshore where such measurements are important to intert idal
and shallow subtidal investigations. In deeper water, an Acoustic Doppler
Current Profiler will monitor the ocean currents responsible for transport of
sediments, plankton, and larvae. Re- engineered data acquisition and management
systems will increase the number of variables surveyed, improve the quality and
reliability of data collected, and provide researchers with greater access to
on-line and archived data via modem, local area network, and the Internet/World
Wide Web.