* 9602834
* Renovation of Wistar Structural Biology Macromolecular      Interactions Complex
* O/D,OIA
* 11/01/1996,10/31/1998
* David Speicher, Wistar Institute
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 10/31/1998
* USD 267,084.00

The Wistar Institute, founded in 1892, is the oldest independent institution in
the United States devoted to biological research and training. Located in close
proximity to the University of Pennsylvania, the Institute has developed
collaborative interactions with the university while maintaining its status as
an independent, nonprofit, basic research organization. Thirty-eight
laboratories are housed in the facility, including research laboratories for the
Structural Biology Program, established in 1991. An important aim of the Program
is to develop and apply technologies and methodological approaches to
investigate biological macromolecules at every level of organization, ranging
from atomic detail using X-ray crystallography and NMR spectroscopy to complex
macromolecule assemblies. Existing conditions of the facility prevent the
optimal usage of space and specialized equipment contained in laboratories
designated to accomplish this work. Problems include: major deficiencies in the
air condition system, including inadequate cooling, dehumidification, and
temperature fluctuations; 2) unreliable cold room space; 3) poor layout and
space design, and 4) inadequate plumbing that periodically floods the lab
damaging equipment. The ARI Program will provide funds to rectify deficiencies
of space dedicated for the Macromolecular Interaction Complex of the Structural
Biology Program. Specifically, four laboratories will be consolidated in
contiguous space that can be designed for structure-function and biochemical
studies and for required instrumentation. The renovated space will facilitate
interactions with investigators and students, and will support advanced
technologies needed to conduct modern molecular biology research. This project
also complements the renovation of the Macromolecular Structure Facility, a
project that was partially funded by the ARI Program.