* 9602628
* Renovation of the Loeb Laboratory Building
* O/D,OIA
* 01/15/1997,06/30/1998
* John Burris, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 06/30/1998
* USD 450,000.00

The Marine Biological Laboratory (MBL) is an independent, non-profit and
educational institution and America's oldest private marine lab. Founded in
1888, the MBL offers a conductive environment for summer investigators and
advance students from the U.S. and abroad to perform research. Diverse and
abundant marine organisms found in surrounding waters serve as models for
exploring fundamental life processes. In addition to being the summer home of
American Biology, the MBL hosts major year-round research programs in cell and
developmental biology, ecosystems studies, molecular evolution, neurobiology,
and sensory physiology. NSF funds will be used to improve the mechanical systems
of the Loeb Building, one of the MBL's five major laboratory buildings. Opened
in 1969, Loeb serves as a prime focal point for research activities in
experimental biology. It houses facilities for the Ecosystems Center, Boston
University's Marine Program, and the summer research of the NINDS Laboratory of
Neurobiology. In addition to housing research programs, Loeb is a major site
where research training courses are conducted. However these activities,
involving the use of electronic equipment to conduct state of the art research,
require a level of environmental controls that the building's existing
mechanical systems are incapable of providing. This modernization will consist
of upgrading and repairing the existing ventilation systems and controls, and
replacing the existing chiller with a more efficient unit. MBL has had a
commitment to developing the nation's intellectual capital, particularly in the
area of basic biology, and has been a long term beneficiary of partnerships with
a variety of institutions across the nation. This project will help strengthen
the MBL infrastructure, which will sustain the tradition in Loeb, and campus
wide, well into the next century.