* 9602459
* Improving Science and Engineering Technology Education at   Community Colleges
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1998
* Rod Risley, Phi Theta Kappa Headquarters
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 08/31/1998
* USD 239,912.00

Improving Science and Engineering Technology Education at Community Colleges Phi
Theta Kappa, the honor society for community colleges, in cooperation with the
American Association of Community Colleges (AACC) is developing and conducting a
multi-component faculty enhancement and curriculum development project to
improve and strengthen the teaching of science, mathematics, engineering, and
technology (SMET) at the nation's community colleges. The project is
accomplishing its goals through a set of activities designed to stimulate and
assist other community colleges to replicate a set of effective NSF-supported
community college curriculum materials and faculty development projects; thereby
improving SMET education on their campuses and ultimately to two-year colleges
nationwide through dissemination activities. The activities to be conducted
include: (a) Establishing of a corps of seven mentors drawn from NSF-supported
projects at community colleges including Sinclair Community College
(manufacturing), Eastern Iowa Community College (environmental education),
Chemeketa Community College (sustainable resources), and Prince George's
Community College (remote sensing, image processing, and geographic information
systems). (b) Conducting a national competition to select 14 colleges to
participate in activities listed below to assist them to replicate the selected
NSF projects. (c) Convening two National Science Education Conferences, the
first to work with mentors to learn about the curricula to be implemented and
prepare a plan to integrate these into their curricula and the second to report
on progress. (d) Publishing three networking newsletters and a final case study
monograph documenting the work of the participating colleges.