* 9602468
* NSF-CGP Fellowship: An In situ Scanning Tunneling Micro-    scopy Study of Group III Nitride Thin Films
* O/D,OISE
* 03/15/1997,05/31/1999
* Ignatius Tsong, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 05/31/1999
* USD 129,858.00

9602468 Tsong This award supports U.S.-Japan collaborative research between Dr.
Ignatius S. T. Tsong of the Department of Physics at Arizona State University
and Dr. Toshio Sakurai of the Institute of Materials Research at Tohoku
University in Sendai, Japan. Dr. Tsong will be spending twelve months at Tohoku
University to conduct an in situ scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) study of
nitride thin films grown by molecular beam epitaxy (MBE). The researchers will
attempt to identify the optimum growth temperature and the most suitable
nitrogen flux species for high quality MBE film growth. The results obtained
during the visit will be correlated with the low-energy electron microscopy
(LEEM) study of nitride growth with seeded supersonic beams in the researcher's
laboratory at Arizona State University. The U.S. researcher brings to this
collaboration his knowledge of geometric and defect structures, atomic
composition, and adsorbate kinetics on the surfaces of metals, alloys and
semiconductors. This is complemented by similar knowledge of the Japanese
researcher who has specific expertise in the area of STM. His laboratory is
equipped with state-of-the-art instrumentation and his MBE- STM system is one of
only a handful of such instruments in the world. The project is expected to
provide new information of critical value to gaining new and deeper
understanding of fundamental materials science phenomena associated with the
epitaxial growth as well as other related processing phenomena in a class of
materials, electronic/photonic, having high technological and economic
significance. It is expected that the cooperation between these laboratories
should foster future collaborations. ***