* 9602709
* Modernization of the Plant Science Facility at California   State University, Northridge
* O/D,OIA
* 09/15/1996,12/31/1999
* Jennifer Matos, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 12/31/1999
* USD 237,054.00

The Department of Biology at California State University Northridge is the
recipient of funds from the ARI Program to renovate and improve its plant
sciences facilities. Because of the antiquated nature of four greenhouses, a
Head-house, and an Auxiliary building, faculty research projects have been
severely hampered in recent years, and research training opportunities for
undergraduates have been curtailed. This has countermanded the long-standing
goals of the institution to support faculty research, encourage excellence in
the plant sciences while bringing expertise and insight to students, and
encourage minority students for careers in the discipline. Currently five
faculty members, 10 graduate, and 11 undergraduate researchers are engaged in
research at the facility. Topics range from plant ecology and evolution to
physiology. In addition, the facility is used for research training in Plant
Systematic, Plant Morphology, Field Botany, and Population and Community
Ecology. Within the four greenhouses, renovations will consist of updating the
environmental systems and controls and plant laboratory fixtures. Overhead
lighting fixtures will be updated to allow more supplemental light for plants. A
modern liquid fertilizer mixing and plumbing system will be installed in the
Head-house and greenhouses, facilitating the upkeep of large collections of
plant species. Benches and storage cabinets used for experiment set up in the
Head-house will be updated to improve efficiency, and to allow access by
physically challenged faculty and students. The Auxiliary building will be
renovated to provide a large controlled environmental growth chamber, which will
allow large experiments to be conducted under precise lighting and temperature
conditions. With the environmental control problems resolved by the renovations,
faculty will be able to conduct research at a level that is currently not
feasible. It is anticipated that the number of students doing research will
increase, as a result of improved research training and experiences, thus
encouraging them to pursue graduate studies.