* 9602457
* Technological Education for Advanced Manufacturing
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1999
* Frederick Schoenig, Cleveland State University
* Continuing Grant
* Margaret D. Weeks
* 08/31/1999
* USD 608,756.00

Technological Education for Advanced Manufacturing Northeast Ohio has more than
7,000 manufacturing firms and ranks as one of the largest concentration of
manufacturers in the world. The region is experiencing a work force crisis;
manufacturers are now struggling to find appropriately skilled workers,
technicians, and engineers. On the other hand, the region has a large population
of undereducated, underexperienced, unemployed or underemployed residents,
predominately minority, who are ill prepared to take advantage of employment
opportunities in manufacturing, primarily because of skill deficiencies. This
team is developing the Technical Education for Advanced Manufacturing (TEAM)
project which integrates the manufacturing education efforts of ten regional
partners and establishes a seamless approach to manufacturing education that
addresses the needs of a target audience of high school, community college, and
university students as well as the unemployed or underemployed or undereducated
residents of the region. The heart of this project is the extension of
Cleveland's Manufacturing Learning Center (MLC), a hands-on educational model
which has been highly successful at the community college and university level,
downward to include not only high school students and teachers but to the
undereducated residents of the region. MLC activities are being expanded to
include two additional community colleges, Lakeland and Lorain County Community
College, and their associated Tech Prep programs. Faculty and students from the
partnering organizations team with MLC associates at Cleveland State and the
community colleges to work on productivity-improving process and product
development projects sponsored by more than fifty regional companies under the
mentorship of industrial personnel or MLC associates. Additional goals are to:
1. Design and implement a model for professional development of university and
community college faculty and secondary teachers, especially math and science,
that focuses on cross-institutional mentoring relationships and hands-on team
experiences in industry sponsored projects. 2. Upgrade the manufacturing
curriculum at all partner institutions and infuse it with real-world
manufacturing applications and ensure seamless progression and articulation
through the partner institutions. 3. Evaluate the curriculum development and
reform efforts in all partnering organizations and validate the best practices
at additional sites among the partners. This includes the Urban Systemic
Initiative within the Cleveland Public Schools. 4. Create computer-simulation
instructional materials that can be utilized at any level of learning--high
school, community college, and university--by utilizing input and applications
from industrial partners.