* 9602530
* Improvement of the Seawater System for the University of    Guam Marine Laboratory
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/1996,02/28/1999
* Steven Amesbury, University of Guam
* Continuing Grant
*  Kristen B. Daly
* 02/28/1999
* USD 174,390.00

The University of Guam Marine Laboratory will expand and upgrade the seawater
system in support of the growing demand for space to support research by both
resident faculty and students as well as visiting investigators. Prior
facilities improvements have included an upgrade of the seawater pumps,
installation of a redundant system that allowed for pump maintenance and repairs
without interruption of seawater flow and the addition of a back-up generator
with an automatic transfer switch which has enabled the system to run
continuously during periods of power outrage. The dependability of the present
seawater system will enhance experimentation and increase use of the laboratory
facilities for manipulative experiments under controlled conditions, and for
longer term growth and physiological studies. With the recent completion of a
visitors housing facility there is also an increasing demand for the use of the
water tables by visiting researchers. In order to ensure the facility can meet
the research needs of both resident and visiting scientists, the University of
Guam Marine Laboratory will expand and upgrade the present facilities. The
specific improvements include the seawater intake, expansion of the outdoor
enclosed space, addition of more seawater tables and tanks, and addition of a
back-up well to allow continuous seawater availability during tropical storms
and typhoons. The University of Guam Marine Laboratory supports the research of
eight full-time faculty, numerous graduate and undergraduate students, as well
as visiting investigators. The research demands on the facility have increased
due to the addition of new faculty at the laboratory, the recent establishment
of collaborative programs between the Marine Laboratory and the University of
Hawaii and the University of the Ryukyus (Okinawa, Japan), and the awareness of
the Marine Laboratory as a resource for coral reef research by over 550
scientists who attended the 7th International Coral Reef Symposium on Guam in
June 1992. The improvements to the seawater system will allow the support of the
increasing number of visiting scientists that wish to conduct research at the
laboratory, which will in turn enhance the research environment.