* 9602492
* NSF-CGP Fellowship:  Scanning Acoustic Microscopy Studies   of Micromechanical Properties of Osteoporotic Bone
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/1997,08/31/1998
* J. Lawrence Katz, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 08/31/1998
* USD 27,411.00

9602492 Katz This award supports U.S.-Japan collaborative research between Dr.
J. Lawrence Katz of the Department of Biomedical Engineering at Case Western
Reserve University and Professor Noriyoshi Chubachi in the Department of
Electrical Engineering at Tohoku University in Sendai, Japan. Dr. Katz will be
spending six months at Tohoku University undertaking scanning acoustic
microscopy studies of micromechanical properties of osteoporotic bone. The
researchers will research ultrasound techniques which measure sound velocity
and/or attenuation through specific bones, in vivo, to assess the level of "bone
quality" in order to develop more effective screening techniques for
osteoporosis as well as providing an indication of when bone might be at risk of
fracture. This technique provides an advantage over dual energy x-ray
absorptionmetry (DEXA) which provides information about the material properties
of bone, such as stiffness and rigidity, rather than bone density. By developing
correlations between elastic properties and bone strength, it then would be
possible to develop a fracture risk index which could become the basis for early
intervention of medical procedures to prevent the occurrence of fractures. The
U.S. researcher brings to this collaboration his knowledge of the scientific
relationships between structure, function and properties of bone tissues. More
recently he has been involved in research into the form function relationships
in bone tissues undergoing material changes (losses) due to the onset of
osteoporosis. This is complemented by expertise of the Japanese researcher in
the area of high frequency scanning acoustic microscopy (SAM) for bone
micromechanic studies. His laboratory is equipped with a state-of-the-art SAM
for work at very high resolution. The project is expected to result in greater
prediction of fracture risk to the large number of women, people in long term
bed rest, and astronauts in the microgravity environment o f space who have, or
are prone to, the serious condition of osteoporosis. Both researchers have
expressed their expectation to continue research on their project after the
conclusion of the six month visit.