* 9602018
* WORKSHOP:"Molecular, Functional, and Evolutionary Approachesto Stress and Inducible Stress Responses: Bridging the Gaps"(To be held at NSF May 14-15, 1996)
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/1996,03/31/1997
* Martin Feder, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* John A. Phillips
* 03/31/1997
* USD 33,465.00

Proposal: 9602018 PI: Feder This workshop examines multidisciplinary approaches
to research problems in the biological sciences, including the present
constraints on multidiscplinarity and how best to facilitate such integrative
research. The workshop uses the topic of biological responses that are induced
by environmental perturbations as a scientific focus because research on this
topic exemplifies how molecular, functional (e.g., ecophysiological), and
evolutionary approaches can be merged and integrated. The organizers and 25
participants with expertise in this broad area, but representing a diversity of
interests, career stages and backgrounds will participate in the event. Two
major components will be considered: (1) A scientific component, in which the
participants would consider how discrete approaches to understanding inducible
responses in organisms can be combined and synthesized to facilitate scientific
progress; and (2) A science policy/infrastructure/education component in which
the participants would consider whether the elements in the careers of
scientific researchers (e.g., development of interest in science, predoctoral
and postdoctoral training, activities of beginning and established researchers)
and in the formal structures with which they interact (e.g., academia, industry,
government, professional organizations) impede or facilitate multidisciplinary
research. The workshop will culminate in a series of recommendations to the
National Science Foundation with respect to its potential role in the
facilitation of multidisciplinary research and training.