* 9602098
* Economic and Environmental Risk Perceptions:  Determinants  of Environmental Policy in Transitional Societies
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1997
* Richard Barke, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Leland
* 08/31/1997
* USD 83,464.00

All societies face decisions about the relationship between environmental
protection and economic development, and all societies differ in the cultural,
historical, and political context in which those decisions must occur. Attempts
to generalize across systems have been illuminating but inconclusive, in part
because study designs often have focused on comparisons across similar systems,
or because underlying theory was poorly addressed. For example, according to the
`postmaterialist thesis,` wide-spread concern about the environment only emerges
in a society when it has achieved a relatively high standard of living, and
satisfied other, presumably more basic, needs. This is consistent with the
commonly held belief that economic growth conflicts with environmental policy.
If post-materialism is correct, environmentalism should increase only as
economic welfare increases. Recent data from Bulgaria and other countries around
the world indicate that concerns about the environment remain high even in the
face of economic woes. When long-standing political regimes fell in Eastern
Europe this last decade, it appeared that environmental activism was a driving
force behind economic and political change. The Burgas area of Bulgaria is
particularly suited to a study of these influences, because it is now undergoing
rapid economic and political restructuring, and has suffered considerable
environmental damage from the Neftochim petrochemical plant, the largest such
plant in Europe. In addition, there is a history of heavy pesticide and
fertilizer use in the area. Thus the stresses on risk perceptions and
environmental policy from economic, environmental, political and policy contexts
are heightened. Although multiple sociological theories have been proposed to
explain variability in environmentalism, these theories do not address
individual level beliefs, decisions and actions. At the individual level,
perceptions of riskiness and intentions to act to reduce a risk are hypothesized
to be the result of two attributes of the risk: (1) perceptions of exposure to
the risk, and (2) perceptions of costs and benefits to individuals and to
society from the hazard, moderated by (a) knowledge and beliefs about the hazard
underlying the risk (i.e., mental models), (b) beliefs about the ability of
individuals or of groups or organizations to reduce or increase the risk, and
(c) uncertainty about the risk. This project will contribute to the risk
perception and environmental policy literatures, by characterizing risk
perceptions, local environmental policies, and attitudes toward those policies
in the context of a transitional society.