* 9602900
* Solid Model Experiments in Force Feedback for Molecular     Docking
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1998
* Michael Bailey, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* THOMAS QUARLES
* 08/31/1998
* USD 45,300.00

Phylogenetic analysis is a powerful methodology with broad explanatory power
derived from its ability to make predictions about evolutionary process.
However, the process of arriving at a classification involves decisions about
how to reconcile multiple tree solutions, how to visualize data changes on
phylogenetic tree topologies, how to represent conflicts among solutions based
on different data sets and finally, methods for presenting these results in
publishable form. The field of scientific visualization specializes in the
development of visual display techniques to reveal (1) patterns and structure
within a data set, and (2) patterns and structure between data sets. The
phylogenetic tree, or cladogram, is an example of type (1) visualization because
it reveals the relationships among taxa within a single data set. Type (2)
visualizations instead focus upon the simultaneous presentation of multiple data
sets or multiple representations of the same data set. Within this proposal we
outline a series of highly visual, data driven methods for data inspection,
simultaneous multiple tree visualization, evaluation of assumptions about the
analysis (e.g., choice of root taxon), presentation techniques for hierarchical
data and methods for linking, through the World Wide Web (WWW), phylogenetic
trees to the data that generated the result(s). Few or none of these techniques
are in current use in systematics, in fact, they represent very recent research
within computer science. We -believe that the richness and complexity of
phylogenetic analysis invites new methods for visualizing the analytical
process. MacClade Maddison92 , a Macintosh program for visualizing data change
on a single tree, enhanced our understanding of the how character changes
occurred on single tree topologies. We will expand that type of analysis to
include far richer visual metaphors for viewing the da ta matrix to phylogeny
pathway. The research we are proposing is exploratory and by design we will
investigate methods that may not prove fruitful for all data sets. However, the
applicability of these methods for other forms of hierarchical data makes the
likelihood high that some or even most of the visualization tools will assist
researchers in all areas of comparative biology. In addressing the visualization
problem, the assumptions--a 2D, static medium, Euclidean drawing space, separate
figures, data and explanations and homogeneous levels of detail in single
illustrations--implicit in current tree visualization techniques must be re-
examined. We envision that as electronic journals become ever more prominent in
all-areas of science the need will exist for display techniques optimized to on-
line viewing. This research should provide significant insight into means for
displaying classifications and systematic analyses within this new medium.
Although a large number of the specific deliverables for this research will be
"backend" programs for creating the visualizations .and database architectures
for storing trees and data, we will provide access to the entire suite of
technologies through WWW browsers (by mid-1996, browsers for all major
workstation and PC platforms should incorporate the capability for viewing these
results). Users will be able to input and store trees and NEXUS (a standard file
format for phylogenetic data) data matrices for subsequent analysis, all within
their browser.