* 9602594
* Renovation and Repair of Plant Growth Facilities
* O/D,OIA
* 02/15/1997,01/31/2000
* Richard Olmstead, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 01/31/2000
* USD 300,000.00

Research in Plant Sciences at the University of Washington represents a long-
standing interdisciplinary program encompassing fundamental and strategic
research goals and emphasizing a diverse array of research organisms and
experimental approaches. Research performed involves investigations reflecting
the diversity of natural habitats in the Pacific Northwest, ranging from marine
algae to old-growth forests, and includes basic research into the fundamental
nature of plant growth and diversity and applied research addressing questions
important to the economic well-being of society at large. Traditional centers of
plant science research include the Department of Botany and the College of
Forest Resources, but the expanding interest in plant science now includes
research in Zoology, Biochemistry, Genetics and the Center for Urban
Horticulture. The link that connects individual research programs in all of
these units is the plant growth facility centered around the botany greenhouses
that include a central greenhouse, a plant laboratory, and five plant growth
chambers. Existing plant facilities, constructed in 1939 and 1949, represent an
aging infrastructure badly in need of repair. The 1949 vintage electrical supply
system is inadequate to handle the needs for artificial light and other
technical advances that are standard in modern greenhouses. Growth chambers are
approximately 20 years old and are unreliable and need replacing. Funding from
the Academic Research Infrastructure Program will be used to partially support
the University's effort in modernizing plant facilities needed to aid
researchers in the pursuit of conducting leading edge research. Renovations will
consist of: upgrading utility systems, exterior glazing, and benching; replacing
outdated growth chambers with modern ones capable of supporting research
activities requiring controlled growth environments; and installing new
equipment and controls needed to maintain environmental conditions throughout
the year. Improvement to the infrastructure of the greenhouses and the addition
of new growth chambers will accommodate all aspects of research and research
training for the future. á¼