* 9602537
* U.S.-Swiss Cooperative Research on Spectroscopy and Energy  Redistribution in Methanol
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/1996,08/31/2001
* David Perry, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Mark A. Suskin
* 08/31/2001
* USD 22,900.00

This award supports Professor David S. Perry and a graduate student of the
University of Akron to collaborate in chemistry research with Professor T. R.
Rizzo and his research group at the Molecular Physical Chemistry Laboratory of
the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology in Lausanne, Switzerland. They propose
to study energy redistribution within energized methanol molecules. They will
examine three different frequency regions by various methods which take
advantage of complementary expertise and equipment within the collaborating US
and Swiss research groups. Specifically, the fundamental regions will be studied
by direct absorption spectroscopies in Akron, and the higher overtone regions
will be studied by infrared- assisted photofragment spectroscopy in Lausanne.
The nature and quantity of reagent vibrational energy has long been recognized
as a crucial factor in controlling chemical reactivity. Redistribution of
vibrational and rotational energy is known to occur on several timescales. As
energy is increased, the relevant interactions appear first as discrete
perturbations, then as clumps of eigenstates, and finally as unresolvably dense
contours. This collaboration will study a particular system, methanol, over a
wide range of energies and time scales, in order to improve understanding and
discrimination of that range of analytical responses.