* 9602528
* FSML: Enhancing Harvard Forest's Study of Forest Response to Disturbance: A Research and Education Program Investigating Ecosystem Dynamics in New England
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1998
* David Foster, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 08/31/1998
* USD 100,546.00

Over the past ten years the Harvard Forest has developed an integrated and
cross-disciplinary research and educational program involving researchers and
students from across the northeastern U.S. that focuses on the response of
forest ecosystems to disturbance and stress resulting from natural and
anthropogenic processes. This program is structured around six approaches: (1)
reconstructive studies; (2) long- term measurement and observation; (3)
experimental manipulations; (4) controlled environment studies; (5) integration
of results within our research group and collaboratively with other research
groups; and (6) application of results to policy issues in natural resource
management, conservation biology, and human health and environment. The pressing
need for expanded new facilities to accommodate the growing numbers of visiting
scientists and students led to the development of a ten-year plan for the
renovation and construction of additional laboratories, office space, archival
facilities, housing, and computer telecommunications and networking systems.
With support from Harvard University and NSF, this plan has been substantially
accomplished. The remaining major project is the development of housing and
meeting space for visiting students and researchers. A recent gift of property
directly contiguous to the main Harvard Forest buildings presents the
opportunity to complete this final element in our ten-year plan. The property
consists of one large house (the Fisher House with 13 bedrooms and 5 baths), a
caretaker's cottage, outbuildings and 20 ha of forest land. due to its large
size, ideal location and solid construction, the Fisher House represents a
perfect opportunity for the development of free-standing accommodations that are
desperately needed for our large visitor and collaborator groups. This project
will renovate and restore this facility for educational and research purposes
using joint funding from Harvard University and NSF&gt; The comp leted structure
will greatly enhance science and education in ecology by increasing our
capability to serve and to integrate the diverse array of students, researchers,
and visitors who comprise our extended community. This facilities development
will also directly improve research operations for collaborating scientists by
removing non-research uses (i.e. housing) from our main office, laboratory and
administrative building (Shaler Hall) and freeing up approximately 2300 sq. ft
of new office and work space in ten rooms in Shaler Hall.