* 9602643
* Renovation and Partial Replacement of the Environmental     Chemistry Laboratories at Coastal Carolina University
* O/D,OIA
* 03/15/1997,02/28/1999
* Kim Weaver, Coastal Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 02/28/1999
* USD 300,000.00

Coastal Carolina University, located in Conway, SC, is the recipient of ARI
funds for the renovation and partial replacement of environmental chemistry
laboratories. Existing facilities in the Science Building are under stress due
to a phenomenal growth in the number of students participating in the sciences.
Because the labs were not designed to accommodate a large number of student
projects, adequate space has become the major impediment in expanding research
activities for undergraduates in biology, chemistry, and marine science. To
increase the efficiency of space and time usage, the university has pledged to
modernize existing space for faculty and student researchers. In conjunction to
the reconfiguration of space, renovations will consist of: upgrading electrical,
plumbing and lighting systems, replacing aged fume hoods and water distiller,
installing benches, cabinets and shelving, and providing for gas cylinder and
hazardous chemical storage. Renovations will include additional safety stations
and ensure space complies with ADA regulations. Revitalized facilities will
improve the department's availability to facilitate student research and will
enhance collaborations between faculty and student researchers. Although the
institution and science departments have been successful in increasing
enrollments of female students, it is anticipated that this project will aid the
university in its recruitment efforts to provide educational opportunities for
minority students, including prospects from minority families with no history of
college matriculation.