* 9602056
* Endomembrane Calcium Control and the Regulation of Cell     Division
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1996,01/31/1999
* Robert Silver, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Richard Rodewald
* 01/31/1999
* USD 218,000.00

96-02056 Silver The role of Ca2+ in controlling various cellular processes
presents an enigma in its ubiquity and selectivity. One process, mitosis,
requires interactions among many serial and parallel biochemical pathways that
are coordinated by the cell cycle. Intracellular free Ca2+ (Ca2+i) regulates
specific biochemical and physiological aspects of mitosis, for example, nuclear
envelope breakdown (NEB). Prior to NEB there are highly localized pulses of
Ca2+i within discrete domains which are called quantum emission domains (QEDs).
These QEDs were detected using aequorin luminescence to report Ca2+i and a
multispectral video microscopy combined with a high performance computational
image and signal analysis system. The analysis of various QED-patterns suggest
that Ca2+i prior to NEB are evoked by an intracellular chemical signal that is
generated proximal to the QEDs, contradicting models that evoke diffusible
agonists or of Ca2+-activated Ca2+ release. The spatial and temporal resolution
of this multispectral approach far exceeds that obtained by other methods; This
approach also avoids perturbations that are associated with many fluorescent
Ca2+ reporters that cause problem with Ca2+-buffering or cause UV toxicity. The
observed Ca2+i-QEDs patterns are highly structural, non-random, and are
apparently of a digital frequency modulated format. These patterns could explain
how Ca2+i control many cellular processes, a particular frequency controls a
particular event. These early studies will be extended in order to correlate
spatial and temporal patterns of the Ca2+i-QEDs within microdomains with events
in mitosis that are known to be Ca2+-dependent. These studies will be conducted
in sand dollar (Echinaracnius parma) blastomeres. Computational analyses using
sophisticated pattern analysis algorithms and high performance computing should
result in identifying and in classifying a type of cellular semantics and
syntax. A library of Ca2+i-QED patterns will be collected from normal mitotic c
ells and from cells whose Ca2+ regulation mechanisms has been altered. This
collection of patterns should allow a deciphering of the language of Ca2+i
signaling. Leukotriene B4 (LtB4) evokes Ca2+i-QEDs in sand dollar eggs and in
mitotic cells. Inhibitors that interfere with the production of LtB4 inhibit
mitosis in a time and dose dependent manners. The cell cycle pattern of LtB4
metabolism as well as the expression of enzymes of the arachidonic acid pathway
will be determined in an attempt to correlate these events with Ca2+-dependent
mitotic events. Analogous studies will be conducted with a class of luminescent
02- sensitive fungal compounds to monitor 02- production during lipid
metabolism. The general goal of these studies is too learn how cells make
decisions that are a function of Ca2+i. The identification of Ca2+i-QEDs as a
type of cellular language with lipid metabolites controlling the expression of
this language should bring us closer to understanding how certain decisions are
made as well as where and when these decisions are made. %%% The role of Ca2+ in
controlling various cellular processes presents an enigma in its ubiquity and
selectivity. One process, mitosis, requires interactions among many serial and
parallel biochemical pathways that are coordinated by the cell cycle.
Intracellular free Ca2+ regulates specific biochemical and physiological aspects
of mitosis, for example, nuclear envelope breakdown. As yet little is known
about how the cell make decisions involving intracellular free Ca2+. ***