* 9603262
* U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science:  Design, Synthesis and      Characterization of New Fullerides
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2002
* Otto Zhou, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Larry H. Weber
* 05/31/2002
* USD 23,500.00

9603262 Zhou This award supports a three-year collaborative research project
between Professor Otto Zhou of the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
(UNC) and Dr. Yoshihiro Iwasa at the Japan Advanced Institute of Science and
Technology in Ishikawa, Japan. The researchers will undertaking studies of the
design, synthesis and characterization of fullerides. Rational approaches will
be adopted to synthesize materials with the desired properties (electronic,
optical and magnetic properties) from the molecular level. Investigations will
involve: 1) superconductivity in metal intercalated fullerides; 2) metal-
insulator transition, and 3) fullerene polymers. The proposal brings together
the efforts of two laboratories that have constituted different parts of the
process. By combining the strength in materials synthesis and structural
characterization at UNC with the expertise and facilities for property
measurements in Japan, the researchers will be able to take a comprehensive
approach to address the physics and materials science issues of
superconductivity in metal fullerides and explore other novel carbon fullerene-
based compounds. Through the exchange of ideas and technology, this project will
broaden our base of basic knowledge and promote international understanding and
cooperation. ***