* 9603618
* Biosynthesis and Regulation of the Phytotoxin Coronatine in Pseudomonas Syringae
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/1997,03/31/2002
* Carol Bender, Oklahoma State University
* Continuing Grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 03/31/2002
* USD 335,000.00

Bender 9603618 Coronatine is a phytotoxin produced by the plant pathogenic
bacterium Pseudomonas syringae. Previous work showed that coronatine
biosynthesis is regulated by temperature and controlled by three regulatory
proteins (CorR, CorS, and CorP). One objective of this research project is to
utilize a genetic approach to determine if the three regulatory proteins are
directly responsible for thermoregulation, or if another level of control is
present and responsible for coronatine gene expression at low temperatures. The
functional role of the three regulatory proteins encoded by the modified two-
component regulatory system will also be investigated. Each protein will be
purified and in vitro assays will address the following: (a) the role of CorS as
both a positive and negative regulator of coronatine biosynthesis; (b) the
potential involvement of CorR and CorP in a phosphorelay; and (c) the role of
CorR as a transcriptional activator of all thermally regulated transcripts in
the coronatine gene cluster. Previous work has also shown that the biosynthesis
of coronafacic acid, a component of coronatine, was shown to require the
coordinated effort of mono- and multifunctional polyketide synthetases. This
research will confirm the role of a multifunctional polyketide synthetase in the
biosynthesis of coronafacic acid. The complete nucleotide sequence of the
coronafacic acid gene cluster will be obtained and used to deduce the functional
roles of catalytic sites within the large proteins associated with coronafacic
acid biosynthesis. Nonpolar mutations will be constructed within the coronafacic
acid gene cluster and used to assess the potential involvement of a
cyclopentenene compound in coronafacic acid biosynthesis. Significance. Many of
the diseases caused by the plant pathogenic bacterium P. syringae are more
severe at cooler temperatures, so it is likely that other traits in this
bacterium are also controlled by temperature. Furthermore, the regulatory
controls involved in coronatine b iosynthesis are likely to have a much broader
significance and be relevant in other bacteria where gene expression is
controlled by temperature. The identification of a regulatory system which
responds to reduced temperatures will be of practical usage in situations where
gene expression at lower temperatures is desirable. Furthermore, the
characterization of the gene cluster encoding the polyketide coronafacic acid
will be of immense benefit to other research groups working on polyketides, but
especially those working on multifunctional polyketide synthetases. Most
research on the latter class of enzymes occurs largely in industry, and the data
is generally not released to the public. Also, much of the previous work on
polyketides has occurred with Gram-positive bacteria, but little is known about
polyketide synthesis in Gram-negative bacteria such as Pseudomonas. The
modification of polyketide gene clusters in Pseudomonas has enormous potential
to increase the number of new compounds with altered biosynthetic and
antimicrobial activities. This research will contribute towards that goal by
elucidating the genes involved in the biosynthesis of coronafacic acid, a
complex polyketide of mixed origins.