* 9603716
* Calcium Signaling in Deflagellation
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/1997,04/30/2000
* Lynne Quarmby, Emory University
* Continuing Grant
* Barbara K. Zain
* 04/30/2000
* USD 353,249.00

9603716 Quarmby Technical The goal of this proposal is to analyze signaling
pathways in Chlamydomonas, a unicellular, biflagellate alga. Chlamydomonas
exhibits two dramatically different behaviors that involve increases in Ca2+ i:
(1) pH-triggered shedding of the two flagella and (2) light-triggered changes in
swimming behavior. The ultimate objective is to understand the mechanisms
whereby pH shock leads to flagellar shedding, while a light stimulus results in
a change in swimming behavior and not in deflagellation, even though both of
these pathways involve Ca2+ signaling. The approach is to begin with a complete
dissection of the Ca2+ signaling pathway of pH shock-induced deflagellation.
From work under the NSF award which currently supports this project, it is known
that a brief pH shock activates the ilflux of Ca2+ which triggers
deflagellation. Mutants with 2 phenotypes have been characterized: (1) The adf
strains are defective in pH-regulated Ca2+ influx and (2) the fa strains are
defective in responding to the Ca2+ signal of deflagellation. The central
hypothesis of this proposal is that the Ca2+-binding properties and localization
of the protein which senses the Ca2+ signal of deflagellation are such that this
protein responds selectively to the deflagellation Ca2+ signal and does not
detect phototactic Ca2+ signals. This hypothesis provides an excellent framework
to test the idea that the temporal properties of a Ca2+ signal determine the
cellular response. The first aim is to characterize a gene from the Ca2+ sensing
pathway which is defective in the fa strains. A molecularly tagged allele has
already been isolated and the location of the gene determined. The fa clone will
be expressed in E. coli in order to generate antibodies and to produce protein
for biochemical characterization. Ca2+ binding studies will test the prediction
that this protein binds Ca2+ slowly and with low affinity. The second aim is to
screen for new deflagellation mutants in order to determine how many d ifferent
proteins are involved in (a) responding to the increase in H+ i and gating the
Ca2+ channel, and (b) binding the influxed Ca2+ and severing the flagella. From
ongoing work under this award, it is known that the Ca2+ channel of
deflagellation is distinct from the channels involved in phototaxis. The third
aim is to clone a gene from the adf pathway and generate antibodies in order to
directly test the idea that the Ca2+ channel involved in deflagellation is
located in the flagellar transition region. The discrimination of Ca2+ signals
within a single cell is a fundamental problem in cell biology. Chlamydomonas
provides a unique experimental system to determine how the cell can distinguish
the Ca2+ signals which result in distinct physiological responses because the
behaviors, such as phototaxis and deflagellation, are easily observed by
microscopy and mutations in the pathways are easily identified. Chlamydomonas is
haploid and produces meiotic spores amenable to tetrad analysis. Techniques are
available for transformation and for cloning. The fundamental mechanisms of Ca2+
mediated signal transduction have been conserved throughout evolution,
therefore, it is reasonably hoped that information acquired in this study will
provide new concepts of Ca2+ signaling. Non-technical Calcium ions play a
central role in transmitting the signals perceived by a wide variety of
environmental and hormonal receptors to induce cellular reactions. Understanding
the role of calcium in transmitting signal information can be efficiently
analyzed by using simple model organisms of which the unicellular algae
Chlamydomonas is among the favorite systems of biologists. Acid pH induces
Chlamydomonas to shed its flagella which involves a calcium mediated signaling
pathway to cellular components that mediate the flagellar shedding. Dr. Quarmby
will use a multidisciplinary approach to elucidate the role and interactions of
calcium in flagellar shedding. This project is important because it will
elucidate fundam ental processes involved in calcium mediated signaling that are
likely to be evolutionarily conserved in animals and plants. ***