* 9603552
* 17th International Congress of Biochemistry &amp; Molecular     Biology: to be held August 24-29, 1997 in San Francisco, CA
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/1997,06/30/1998
* Ralph Bradshaw, American Society of Biolchemistry and Molecular Biology
* Standard Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 06/30/1998
* USD 20,000.00

9603552 Bradshaw Part 1 Technical The International Congress in Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, a forum for discussion of advances in this topic area by
scientists coming from around the world has been the major event of the field,
and has been in operation for nearly 50 years. This year, USA is invited to
serve as the host. It will be held August 24 - 29, in San Francisco, followed by
a post conference meeting in Asilomar, California. The congress this year is
organized in a format of 36 symposia, 12 of three-day duration and 24 of two-day
duration. The two-day symposia are divided into two equal sections with unique
time slots such that an individual can attend all of the lectures. The program
includes areas of interest in enzymatic mechanisms and catalysis, protein
folding, molecular design, receptors and signal transduction, signaling,
regulation, intracellular sorting and trafficking, replication, recombination
and repair, genome analysis, bioenergetics, protein turn over, macromolecular
modification, ribozyme, and others. The topics have been selected and scheduled
to allow a flow from three-day symposia to those in the ensuing two-day
symposia. The design is to allow participants to remain highly focused, as is
appropriate for individuals with very distinct and specialized interests, or one
can attend a broad spectrum of lectures, as befits a generalist. The support
will be used to help defray costs for approximately 30 young scientists from USA
to attend one or both of these venues. Part 2. Non technical The International
Congress in Biochemistry and Molecular Biology is a forum for discussion of
advances in this topic area by scientists from around the world. It is the major
event of the field, and has been in operation for nearly 50 years. This year, it
will take place during August 24 - 29, in San Francisco. USA is invited to serve
as the host. The congress will be held with a post conference meeting in
Asilomar, California. It is organized in a format of 36 sympos ia, 12 of three-
day duration and 24 of two-day duration, with many areas of interest from basic
to applied biochemistry and molecular biology included. The topics have been
selected and scheduled to allow a flow from three-day symposia to those in the
ensuing two-day symposia. The design is to allow participants to remain highly
focused, as is appropriate for individuals with very distinct and specialized
interests, or one can attend a broad spectrum of lectures, as befits a
generalist. The support will be used to help defray costs for approximately 30
young U.S. scientists.