* 9603005
* U.S.-Hungary Chemical Engineering Research on Phase         Equilibrium and Interfacial Properties in Shearing Liquids
* O/D,OISE
* 12/01/1996,11/30/1999
* Peter Cummings, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 11/30/1999
* USD 23,906.00

INT 9603005 Cummings This U.S.-Hungary research project between Dr. Peter
Cummings of the University of Tennessee and Dr. Andras Baranyai of Eotvos
University, Budapest, will examine the interfacial properties of shearing
liquids in atomic/molecular detail using nonequilibrium molecular dynamic
simulations. The liquids employed may be liquid-vapor or liquid-liquid
interfaces in the presence or in the absence of amphiphilic molecules. This
study, at the molecular level, is undertaken as a preliminary step toward being
able to predict the mixing or demixing behavior of polymers. Collaboratively,
the U.S.-Hungarian team intends to: 1) develop simulation algorithms for this
study; 2) model the structural properties of shearing interfaces at the
molecular level; 3) calculate the physical properties of the interfaces and
quantify the effect of the shear; and 5) develop simulation algorithms for the
study of phase separation in steady shearing systems. In the process, the
researchers will search for other possible simulation methods applicable to the
study of nonequilibrium separation. Results are expected to contribute to our
understanding of fast flow conditions, such as those arising frequently in
chemical, oil and gas industrial processing. This joint project in chemical
engineering research fulfills the program objective of advancing scientific
knowledge by enabling leading experts in the United States and Eastern Europe to
combine complementary talents and pool resources in areas of strong mutual
interest and competence. ??