* 9603927
* Vacuolar Sequestration of Anthocyanin in Maize
* BIO,IOS
* 01/15/1997,09/30/2000
* Virginia Walbot, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Judith A. Verbeke
* 09/30/2000
* USD 409,750.00

9603927 Walbot Flowering plants synthesize an incredible diversity of "toxic"
natural products. The PIs use many of these compounds in medicine, for example,
the anti-cancer drugs taxol and colchicine, the heart medicine digitalis, and
even the widely used pain relievers of aspirin and quinine are based on plant
natural products. Within the plant, theses compounds and many additional
pigments and secondary metabolites deter herbivores and pathogens, and are thus
part of the plant's ability to survive in the natural world. Surprisingly little
is known, however, about how plants can synthesize "toxic" molecules and yet
avoid damaging their own cells. Biosynthesis occurs in the plant cell cytoplasm,
but the toxic metabolites are stored in the plant vacuole. The biochemistry and
molecular biology of anthocyanin pigment biosynthesis is the best understood
secondary metabolite pathway in higher plants. Anthocyanins are the red-blue-
purple pigments found in most flowers and many fruits, and their color makes
them a useful "marker" for elucidating the mechanisms of vacuolar sequestration.
In maize, the Bronze2 gene encodes that last genetically defined step in
anthocyanin biosynthesis. This enzyme is a glutathione S-transferase (GST) that
adds a chemical "tag" to cytoplasmic anthocyanin that facilitates entry into the
plant vacuole. This is the first established mechanism by which plants can
transport large secondary metabolites into the vacuole. In the proposed work,
the investigators will define the distribution of the Bronze2 enzyme, determine
if it complexes with other GSTs, and determine if this enzyme has additional in
vivo substrates besides anthocyanin. Mutants in Bz2 and other maize GSTs will be
used to define which enzymes perform unique roles and which have overlapping
roles. Structural studies of the transiently glutathionationated anthocyanin
pigment will define the site(s) of glutathione tagging and determine if
subsequent anthocyanin modification in the vacuole occurs at th e same sites
tagged with glutathione in the cytoplasm. Understanding the key steps of
anthocyanin transfer from cytoplasm to vacuole will provide new insights into
the capacity of plants to synthesize and store a wide range of toxic but very
useful metabolites.