* 9603878
* Adaptive Significance of Circadian Timing Systems in Wild,  Free-Living Chipmunks
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/1997,08/31/1999
* Patricia DeCoursey, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Zoe Eppley
* 08/31/1999
* USD 109,400.00

9603878 DeCoursey Circadian pacemakers are presumed to be highly adaptive for
survival and for genetic fitness of organisms since they play a role in diverse
daily physiological and behavioral functions of nearly all animals. No direct
test has been made, however, to assess the survival value of circadian
pacemakers in wild species, primarily due to the technical difficulties
involved. The object of this project is to use a favorable rodent circadian
model to test the importance of the primary mammalian circadian pacemaker, the
suprachiasmatic nuclei (SCN). The rationale of the research is to surgically
create clockless, arrhythmic cohorts of a wild population by SCN lesioning, then
compare and control and clockless groups. The study system will be the chipmunks
of a southern Appalachian wilderness population at Mountain Lake Biological
Research Station, Pembroke, Virginia. A year-long pilot study has demonstrated
the feasibility of lesioning the SCN of wild-caught individuals, reintroducing
them back into their burrows, and then documenting selected measures of fitness
by periodic trapping censuses, daily visual observations, and tracking of
radiotransmitter-collared animals. In the proposed study, all chipmunks of a
4-hectare grid will be marked by permanent ear tags and colored bead necklaces
for visual observation. Twenty SCN-lesioned, 20 sham-lesioned, and 24 intact
control animals will then be radiocollared and followed intensely for a two-year
period; measures of fitness will include daily activity patterns, mortality,
feeding success as evidenced by body weight, den and core territory defense,
reproductive success, and hibernation behavior. In parallel with these free-
living individuals, 5 control chipmunks and 5 SCN-lesioned chipmunkds will be
monitored by radiotelemetry during the winter months from November to April in
an outdoor Hibernaculum facility to obtain additional information on hibernation
during the time that wild chipmunks are largely inactive underground and di
fficult to monitor.