* 9603896
* RUI:  Novel Specialization of the Lateral Line System:      The Laterophysic Connection
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/1997,01/31/2000
* Jacqueline Webb, Villanova University
* Standard Grant
* Zoe Eppley
* 01/31/2000
* USD 132,232.00

9603896 Webb The morphology of a unique connection between the swim bladder and
the mechanosensory lateral line canal system in the head of tropical coral reef
butterflyfishes will be described for the first time. It is hypothesized that
this unique "laterophysic" connection makes the lateral line system, which is
normally only sensitive to fluid movement, sensitive to fluid movement,
sensitive to pressure stimuli such as sound. 3-D reconstruction of histological
material will be used to describe morphological variation in the laterophysic
connection in three Chaetodon spies and to compare them with butterflyfishes in
two general that lack the connection to better define the structural features
that characterize this sensory specialization. Anatomical specializations in a
single genus that change the function of a sensory system are rare. The
laterophysic connection is an excellent system in which to study the
evolutionary functional morphology of a sensory specialization. Chaetodon is a
well-known and ecologically important genus of coral reef fishes for which we
have an expanding body of ecological and behavioral data, and a well-supported
hypothesis of phylogenetic relationships. The results of this study will lead to
collaborative neuroanatomical and behavioral investigations of the function of
this unique sensory specialization.