* 9603980
* Evolution of a Genetic Island of Catabolic Diversity in Bacteria
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/1997,02/28/2001
* L.Nicholas Ornston, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 02/28/2001
* USD 339,000.00

Ornston 9603980 We shall expand knowledge of an Acinetobacter chromosomal
segment that allows growth of the bacteria with many different chemicals from
the environment. Presently sequenced and open to genetic investigation is the
pca-qui-pob cluster containing genes associated with catabolism of quinate
(qui), shikimate (qui) and 4-hydroxybenzoate (pob) through protocatechuate
(pca). Downstream from pobA are genes provisionally designated caf and required
for catabolism of chemically analogous plant products (caffeate, coumarate and
ferulate) through metabolic reactions that give rise to protocatechuate. After
this DNA has been cloned and sequenced, it will be subjected to genetic analysis
by a simple procedure that allows selection of strains in which caf genes are
defective. The results will expand knowledge of both the evolutionary source and
the biochemical mechanisms of enzymes that catabolize caffeate, coumarate and
ferulate. The enzymes are likely to share ancestry with enzymes associated with
the (-oxidation of fatty acids. Thus the combination of evolutionary and genetic
investigations is designed to elucidate how genes for a classical metabolic
sequence have been adapted to novel metabolic challenges. Variations upon the
metabolic theme of ( oxidation are represented in catIJF and pcaIJF, nearly
identical chromosomal segments that exchange sequence information by gene
conversion. The potential contribution of this intracellular horizontal sequence
transfer to concerted divergence of catIJF and pcaIJF in divergent Acinetobacter
cell lines will be compared with the rates of divergence of caf genes with
analogous biochemical functions. Knowledge emerging from the foregoing studies
will define further a chromosomal island of catabolic diversity, the pca-qui-
pob-caf gene cluster containing genetic information allowing growth of
Acinetobacter with a wide range of compounds in the environment. The nutrients
support the growth of many but not all representatives of the genus Acinetobacte
r. We shall characterize genetic variants of the pca-qui-pob-caf gene cluster
from different Acinetobacter cell lines. Particular attention will be directed
to strains exhibiting phenotypes indicating that portions of the cluster are
absent. We shall determine the extent to which the missing phenotypic properties
reflect the absence of DNA required for their maintenance. This evidence will
indicate if the known phenotypic variations are the consequence of abrupt
genetic discontinuities that may help to distinguish members of different
genomospecies within the complex genus Acinetobacter. If genetic variations in
the pca-qui-pob-caf cluster are concordant with biological separation of
Acinetobacter genomospecies by other criteria, it may be possible to infer how
evolution of different cell lines within the genus was influenced by different
sets of nutritional opportunities within the environment. This project will
expand knowledge of evolutionary mechanisms that led to the extraordinary
ability of bacteria to remove chemicals from the environment. Application of
such knowledge may improve the biological cleanup of environmental chemicals and
also may assist in development of processes for bacterial conversion of natural
resources to chemicals with improved value for society.