* 9603951
* "Development of the Immune System: Are Neonatal T Cells     Deficient in Numbers or Function In Vivo?
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/1997,04/30/2000
* Rebecca Adkins, University of Miami School of Medicine
* Standard Grant
* Jermelina Tupas
* 04/30/2000
* USD 210,000.00

Abstract 9603951 Adkins Newborn animals mount poor immune responses, a condition
referred to as neonatal immunodeficiency. For decades it was widely believed
that this conditions was at least partially due to the developmentally immature
state of newborn T cells. The generally accepted hypothesis was that neonatal T
cells were qualitatively different from adult T cells, resulting in deficient T
cell mediated responses. However, several recent studies indicate that reduced T
cell mediated responses may be caused solely by reduced numbers of T cells in
the neonatal animal. This interpretation is difficult to reconcile with the
wealth of data showing phenotypic and functional immaturity among the neonatal T
cell population. Resolution of the relative importance of neonatal T cell
numbers vs function is pivotal for our understanding of the developmental
biology of the immune system. This investigator is proposing experiments to
determine whether the deficient T cell mediated responses of neonates are due to
qualitative or quantitative differences, or both, between newborn and adult T
cells. First the relative capacities of newborn and adult T cells to provide
help for B cell antibody responses in vivo will be measured. Then the types and
amounts of cytokines produced by lymph node T cells in neonates and in adults in
response to a primary stimulation will be compared. In neonates, these responses
will also be measured when adult antigen presenting cells are provided. These
studies will provide a definitive test of the functional capacities of newborn T
cells in situ. Although it has been known for a long time that newborn animals
have poor immune responses, the reason for this has not been determined. A
number of recent experiments do not conform to the accepted hypothesis that this
may due to reduced numbers of T cells, The experiments in this proposal will
determine the functional capacities of newborn T cells in the immune response
and provide a basis for understanding neonatal immunodeficiency. ***