* 9603750
* Neuronal Regulation of Gene Expression in Oligodendrocytes
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/1997,01/31/2001
* Pamela Knapp, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 01/31/2001
* USD 239,998.00

IBN-9603750 Knapp These studies are concerned with 2 different types of cells
found in the brain: nerves and oligodenrocytes. During the time that the brain
is developing, oligodendrocytes make connections with nerves and eventually wrap
a fatty coating called myelin around the long extensions of the nerve cells.
This fatty coating is very important since it functions to insulate the nerve
cells as in an electrical wire, allowing them to send signals with speed and
accuracy. When myelin does not form properly or when it is destroyed by injury
or disease, the nerves do not function properly and this results in problems
with movement, vision and many other body systems. Since this myelin coating is
so important for the function of nerves, it is critical that we understand how
nerves and oligodendrocytes recognize each other in the developing brain and how
they interact. Some evidence presented by the principal investigator suggests
that there are signals which are sent from nerves to regulate oligodendrocyte
development and behavior. The basic goal of these studies is to determine what
these signals are and how oligodendrocytes recognize and respond to them. The
investigators propose to address 3 related questions about the relationship
between nerves causes oligodendrocytes to synthesize particular proteins and
then distribute them to the correct place within the cell. (Sometimes in order
for a protein to function properly it must not only be made in sufficient
amounts, but must also be put in the right place.) Based on our earlier
findings, the investigators have chosen to work with proteins which control the
ion distribution and electrical activity within cells. The second question is
whether contact with nerves regulates the distribution of the precursor to those
proteins (this is called mRNA). The final question is whether the investigators
can identify specific chemicals on the surfaces of either oligodendroctyes or
nerves which serve as signa ls to control protein mRNA production and
distribution in oligodendrocytes. These studies will help us to understand how
nerves control oligodendrocyte development and the formulation of myelin.