* 9603837
* Regulation of CNS Ion Channels By Lipid Signaling Molecules
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/1997,01/31/2001
* Douglas Eaton, Emory University
* Continuing Grant
* Marc D. Servetnick
* 01/31/2001
* USD 255,000.00

9603837 Denson Electrical activity in the central nervous system (CNS) results
from the transmembrane movement of charged ions through special openings in the
neuron membrane called ion channels. One important ion channel within the CNS is
a special type of potassium channel (called big potassium or BK-channels) which
allows potassium ions to move from the inside to the outside of the cell . This
movement is essential to maintain normal rhythmic activity of repetitively
firing brain cells such as those involved in regulation of the heart rate and
rhythm and sleep. Because of the importance of these channels, the mechanisms
responsible for controlling their activity are interesting. Although some
regulation of these channels depends upon changes in intracellular ions,
regulation of these channels also involves chemicals which are normally produced
in the cell membrane. Most of these chemicals are derived via the breakdown of
fatty molecules called phospholipids. One major chemical reaction involves the
production of a chemical called arachidonic acid from these phospholipids.
Arachidonic acid has been shown to activate this special type of potassium
channel either directly or by the regulation of other intracellular chemicals.
To understand this regulation requires an examination of the both arachidonic
acid and the other chemicals which may be affected by arachidonic acid. Since
arachidonic acid is such an important regulatory chemical in terms of producing
electrophysiologic responses, the experiments in this proposal will focus on the
several possible pathways which govern arachidonic acid production. The
objectives of the proposal are: (1) determine the characteristics of arachidonic
acid activation of BK channels; (2) determine if arachidonic acid production is
regulated by other chemicals to control the normal activity of BK channels, and;
(3) determine whether the activity of these BK-channels is influenced by other
chemicals produced norma lly by chemical reactions in the cell membrane. The
results of this research will increase the understanding of BK-channel
regulation, in particular, but also central nervous system ion channels, in
general. In addition, the work could provide a new description of the
interaction between product molecules resulting from membrane-associated
chemical reactions which could be important in regulating rhythmic electrical
activity in the central nervous system.