* 9603997
* Anion Exchange Mechanisms in Bacteria
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/1997,02/29/2000
* Peter Maloney, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing grant
* Hector E. Flores
* 02/29/2000
* USD 360,000.00

9603997 Maloney This project concerns Oxlt, a novel transport protein found in
the Gram-negative anaerobe, Oxalobacter formigenes. OxlT catalyzed the exchange
of external divalent oxalate for internal monovalent formate. This electrogenic
exchange, along with proton consumption during intracellular decarboxylation,
constitutes an "indirect proton pump" that generates a proton-motive force
allowing O. formigenes to extract energy from oxalate. It is now thought such
protonmotive metabolic cycles are widely spread in microbiology, and to
understand these events at a molecular level this project concentrates on
studies on OxlT, the antiport protein at the center of this process in O.
formigenes. Antibodies against the OxlT N-terminus are available, the gene is
cloned, and functional protein is purified after expression in Escherichia coli.
Therefore, tools are available to study structure-function relationships in four
areas of progressively increasing resolution: (1) Initial studies will focus on
studies of OxlT topology, using peptidespecific antibodies, gene fusions and SH-
directed probes, guided by predictions derived from hydropathy analysis of the
amino acid sequence. (2) Site-directed mutagenesis will then be used to generate
a panel of single-cysteine derivatives to be probed with impermeant SH-active
reagents in order to localize the OxlT translocation pathway. (3) Mutagenesis
will also be used to identify functionally important residues, with emphasis on
K355, which may be the lone charged residue in the OxlT hydrophobic core; K355
may form part of an anion binding center. (4) Concurrently, capitalizing on the
stability of the OxlT/substrate complex and on recent success in protein
purification, trials of 2-dimensional crystallization will be conducted.
Together, this work will extend an understanding of OxlT from the level of cell
physiology to that of molecular biology and biophysics. This project is about
OxlT, a novel transport protein found in the soil bacterium, Ox alobacter
formigenes. OxlT catalyzes the transmembrane exchange of two anions that differ
in net charge, so that a membrane potential arises as one (divalent oxalate)
moves inward while the other (monovalent formate) moves outward. Similarly, when
inside the cell, oxalate is transformed into formate in a reaction that consumes
a single proton. Overall, then, the metabolism of oxalate generates electrical
and chemical (ph) gradients that comprise a "protonmotive force" which O.
formigenes uses to power other membrane-associated events. Such proton-motive
metabolic cycles appear to be widely spread in microorganisms. To understand
these events at a molecular level this project concentrates on studies of OxlT,
the antiport protein at the center of the process in O. formigenes. Initial
studies will focus on the overall organization of OxlT in the cell membrane,
using biochemical, genetic and immunological tools. Mutagenesis will then be
used to change the molecule into one suitable for probing with reagents that may
localize the substrate transport pathway and identify functionally important
residues. Finally, trials of 2-dimensional crystallization will be conducted to
capitalize on the stability of the OxlT-substrate complex. Together, such
experiments should experiments should extend an understanding of OxlT from the
level of cell physiology to that of molecular biology and biophysics.