* 9603571
* X-Ray Determination of Proteins and Viruses
* BIO,MCB
* 02/15/1997,01/31/2000
* Michael Rossmann, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 01/31/2000
* USD 418,160.00

9603571 Rossmann X-ray diffraction, using crystallized viruses, will be the
primary tool to analyze the assembly and uncoating intermediates of various
viruses. Frequently, however, it is not possible to crystallize transient
intermediates on account of their short-lived, unstable properties. In these
cases, the X-ray crystallography will be augmented by cryo electron microscopy.
The major emphasis will be on the study of bacterial viruses, such as single-
stranded X174 and the far more complex double-stranded T4. The far more complex
and far larger dsDNA T4 phage has over 40 structural proteins. While it is
unlikely that it will ever be possible to study the whole virus by X-ray
diffraction, it is possible to study the atomic structure of individual
proteins. Combination of X-ray diffraction and cryo-EM is to be used to
determine the interactions of components. Part of the work will be to develop
suitable techniques for interfacing cryoelectron microscopy with X-ray
diffraction techniques and also to examine particles that lack perfect
icosahedral symmetry. The objectives will be to determine not only the
structures, but also the molecular mechanisms by which the assembly
intermediates are stabilized and triggered into the subsequent steps of
morphogenesis. Similarly, the structural intermediates of viral disassembly
during cellular infection are to be examined. Comparision of different viral
systems should lead to the identification of common strategies and evolutionary
relationships. The goal of the research is to elucidate the mechanisms by which
infectious virus particles are assembled from their component parts. Although
the work is devoted to the study of bacterial viruses, the viral mechanisms are
also likely to be utilized by plant and animal viruses. The different process of
disassembly during viral entry into a host will also be studied. Viral assembly
often requires scaffolding proteins which help guide protein folding. Hence, the
stud ies will be among the first to observe the structures of these chaperone-
like proteins complexed with their substrates. The study of their transient
intermediates will require the development of techniques to combine X-ray
crystallography (which can resolve features near atomic resolution) and cryo-
electron microscopy (which has poorer resolution but lacks the requirement of
making crystals) Combination of these techniques is likely to be critical in the
future development of structural biology.