* 9603426
* US-Japan Joint Seminar:  Information Exchange on            Photophysics and Photoconversion in Small Domains by        Near-Field Scanning Optical Microscopy
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1997,05/31/1998
* Paul Barbara, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Larry H. Weber
* 05/31/1998
* USD 12,000.00

9603426 Barbara This award supports the participation of American scientists in
a U.S.-Japan seminar on Photophysics and Photoconversion in Small Domains by
Near-Field Scanning Optical Microscopy to be held in Palm Springs, California
from January 6-9, l998. The seminar will address how near-field optical methods,
and related confocal microscopic approaches can be used to address many of the
key issues in mesoscopic photochemistry and photophysics. The meeting will
include experts in areas broadly ranging from near-field optical microscopy,
photochemistry of nonoparticles, spectroscopy of aggregates, scanning probe
methods, photosynthesis, and quantum confinement of electronic wavefunctions.
The most efficient and most promising man-made and natural
photosynthetic/photoconversion media take advantage of mesoscopic structural
organization to optimize key structural and dynamic processes. One of the most
exciting new tools for the study of photoconversion and photophysics in
mesostructures is Near-Field Scanning Optical Microscopy. This technique
combines various spectroscopies and photochemical techniques with scanning probe
methodology, offering unprecedented mesosocopic scale data on various materials.
The exchange of ideas and data with Japanese experts in this field will enable
U.S. participants to advance their own work, and will set the stage for future
collaborative projects. Participants' papers will be published in a journal and
abstracts will be made available on the World Wide Web. ***