* 9603025
* Developing a Comprehensive Blood Volume Budget for          Amphibians
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/1997,12/31/2000
* Stanley Hillman, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 12/31/2000
* USD 49,775.00

9603025 Hillman Amphibians lose water very quickly, which must be replenished to
sustain life. As terrestrial vertebrates they consequently lose and gain water
at ten times the rate of other vertebrates. There is a greater potential for
water deficits to occur (water loss exceeds water gain) as a consequence of
these high water turnover rates. Natural selection has favored tolerance to
periodic water deficits, its in amphibians, with more terrestrial species having
greater dehydration tolerance than aquatic species. Amphibians have a two to
four fold greater dehydration tolerance than mammals. They consequently
represent an excellent vertebrate model system to unravel what cardiovascular
mechanisms are important in dehydration tolerance. The cardiovascular system
must deal with a decrease in its volume during dehydration. The amphibians
ability to compensate for low blood volume is different between different
species and remarkable in comparison to other vertebrates. The first step in
describing the mechanisms involved in compensating for a decrease in blood
volume is to develop a budget for all the avenues of fluid entry and fluid loss
in the amphibian circulatory system. The PI plans to develop such a blood volume
budget for two species which differ in their tolerance to dehydration and
ability to maintain blood volume. This entails quantifying the volume of fluid
moving through the kidneys, skin, bladder, lymph, nephrostomes and leaks in the
capillaries. The PI will describe the range of flows possible in low volume and
high volume conditions across the various pathways of exchange. The PI will also
investigate some aspects of the neuroendocrine control of these pathways of
fluid movement. The work will: 1 ) provide the first non-mammalian blood volume
budget; 2) provide the first measurements of vascular leakiness and compliance
for amphibians; 3) provide a test of which aspects of the budget correlate with
dehydration tolerance; and 4) increase understanding of what c ardiovascular
adaptations were important in the aquatic to terrestrial transition in
vertebrate evolution. ***