* 9603666
* 1997 Cold Springs Harbor Laboratory Meeting on Tyrosine Phosphorylation and Cell Signalling: to be held May 7-11, 1997, Cold Springs Harbor, New York
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/1997,02/28/1998
* Nicholas Tonks, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Barbara K. Zain
* 02/28/1998
* USD 6,000.00

Abstract 9603666 Tonks The phosphorylation of proteins on tyrosyl residues is an
essential element in he control of many fundamental cellular processes including
growth and proliferation, differentiation, cytoskeletal function and the cell
cycle. At the present time there is a lot of progress in determinating the
structure, regulation and function of protein tyrosine k8inases (PTKs) and
protein tyrosine phosphatases (PTPs), the coordinated action of which governs
the levels of cellular phosphotyrosine. This grant is to provide funds for the
third meeting on Tyrosine phosphorylation and cellular signaling ,which will
provide a format in which studies of PTK and PTPs will be integrated so that the
scientists can see how their results contribute to the overall big picture. The
sessions will be organized around physiological processes and cellular functions
to provide a biological context. With the exception of 2 keynote addresses, all
speakers will be selected from the submitted abstracts. This will encourage
graduate students, postdocs and young independent investigators to present the
talks. It shoud also facilitate the presentation of the most recent results.
This meeting on tyrosine phosphorylation and cell signalling , palcae emphasis
on the biological function of htese proteins. The format also encourages young
scientists and new findings to be presented and discussed. The intent is to
encourage cohesiveness and communication among scientists working on
phosphorylation and cell signaling. ***