* 9603347
* U.S.-Japan Cooperative Research:  Research and Development  of Space Qualified Change-Coupled Devices (CCDs) for X-ray  Spectroscopy
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1997,03/31/2002
* George Ricker, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Larry H. Weber
* 03/31/2002
* USD 19,500.00

9603347 Ricker This award supports a three year collaborative research project
between Professor George Ricker, Center for Space Research, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, and Professor Katsuji Koyama of the Department of
Physics at Kyoto University in Japan. The joint research project focuses on
scientific preparations for the Astro-E mission, a Japan/USA orbiting
observatory scheduled for launch by the Institute of Space and Astronautical
Science (ISAS) in Japan during February, 2000. The project will provide powerful
X- ray spectroscopic capability through both a narrow-field high spectral
resolution microcalorimeter instrument (the X- ray Spectrometer, XRS) and a
wide-field, moderate resolution, imaging spectrometer (the X-ray Imaging
Spectrometer, or XIS). This project places emphasis on development of the XIS.
The scientific objectives of the XIS are two-fold: (1) it will provide wide
field imaging and spatially resolved spectroscopy in support of observations
with the microcalorimeter-based XRS, which is limited in lifetime by its
cryogenics, and (2) it will expand upon the broad range of moderate resolution
spectroscopic observations initiated by the Solid-State Imaging Spectrometer
(SIS) successfully flown on the Astro-D mission. This award supports the non-
hardware tasks associated with the experiment, which will be carried out with
scientists in Kyoto, Osaka and Tokyo. These tasks include XIS instrument
calibration and testing efforts. As a result of the greater telescope area and
improved angular telescope resolution for Astro-E, greatly improved sensitivity
for the XIS is expected. Thus spectroscopic observations of fainter objects, or
exploration of more members of a given class can be expected. The power of the
XIS, as a unique observational tool, will be widely available to the entire US
and Japanese astronomical community. Graduate students and young postdoctoral
scientists will participate in all phases of the scientifi c and technical
enterprise. It is anticipated that a number of publications will result from the
collaboration. Through the exchange of ideas and technology, this project will
broaden our base of knowledge and promote international understanding and
cooperation. ***