* 9603651
* RUI:  Steroid-Induced Plasticity in Brain and Behavior
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/1997,12/31/2002
* Joseph Dulka, Creighton University
* Continuing Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 12/31/2002
* USD 246,349.00

9603651 Dulka There are striking sex differences in the central nervous system,
and in the physiology and behavior of most vertebrates. Steroid hormones derived
from the gonads of males and females are primarily responsible for generating
and maintaining these differences. Androgens and estrogens have been shown to
both organize sex-specific neural pathways during critical periods of
development, and cause structural remodeling of existing neural pathways later
in adulthood. This steroid-induced neural plasticity in adulthood not only
involves changes in synaptic connections and neuronal morphology, but also
changes in the expression of pathway-specific neuropeptides. This is very
important since neuropeptides play an important role in modulating
neurotransmitter activity. Moreover, there is surprisingly little information on
neuropeptide systems which either originate in, or innervate sexually dimorphic
brain regions. Dr. Dulka is using a neuroethological model system to examine
this issues. He will explore how steroid-induced neural plasticity of
neuropeptides mediate behaviors in vertebrates. Dr. Dulka has found that the
neuropeptide substance P located in several important forebrain regions is
sexually dimorphic in that males, not females, have an intense network of
substance P activity. He will use a multidisciplinary approach that includes
neuroanatomical, neurophysiological, biochemical, and behavioral techniques to
determine how androgens modulate the substance P system in the brain to
influence a complex communicatory behavior. These results are crucial to
understanding the basic mechanisms underlying neural plasticity. Furthermore,
they will generate important new knowledge of steroid and peptide hormone
interactions in the brain of vertebrates, and how such interactions play a role
in establishing sex differences in neural organization, circuitry, and behavior.