* 9603779
* Control of Cell Proliferation in Estrogen-Target Cells
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/1997,08/31/1999
* Ana Soto, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Judith A. Verbeke
* 08/31/1999
* USD 50,000.00

9603779 Soto The mechanisms that control cell proliferation in multicellular
organisms are poorly understood; little is known about the signals mediating
these events, except for certain hormones. Among them, sex steroids control the
cell number and proliferative activity of their target organs. Animal studies
revealed that administration of estrogens to ovariectomized mammals results in
1) inhibition of cell death, 2) a swift but transient proliferative response and
later 3) inhibition of cell proliferation. The mechanisms underlying these
phenomena have yet to be elucidated. The establishment of estrogen-sensitive
cell lines from several mammalian species during the last two decades provide
models whereby the proliferative effect of estrogens may be studied. Three
working hypotheses have been proposed to explain estrogen (E) induction of cell
proliferation. The first proposes that E acts directly; in the second E acts
through the induction of growth factors, and the third proposes that E
neutralizes the action of an inhibitor. The third hypothesis is based on the
following evidence: 1) estrogen-sensitive cell lines proliferate maximally in
serumless medium regardless of the presence of estrogens. 2) Homologous serum
from ovariectomized donors, or serum from intact donors rendered estrogenless by
charcoaldextran stripping results in a dose-dependent inhibition of cell
proliferation. 3) Estrogens induce cell proliferation by neutralizing the
inhibitory effect of serum. The nature of this inhibitor was unclear until
recently (the inhibitor is either serum albumin, or a protein of native
molecular weight and pI similar to that of albumin); this laboratory explored
both hypotheses, and concluded that the inhibitor (estrocolyone-I, EK-I)
function is coded within the albumin molecule. Serum albumins purified from
hamster, bovine rat and human serum have EK-I activity; this activity is
intrinsic to the albumin molecule, since it is present in recombinant human
serum albumin and certain re combinant truncated albumin peptides. In order to
facilitate the understanding of the serum-mediated inhibition, serum-resistant
variants of estrogen-sensitive cells were developed. The objectives of this
research are i) to test whether the findings summarized above, obtained using
established cell lines, apply to normal target cells in organ explants and
primary cultures, ii) to determine whether the EK-I activity in analbuminemic
rat and human serum is due to truncated albumin peptides, iii) to assess whether
EK-I interacts with target cells via membrane receptors, and iv) to assess the
role of estrogens, growth factors and EK-I on the control of proliferation of
estrogen-target cells. Methods to be used include: FPLC/HPLC, affinity
chromatography, ID and 2D electrophoresis, receptor binding assays, cell and
tissue culture. The fulfillment of these objectives will provide mechanistic
understanding of the control of cell proliferation of estrogen-target cells.
This evidence will finally validate the physiological relevance of the important
finding that serum albumin is the long-sought after EK-I. ***