* 9603008
* Dissertation Reserach:  Ecuadorian Resource Conservation    and Subsistence
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/1997,01/31/1998
* Bruce Winterhalder, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 01/31/1998
* USD 6,800.00

This project supports the dissertation research of an anthropology student from
the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. The project will investigate
the behavioral ecology of resource use and common property management of the
Ecuadorian Huaorani Indians, in the context of regional petroleum development.
The Indian community are hunter-gatherer-horticulturalists who live in a lowland
moist tropical forest in the Ecuadorian Amazon. The development industry has
made wage labor available to the Indians, causing the men to migrate to work
sites. The study will assess how the Indians are changing their relationship to
forest resources in light of these new wage payments. The potential for
ecological sustainability will be studied through analyzing indigenous
conservation of faunal resources through an optimal diet breadth analysis.
Economic sustainability will be investigated through time allocation, diet, and
household diversification studies. This project will integrate two bodies of
theory, from evolutionary ecology (foraging theory) and political ecology
(common property theory), to contribute to a new perspective that is cognizant
of human adaptability and the influence of larger economic, social and political
context. The research is also valuable because it will contribute to our
nation's expertise about this important area of the world.