* 9603679
* Signaling by Ethylene Receptors of Arabidopsis
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/1997,02/28/2001
* George Schaller, University of New Hampshire
* Continuing Grant
* Randolph Addison
* 02/28/2001
* USD 321,719.00

MCB-9603679 Schaller Technical The simple gas ethylene functions as an
endogenous growth regulator in plants, and affects seed germination, seedling
growth, abscission, senescence, fruit ripening, and pathogen responses. The
initial steps by which plants perceive and transduce the ethylene signal have
begun to be elucidated by studies in the plant Arabidopsis thaliana. From this
work it has been demonstrated that a family of ethylene receptors exist in
plants that are related to bacterial histidine kinases. Additional evidence
indicates that downstream of the ethylene receptors lies a MAP kinase pathway.
Thus, signal transduction elements characteristic of both prokaryotic and
eukaryotic systems have been combined in a single pathway. The proposed research
is designed to determine how the ethylene signal is transduced through the
receptor and passed to downstream elements in the signaling pathway. Ethylene
receptors will be characterized in reference to their bacterial counterparts.
The membrane location of the ethylene receptors in plants will be determined by
biochemical fractionation methods. The postulated kinase activity of the
receptors will be examined following transgenic expression and purification of
the protein from bacteria and yeast. Purification of full-length ethylene
receptors from transgenic yeast will allow analysis as to how binding of
ethylene regulates kinase activity. In addition, the mechanism of action of the
ethylene receptors will be examined in detail by transforming mutant versions
back into Arabidopsis and determining how ethylene signal transduction is
affected. Ethylene receptors are hypothesized to function through a response
regulator protein that feeds into the MAP kinase pathway, and potential response
regulators have been identified in Arabidopsis. Their role in ethylene signal
transduction will be characterized by knock-out mutations and the ability to
interact with known elements in the pathway. This wo rk will clarify the early
steps in ethylene signal transduction and provide a framework for engineering
modifications into these steps. Modifications of ethylene sensitivity will
enhance our ability to regulate such processes as abscission and fruit-ripening
in crops of agronomic importance. In a broader context, these studies will also
help elucidate how the bacterial histidine kinases have been adapted to function
in a eukaryotic system. Nontechnical The gas ethylene is a plant hormone that
both signals and induces a variety of responses including ripening and
senescence. The efflux of ethylene from some cells stimulates the response of
adjacent cells and plants. Ethylene is widely used to induce ripening of some
fruit such as tomato and the interruption of ethylene production has been shown
to extend the shelf life of transgenic tomatoes that are now commercially
available. This project will investigate the fundamental mechanism of how
ethylene is perceived by targeted cells. Ethylene is detected by a protein on
the surface of plant cells and signals the cell to undertake the stimulation of
a number of genes that mediate the ripening and senesence response. This project
will elucidate the mechanism of signaling that occurs as a consequence of
ethylene detection. The elucidation of the signaling mechanism for ethylene will
be an important advance in the understanding of the fundamental biology of
plants and it will present the prospect of producing new and useful changes in
food and floral crops to permit controlled ripening and longer-lived produce and
flowers.