* 9603369
* U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science:  Cenozoic Environmental Variability in Antarctic Coastal Areas
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1997,09/30/2001
* Paul Arthur Berkman, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Larry H. Weber
* 09/30/2001
* USD 32,675.00

9603369 Berkman This award supports a three year collaborative research project
between Professor Paul Berkman of the Ohio State University and Professor
Kazuomi Hirakawa of Hokkaido University in Sapporo, Japan. This project will
undertake a study of Cenozoic environmental variability in Antarctic coastal
areas. The relevance of Antarctic coastal areas is that they contain integrated
environmental records of the glaciological, geological, chemical and biological
variability around the continent - in the transition zone which reflects the
most immediate interaction between the ice sheets, sea level and climate. The
major goals of this project are: 1) develop interdisciplinary approaches which
integrate the biology and chemistry of marine macrofossils in a glacial
geomorphological context for the purpose of interpreting Cenozoic ice-sheet,
sea-level and climate impacts; and 2) facilitate interactions among Japanese and
American scientists along with members of the international scientific community
who are investigating the Cenozoic dynamics between the Antarctic ice sheets,
sea level and climate. To facilitate distribution of the results of this
research, several workshops will be held involving researchers from the United
States (Ohio State University, the University of California), and Japan
(Hokkaido University, Rissho University, Shimane University, Nagoya University,
Shizuoka University and the National Institute of Polar Research). Understanding
the environmental dynamics around Antarctica, which currently contains 90% of
the ice on Earth, is necessary for accurately predicting global environmental
changes which may occur in the future. The analyses and cooperation between the
Japanese and American researchers will contribute to our understanding of the
role of Antarctica in global change. ***