* 9603723
* Physiological and Molecular Characterization of Ca Pump and Exchanger; an Integrated Approach Modeled on the Freshwater Crayfish Molting Cycle
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/1997,01/31/2002
* Michele Wheatly, Wright State University
* Continuing Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 01/31/2002
* USD 270,500.00

9603723 Wheatly The mineral calcium (abbreviated Ca) is of fundamental
biological importance. In animals it is a component of biominerals such as
skeleton and shell. It is also necessary for muscle contraction and for relaying
messages from the exterior to the interior of the cell. For these reasons,
scientists are very interested in how Ca moves between different parts of the
body and specifically how it is transported across cell membranes (boundaries).
These processes are easily modeled in crustaceans (aquatic arthropods) for two
reasons. First their calcium carbonate skeleton is external and therefore far
more accessible than the backbone of vertebrates. More importantly, in order to
grow, they undergo the molting cycle which involves Ca cycling out of and into
the animal. In preparation for molting, Ca is reabsorbed from the old skeleton
and either recycled or lost (Ca leaves). Once the old skeleton is shed, the
animal must rapidly mineralize the new skeleton (calcium enters). Calcium
leaves/enters via specialized layers of cells (epithelia) that communicate
either directly or indirectly with the external water. The calcium exchanging
surfaces include gill, kidney and gut. Ca movement across these cells is
effected by specialized proteins situated in the cell membrane. Manufacture of
specific proteins is under the control of genetic material (termed DNA) in the
nucleus of the cell. In this grant, the PI proposes to use the crustacean
molting cycle to (1) study the dynamics of Ca transport across vesicles
(resealed patches of cell membrane akin to a water balloon) and to (2) isolate
the DNA that codes for the Ca pumping proteins and to assess whether abundance
of the DNA is regulated by steroids. These studies will enable understanding of
the evolution of Ca transporting proteins common to all cells. ***