* 9603860
* Role of Winter Water Relations in Determining the Upper     Elevational Limits of Three New England Conifers
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/1997,07/31/1999
* Andrew Friedland, University of Denver
* Continuing grant
* Kitti Williams
* 07/31/1999
* USD 189,864.00

9603860 Boyce Evergreen conifers, unlike diciduous trees, must keep their
foliage alive during the winter. In addition to freezing stress, they must deal
with drought, or desiccation. A lot of water is found in the winter environment,
but it is usually locked up as snow and ice and is unavailable to plants.
Conifer foliage is adapted to minimize water loss during the winter; losses are
replaced during above-freezing periods, when water stored in the wood melts and
can flow into the foliage. Shorter growing seasons at high elevations decrease
foliar resistance to winter water loss, while the frequency and duration of warm
periods in the winter also decreases. Thus, the amount of water lost increases,
while the ability to replace it decreases. Winter desiccation appears to cause
alpine treeline in some places. However, its role in setting the upper
elevational limits of conifers that do not extend all the way to treeline is
poorly known. This study will examine the foliar winter water relations, or
water balance, of three important New England conifers that differ in location
preferences and growth strategies: white pine, eastern hemlock and red pine. Our
preliminary data suggest that the older foliage in these species may experience
damaging water levels during the winter. We will use physiological measurements
of trees collected near their upper elevational limit to determine desiccation
stress. These data will be coupled with climatic data collected at the research
sites to predict water relations. This approach may be extended to other species
and under conditions imposed by a changing climate.