* 9603605
* U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research on Efficient and Applicable Geometric Alogrithms
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/1997,05/31/2000
* Pankaj Agarwal, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 05/31/2000
* USD 20,376.00

9603605 Agarwal This award provides funds to permit Dr. Pankaj K. Agarwal,
Department of Computer Science, Duke University, to pursue with Dr. Otfried
Schwarzkopf, Pohang. University of Science and Technology, (POSTECH), Pohang,
Korea for 36 months, a program of cooperative research on efficient geometric
algorithms and their applications. These collaborators will study the following
areas in computational geometry: randomized algorithms, approximation
algorithms, arrangements of curves and surfaces, multidimensional searching,
robot motion planning and collision detection, and proximity problems.
Computational geometry concerns itself with the design, analysis, and
implementation of geometric algorithms. Problems in several applied areas
including graphics, computer vision, pattern recognition, image processing,
medical imaging, robotics, data mining, and geographical data processing have
motivated the study of a number of geometric problems from a computational point
of view, and their efficient solutions often require sophisticated techniques
from computer science and various mathematical disciplines. The PI and his
collaborator in Korea have made significant contributions to many basic and
applied problems in the area, including motion planning, computer graphics,
randomized algorithms, the study of arrangements of curves and algebraic
surfaces and data structures for multidimensional searching. The purpose of the
present project is to continue such research and to initiate new collaboration
in computational geometry. The emphasis will be on developing simple and
practical algorithms, on cross-fertilization between basic research and the
various applications, on understanding higher dimensional problems, and on
handling curved objects. This project is relevant to the objectives of the
U.S.-Korea Cooperative Science Program, which seeks to increase the level of
cooperation between U.S. and Korean scientists and engineers through the
exchange of scientific information, ideas, skills, an d techniques and through
collaboration on problems of mutual benefit. This project provides an
international research experience for an U.S. graduate student Korean
participation is supported by the Korea Science and Engineering Foundation
(KOSEF). ***