* 9603656
* Protein Engineering of Citric Acid Cycle Enzymes
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/1997,08/31/2001
* Leonard Banaszak, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 08/31/2001
* USD 390,000.00

9603656 Banaszak As the link between protein structure and function strengthens,
the number of fundamental questions which can be answered through combined use
of x-ray crystallography and recombinant DNA methods increases. The specific
objectives proposed by the PI fall into three diverse areas, having the unifying
theme of understanding the molecular mechanisms by which cells produce metabolic
energy, and the principles they use to assemble and control these pathways.
First, the PI and his students will complete the x-ray crystallographic studies
of fumarase from E. coli. This structural data will be critical for any attempts
to build the true substrates into the current crystallographic model. Sidechains
affecting the biding and electrostatics of a catalytic water molecule will be
studied by mutagenesis. Closely linked to the x-ray crystallographic studies of
fumarase from E. coli are parallel analyses of the enzyme from yeast. The
objectives in this case are not related to active site stereochemistry but
rather toward the gathering of information on organelle targeting. In this
second endeavor, the PI has set the goal of determining the molecular structure
of one or more of the precursor proteins targeting them to mitochondria. The
final objective is related to mechanisms for serine control of an enzyme called
phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase. Using recombinant technology, structural and
biochemical studies of the regulatory domain will be done with and without
serine. Modern biotechnology centers on the use of enzymes as chemical reagents.
New developments in this area will depend on changing several properties
commonly found in these protein catalysts. These include stability, control and
specificity. The PI for this grant has used two major techniques in his
laboratory to study and alter the properties of enzymes of the citric acid
cycle. One involves studies of molecular structure using x-ray crystallography;
the other employs cloning techniques to change the molecule sli ghtly and test
the resulting products. The citric acid cycle is a sequence of enzymatic
reactions that is the principle source of energy for nearly every living
organism. The PI and students supported by this NSF grant will attempt to
engineer changes in one or more of these enzymes in order to understand their
catalytic mechanism and specificity. In another phase of the studies, the PI
will prepare quantities of the precursor form of fumarase and examine its
molecular structure by x-ray crystallography to study how the targeting process
works.