* 9603696
* Contractile Ring Formation in Drosophila Cytokinesis
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/1997,04/30/2000
* Steven Wasserman, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center
* Standard Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 04/30/2000
* USD 150,000.00

9603696 Wasserman Technical Abstract: During the terminal phase of mitosis or
meiosis, an animal cell must carry out cytokinesis, the division of a cell into
two progeny cells, in spatial and temporal coordination with the nuclear
division cycle. Cleavage is initiated by an actin-rich contractile ring. The
long term goal of our research is to understand how contractile ring formation
is initiated, how cytoskeletal components are recruited to the site of ring
assembly, and how these components come together to form a functional
contractile ring. Genetic and molecular studies in Drosophila have identified
two contractile ring proteins, Diaphanous and Peanut, that are specifically
required for cytokinesis. Loss-of-function mutations in the gene for either
protein block cytokinesis, but have no apparent effect on chromosome segregation
or on cellular functions during interphase. The hypothesis underlying this
project is that a subset of cytokinesis factors that includes these two proteins
provides the molecular framework for the organization of broadly functioning
cytoskeletal proteins, such as actin and profilin, into the contractile
apparatus. We therefore propose to use Diaphanous and Peanut as the starting
point for defining the network of interactions necessary to build a contractile
ring. A characterization of ring assembly and component recruitment in both
wild-type cells and cells defective for ring formation will allow us to order
these interactions into an assembly pathway. A two-step approach will be used to
identify contractile ring proteins that interact with Diaphanous or Peanut.
First, the yeast two-hybrid system will be used to screen libraries generated
from tissues rich in dividing cells for clones that interact with Diaphanous or
Peanut fusion proteins. Second, epitope tagged forms of the two-hybrid clones
will be expressed in cultured Drosophila cells, allowing identification of the
subset of positive clones that encode proteins colocalizing with Diapha nous and
Peanut during cell division. With the aid of a PCR based strategy for clone
characterization and a modular set of cloning and expression vectors,
interactions of physiological relevance can thereby be rapidly and efficiently
identified. Full length cDNAs will be isolated for clones identified in the two-
hybrid and localization screens and sequences will be compared to the nucleic
acid and protein databases. Novel genes will be localized on the physical map by
in situ hybridization to polytene chromosomes. Bacterially expressed fusion
proteins will be used to raise antisera. Polyclonal antibodies will be used to
characterize the distribution of cytokinesis factors in both dividing wild-type
cells and cells defective for cytokinesis. An array of markers for subcellular
structures will be employed in colocalization studies focusing on the cleavage
furrow and contractile ring in spermatocytes, the ring canals in developing egg
chambers, and the membrane front in embryos undergoing cellularization. The
existence of counterparts to Diaphanous and Peanut in a range of organisms
(e.g., mice, fungi) indicates that these studies are likely to provide insights
of broad and fundamental applicability into the molecular and biochemical
mechanisms for cytokinesis. Lay language abstract: cell division is one of the
most fundamental behaviors of animal cells. It is already known that the
cleavage of one cell into two daughter cells involves a highly organized array
of actin microfilaments, polymerized myosin, and other actin-associated proteins
in a ring-like arrangement just beneath the cell membrane at the site of
division, and that cleavage proceeds by the contraction of this ring to create
an ever-deepening cleavage furrow, or constriction, at the division site.
However, there is very little known about the identity of the other proteins in
the ring or their role in the process, and nothing is known about how the ring
components are recruited to the right place at the right time. It is anticipated
that this project, by combining the power of genetic analysis and molecular
biological techniques with more traditional approaches (morphology,
immunolocalization, and biochemical techniques), will rapidly advance our
knowledge and understanding of this critically fundamental aspect of cell
biology. ***