* 9603086
* The Complement System in Sea Urchins and the Evolution of   the Vertebrate Complement Cascades
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/1997,04/30/2001
* L Courtney Smith, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Randolph Addison
* 04/30/2001
* USD 289,457.00

Abstract 9603086 Smith The aim of this investigation is to understand the
complement system of the purple sea urchin, Strongylocentrotus purpuratus, an
ancient and primitive organism, that may elucidate the origin and evolution of
the complement cascade in higher vertebrates. This investigator has identified,
in the immune cells of this sea urchin, two putative complement components. One
is a gene encoding a protein (SpC3) with significant similarity to the
vertebrate complement C3, the central component of the complement cascades in
higher vertebrates, and the other gene codes for a protein (SpCR) with similar
domains or functional modules that are characteristic of complement receptors or
complement regulatory proteins. The research in this proposal is aimed at
understanding this complement system. The sequence analysis of SpC3 and SpCr
genes will be completed and from this the encoded protein sequences deduced. The
expression patterns of these two genes in sea urchin cells and tissues will be
determined. Changes in gene and protein expression in coelomocytes responding to
immune challenges will also be examined. Experiments will be done to see whether
SpC3 functions as an opsonin and SpCR functions as a complement receptor or a
complement regulatory protein. This proposal is designed to address the
evolution of deuterostome immunity through investigations of the newly
identified sea urchin complement system. This system will further our
understanding of the mechanisms involved in the sea urchin immune response and
will help define the primitive functions that still operate in higher
vertebrates. ***