* 9603439
* Biochemical and Molecular Basis of Phytoalexin Synthesis in Sorghum
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/1997,11/30/2000
* Peter Goldsbrough, Purdue Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Hector E. Flores
* 11/30/2000
* USD 225,000.00

9603439 Nicholson The project deals with the biochemical basis of disease
resistance in sorghum. The overall goal is to determine the route of synthesis
of the sorghum phytoalexins which are 3-anthocyanidins. Phytoalexin synthesis
will be studied as it occurs in response to infection by the fungi
Colletotrichum sublineolum and Bipolaris maydis. The work will include
investigation of the route of biosynthesis of the phytoalexins, analysis of
enzymes essential for phytoalexin synthesis, comparison of the fungal infection
process in mature leaves with that which occurs in juvenile leaves, and
determining if specific members of the phenylalanine ammonia-lyase and chalcone
synthase gene families are associated with phytoalexin synthesis. In the first
objective, metabolic intermediates in phytoalexin synthesis will be identified.
This will be done by trapping intermediates using 14C as a radio label tracer.
Compounds will be identified by high performance liquid chromatography in
combination with Plasma Desorption Mass Spectrometry and Fast Atom Bombardment
mass spectrometry. The second objective will be to determine whether the levels
of activity of two enzymes essential for phytoalexin synthesis increase in
response to infection. Although the enzymes are necessary for the synthesis of
the two most fungitoxic phytoalexins, they have never been assayed in sorghum.
The first enzyme is flavonoid-3'-hydroxylase which is required for hydroxylation
at the 3' position to form luteolinidin. The second is an O-methyltransferase
which is essential for the formation of the most fungitoxic phytoalexin,
5-methoxyluteolinidin. The enzymes will be assayed in time course studies that
follow phytoalexin synthesis. In the third objective, elements of the C.
sublineolum infection process will be studied to determine if the expression of
host resistance is associated with the ability of the fungus to penetrate and
colonize leaves of different ages. This is important because juvenile plants are
uniformly resistant t o C. subIineolum. However, when plants of a susceptible
genotype mature they lose their ability to express resistance and become
susceptible to the fungus. Methods to be used will include scanning electron
microscopy in combination with micromanipulation and fluorescence microscopy to
determine in vivo fungal growth and development and to identify the exact time
of penetration. Patterns of phytoalexins synthesized as well as the time of
synthesis in resistant and susceptible cultivars will be determined as a
function of leaf age, and the information will be correlated with events in the
infection process. In the final objective, gene-specific probes for members of
the PAL and CHS gene families will be used to study the expression of these
genes in response to fungal infection. This work will have a significant impact
on understanding how grain crops protect themselves from diseases caused by
fungi. Some plants, such as sorghum, produce unique compounds called
phytoalexins when they are attacked by fungal pathogens. The phytoalexins are
often very toxic to the pathogens and thus help the plant to resist disease. The
aim of this project is to discover how the sorghum plant makes these important
resistance compounds. The research will contribute substantially to
understanding what controls the synthesis of these unique compounds. The work
should enable the development of environmentally benign ways to protect
important crops such as the grains.