* 9603928
* Tyrosine Phosphatases in Axon Growth
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2002
* John Bixby, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Paul B. Farel
* 06/30/2002
* USD 350,885.00

ABSTRACT 9603928 Bixby The precise growth of nerve fibers (axons) to their
targets during embryonic development is required for the normal functioning of
the adult brain. Axon growth is a highly regulated process, in the sense that
numerous overlapping mechanisms must operate to ensure that it occurs correctly.
One major mechanism regulating the growth of axons involves two classes of
enzymes that modify proteins inside nerve cells -- tyrosine kinases, which add
regulatory phosphate groups to proteins, and tyrosine phosphatases, which remove
these regulatory groups. Addition or removal of regulatory phosphate groups has
profound effects on the functioning of proteins inside nerve cells. Of the two
groups of enzymes, much less is known about the organization and function of
tyrosine phosphatases than is known about kinases. Dr. Bixby has identified two
particular tyrosine phosphatases that are found in developing neurons, and which
are likely to be involved in regulating the growth of axons in the brain and
spinal cord. One of these, called CRYP-2, is present on the neuronal cell
surface, and has both an extracellular (receptor) domain and an intracellular
(enzymatic) domain. The other, called SHP-2, is an intracellular protein. In a
series of experiments, Dr. Bixby's lab will characterize which developing
neurons have CRYP-2 on their surfaces, identify the proteins that bind to the
receptor domain of CRYP-2, and examine the role of CRYP-2 in regulating axon
growth from cultured nerve cells. In a second group of experiments, Dr. Bixby
will use recombinant DNA techniques to cause neurons to produce SHP-2 in
abnormal amounts, or to inhibit the function of SHP-2, in developing neurons.
The consequences for axon growth of the abnormal production or the loss of SHP-2
will be assessed. Results from this project will expand our knowledge of the
ways in which axons grow by identifying specific molecular mechanisms
responsible for regulating this process in the developing brain and spinal cord.