* 9603097
* Relativistic Nuclear Few- and Many-Body Problems
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/1997,04/30/2001
* Ruprecht Machleidt, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Continuing Grant
* Sidney A. Coon
* 04/30/2001
* USD 134,564.00

One of the most fundamental challenges pervading theoretical nuclear physics
for half a century is to understand the properties of atomic nuclei in terms of
the basic forces between nucleons (protons and neutrons). In spite of the
progress made in the past, our present understanding still has many gaps and
deficiencies. It is the purpose of this project to substantially advance this
field of microscopic nuclear structure. First, we will improve the theory of the
basic nuclear force--the interaction between two nucleons. We will develop more
quantitative nuclear potentials, which can serve as reliable input for
microscopic nuclear structure calculations. Moreover, we will also improve the
foundation of the nuclear force model: it must be based upon the fundamental
theory of strong interactions, quantum chromodynamics (QCD), and the theory of
relativity of Albert Einstein. The second stepping stone in our program is the
three nucleon problem which can be solved exactly. The final step in our
proposed research is nuclear matter--the stuff that atomic nuclei are made of. A
topical issue is the question of how the interaction between two nucleons
changes in the nuclear matter environment. This information is important for the
theory of nuclear reactions involving heavy nuclei (heavy ion collisions).