* 9603594
* Regulation of the B. Subtilis trp Genes by the trp RNA-     binding Attenuation Protein (TRAP)
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/1997,03/31/2001
* Paul Gollnick, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 03/31/2001
* USD 345,625.00

9603594 Gollnick The importance of RNA binding proteins as regulators of gene
expression has become increasingly clear in recent years. The trp genes of
Bacillus subtilis are regulated by an RNA binding protein called TRAP (trp RNA-
binding Attenuation Protein). TRAP regulates the expression of trp genes in
three ways which all involve tryptophan-dependent binding of TRAP to RNA.
Transcription of the trpEDCFBA operon is controlled by an attenuation mechanism.
TRAP binding to a site containing 11 (G/U)AG repeats in the leader sequence of
trp operon transcript affects the secondary structure of the attenuator and
promotes formation of a transcription terminator. TRAP also regulates
translation of the trpE and trpG genes. TRAP is proposed to sequester the
ribosome binding site of the trpE mRNA by altering the secondary structure of
the mRNA leader sequence, and to compete directly with ribosomes for binding to
the trpG mRNA. Recent X-ray crystallographic analysis of the TRAP-L-tryptophan
complex revealed a novel macromolecule consisting of 11 identical subunits
arranged in ring structure with a 23 Angstrom hole. Each subunit is composed
entirely of beta-strands, beta-turns and random coils. The discoveries that TRAP
is an 11-subunit protein and that its trp RNA binding site contains multiple
small sequence repeats has led to a model in which the trp RNA wraps around the
TRAP so that each of the 11 repeats in the trp RNA leader sequence interacts
with one TRAP subunit or a combination of adjacent subunits. The objective of
this research is to determine precisely how TRAP recognizes its target RNAs
including the identification of the RNA binding domain of TRAP and the
determinants of target RNA specificity for TRAP, and the characterization of the
kinetics and thermodynamics of TRAP - RNA interaction. This research will
provide new information about how proteins recognize RNA and will result in
better understanding of the basic principles of protein-RNA interaction that may
govern more com plicated processes of transcription, translation, RNA processing
and transport in eukaryotes. The importance of RNA binding proteins as
regulators of gene expression has become increasingly clear in recent years. The
genes responsible for tryptophan biosynthesis in the bacteria Bacillus subtilis
are regulated by an RNA binding protein called TRAP (trp RNA-binding Attenuation
Protein), which requires the amino acid tryptophan to bind to RNA. Recent
structural analysis indicates that TRAP is a novel macromolecule consisting of
11 identical subunits arranged in ring structure. This research will determine
how TRAP recognizes and binds to its target RNA, and will provide new
information and a better understanding of the basic principles of protein-RNA
interaction that may govern more complicated processes of transcription,
translation, RNA processing and transport in eukaryotes.