* 9604145
* Genes That Specify Developmental Age in                     Caenorhabditis Elegans
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/1997,02/28/2001
* Edward Hedgecock, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Chris T. Amemiya
* 02/28/2001
* USD 270,000.00

Hedgecock 96-04145 The life history of an animal describes the sequence of
global developmental stages from egg to adult. The most dramatic event is the
transition from embryonic to larval development. Larval organ systems undergo
coordinated growth and possibly remodeling at specific stages. The adult stage
itself may have early and late components associated with reproductive
senescence or increased mortality. Dr. Hedgecock proposes to characterize a
novel family of nuclear receptor genes, designated ESCKA, implicated in life
history regulation. Endocrine tissues secrete long-range chemical signals, or
hormones, to coordinate development over large regions. Many hormones, typically
steroids or other lipophilic molecules, act through an ancient family of
proteins called nuclear receptors. In the model Caenorhabditis elegans, which is
a nonparasitic nematode, the ESCKA receptor gene daf-12 is required to
coordinate development of the entire organism at specific life stage
transitions. He believes the proteins made by this gene, plus two other ESCKA
genes discovered in this organism, provide tissues throughout the animal with a
means of 'remembering" their current developmental age. Moreover, hormonal
activation of these nuclear hormone receptors may allow these diverse cells to
advance in unison to new stages in the nematode life history. Interesting, at
least one ESCKA gene has been identified in insects, suggesting this family of
nuclear receptors can tell us about life history regulation in all higher
animals.