* 9604889
* Analysis of the Drosophila Cysteine-String Proteins and     Their Role for Neurotransmission
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/1997,10/31/2000
* Konrad Zinsmaier, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 10/31/2000
* USD 360,038.00

9604889 Zinsmaier The signaling pathway of depolarization-dependent
neurotransmitter release is a product of trafficking synaptic vesicles through
repeated cycles of secretion, membrane recycling, and vesicle genesis. Each
stage of this cycle requires the cooperative action of proteins. This proposal
studies the cysteine-string protein (csp) intrinsic to synaptic vesicles. The
loss of csp protein in Drosophila mutants progressively reduces evoked
transmitter release at higher temperatures, but not spontaneous release. Such a
failure of neurotransmitter release in csp mutants could be due to a defect at
any stage of the vesicle cycle. To gain a better understanding of csp function
this proposal will determine which stage of the vesicle cycle requires csp
function by imaging the dynamics of the synaptic vesicle cycle in the csp mutant
flies. From earlier studies it has been proposed, that csp might serve as a
cofactor to catalytically recruit an unknown protein to cooperate protein
interactions critical for evoked neurotransmitter release. To explore this
working hypothesis the proposal plans to identify protein domains of csp which
are critical for its function by genetic engineering. In addition, a strategy
has been designed to determine the molecular components that interact with csp
combining the purification of interacting proteins and the isolation of
mutations interacting with the csp mutation. The identification of critical
parts of the csp protein and its interacting partners will provide the basis to
develop more specific ideas to directly elucidate csp function. Given the
numerous signaling pathways conserved from flies to mammals, Drosophila will
serve as a model system to illuminate basic mechanisms of normal and abnormal
synaptic transmission.