* 9604319
* A Rotating Anode X-ray Generator for Biological Macromolecular Crystallography
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/1997,02/28/1998
* Xiaodong Cheng, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 02/28/1998
* USD 84,140.00

Funds are requested to purchase a rotating anode X-ray generator in order to
measure diffraction data from biological macromolecular crystals. This
instrument will provide a source of X-rays urgently needed for our existing
imaging plate detector system and will directly support the research of 3 major
investigators as well as instruction in protein crystallography. Projects that
will utilize this X-ray source include DNA methylation; the bleomycin hydrolases
and their complexes; transcription complexes; and RNA splicing factors, for all
of which crystals are currently available. The crystal structures elucidated in
the course of these projects will provide structural frameworks, along with the
biochemical and genetic studies, for interpreting the functional and molecular
properties of this diverse range of biochemically and biomedically significant
macromolecules. In addition, the equipment is necessary for teaching an advanced
course in macromolecular crystallography offered in the fall of every year at
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory as well as training our own graduate students and
postdoctoral fellows. The advanced course in macromolecular crystallography has
a wide impact on the field of structural biology and thus in addition to its
importance for the specific crystallographic studies described here, the value
of a properly operating X-ray facility to the field of macromolecular
crystallography in general would be substantial.