* 9604108
* Characterization of the Role of the Par Proteins in         Signaling Pathways that Regulate Cell Integrity in Yeast
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/1997,02/28/1999
* Roymarie Ballester, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Barbara K. Zain
* 02/28/1999
* USD 108,220.00

Abstract 9604108 Ballester Technical This proposal is studying proteins which
are important in maintaining the integrity of the cell wall of the yeast
Saccharomyces cerevisiae. The cell wall is responsible for the morphology of the
yeast, its mechanical strength and selective uptake of molecules. Its
composition and structure changes during the cell cycle and in response to
environmental signals. The cell wall integrity pathway is required for cell wall
biosynthesis, and it is composed of Rho1p, protein kinase C and a MAP kinase
cascade of serine/threonine protein kinases. This investigator has identified a
family of plasma membrane associated proteins - Par7p, Par 15p, and Par 18p that
function upstream of protein kinase C. Association with the plasma membrane and
sequence characteristics of Par suggest that these proteins act as receptor
molecules required for the activation of the cell integrity pathway. This grant
aims to characterize the role of the Par proteins in the regulation of the cell
integrity pathway. Other genes in yeast with a functional relation to PAR will
be identified, and the component of the pathway that they regulate will be
determined. This will be done by characterization of extragenic mutations and
high copy suppressors of the lysis defect of a par mutant strain. These studies
will also determine whether Par 8, a protein with homology to the Pars, is a new
member of the PAR family. This will be established by deletion analysis of the
PAR8 gene and complementation of the phenotypes of the par mutant to test its
functional relation to the cell integrity pathway. These studies will be
important in understanding how yeast is able to maintain its cell wall during
during normal cell growth and in response to its environment. Non-Technical This
proposal is studying the role of a new family of plasma membrane associated
proteins that are required for maintaining the integrity of the yeast cell. The
regulatory p athways affected by these proteins will be identified. ***