* 9604552
* The Roles of the C. elegans glh Genes in Germline           Lineage Determination
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/1997,07/31/2000
* Karen Bennett, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 07/31/2000
* USD 225,750.00

Bennett 9604552 The basic mystery of development is how a fertilized egg can
correctly become a complex adult organism. The Bennett laboratory is interested
in how a particular cell lineage, the germline, is established. In the 1 6-cell
embryo of the soil nematode Caenorhabditis elegans, one founder cell, P4, will
become the entire adult germline. Surrounding the nucleus of the P4 primordial
germ cell are non-membrane-bound particles called P granules. Germ granules
similar to the P granules have been described in the primordial germ cells of
many animals. It is important for understanding the overall role of germ
granules in animal development to consider how germ granules function in
Caenorhabditis and humans. The Bennett laboratory has recently reported on two
P-granule components, the germline RNA kelicases, GLH-1 and GLH-2. By now
focusing on the function of GLH-1 and GLH-2, this project will begin to
discriminate their roles in the P granules and in germline development.
Transposon-tagged glh-1 and glh-2 mutant strains will be identified and will be
phenotypically analyzed. In addition, the RNA helicase activity of the GLH
proteins will be confirmed by standard biochemical assays. The predicted GLH
proteins contain several motifs not found in other RNA helicases, motifs likely
to be critical to GLH function. These include multiple retroviral-like CCHC zinc
fingers. Similar zinc fingers, best studied in HIV, bind RNA with selectivity.
It is proposed that the various GLH zinc fingers add RNA binding specificity. In
addition, N-terminal glycine-rich repeats, found in both GLH-1 and GLH-2, may
function in P granule aggregation. These hypotheses will be tested by in vitro
analyses. If RNA specificity can be demonstrated for in vitro-produced GLH
proteins, the RNAs bound can begin to be identified. Detailed studies of the
function and regulation of glh genes and the identification of the RNAs they
bind may reveal that GLHs are critical germline determinants.