* 9604344
* RUI:  Mechanisms of Early Embryogenesis in Arabidopsis:     Characterization of the twn1 and emb88 Mutants
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/1997,04/30/2001
* Daniel Vernon, Whitman College
* Standard Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 04/30/2001
* USD 206,758.00

Vernon 96-04344 In plants, embryogenesis is a crucial stage of development in
which numerous cell types are defined, meristems are established, and the basic
body plan is formed. Despite its importance, embryogenesis remains perhaps the
least-understood period of plant development. One powerful strategy for
investigating embryogenesis is the analysis of mutants impaired in various
aspects of embryonic development. Many such embryo-defective (emb) mutants have
been identified in the model plant system Arabidopsis thaliana. The proposed
research will contribute to our understanding of plant embryogenesis via
characterization of two intriguing Arabidopsis embryo-defective mutants, emb88
and twn 1. Emb88 is representative of a little-studied class of early embryo-
defectives, the round embryo (rem) mutants. These mutants exhibit disorganized
cell architecture and incomplete morphogenesis. Recent molecular analysis of
EMB88 indicates that this gene encodes a novel plant protein similar to animal
proteins involved in cell signal transduction. Thus, EMB88 may help define an
essential cell signaling pathway not previously identified in plants. The
proposed characterization of emb88 includes cloning and sequencing of the EMB88
CDNA, analysis of EMB88 gene expression, comparison of genomic structure of the
mutant and wild-type alleles, and complementation of the mutant phenotype with
the wild-type gene. This molecular characterization will elucidate the role of
this gene in embryogenesis, and pave the way for future biochemical and genetic
dissection of the pathway in which EMB88 may play a role. The second mutant, twn
I, displays an unusual phenotype: two or more viable embryos often develop
within a single seed. Secondary embryos arise when cells of the suspensor, a
specialized structure that forms early in embryogenesis, lose their identity and
undergo embryogenic transformation. Thus the twn I gene appears to suppress a
default embryogenic pathway in suspensor cells, and this mutant offers an
excellent system in which to investigate the relationship between cell
differentiation and suppression of totipotency in the early plant embryo. The
proposed experiments on twn I will address the physiological basis of the twn I
phenotype and better define the role of this gene in embryo development.