* 9604137
* Characterization of TETMYO-1, A Myosin Heavy Chain Gene in  Tetrahymena
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2000
* Ray Gavin, CUNY Brooklyn College
* Standard Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 06/30/2000
* USD 50,000.00

9604137 Gavin Technical: Basal body-associated actin and myosin could constitute
a contractile system that might have a role in ciliary motion and theefore have
significance beyond motility in ciliated protozoa. Ciliated basal bodies with
associated fibrillar complexes are present in many vertebrate tissues, such as,
tracheal epithelium and ciliary motion, that are an integral part of the
physiology of these tissues. The head domain of an unconventional myosin heavy
chain gene (TETMYO-1) was previously cloned and sequenced. Preliminary
immunofluorescence microscopy results indicated that the myosin encoded by the
TETMYO-1 gene is localized in the basal bodies of the Tetrahymena cytoskeleton.
The objectives of this one-year project are to determine the ultrastructural
localization of the myosin encoded by TETMYO-1 and to prepare a construct for a
genomic knockout of this gene in Tetramymena. Specific antibodies will be
prepared from 156-nucleotide fragment of the gene that will be cloned intoa
vector and expressed in E. Coli. The expressed protein will be ourified and used
as an immunogen to elicit polyclonal antibodies. The antibodieq will be used for
immunogold localization of the TETMYO-1 in Tetrahymena cells. The
ultrastructural localization will focus on cortical structures, the
macronucleus, and the cytoplasm for evidence of TETMYO-1 localization.
Particular attention will be focused on basal body-associated microfilaments in
order to determine whether the mysosin colocalizes with actin filaments that
have been shown to form a cage-like structure around each cytoskeletal basal
body in Tetrahymena. To prepare for a genomic knockout of TETMYO-1 function in
Tetrahymena, a disruption construct will be devleoped. A cassette that contains
an antibiotic resistance coding sequence flanked by promoter and a terminator
sequence will be ligated to a cloned TETMYO-1 fragment. Non Technical: The
beating of cilia provides the motive force for the movement of many unicellular
organisms and to mo ve fluids over the surface of some animal organs. A
remarkable feature of the motion of cilia in both unicellular organisms and in
vertebrate tissues is that the beating and direction of the cilia is coordinated
with that of both adjacent and distal cilia. How this coordination is achieved
is an important question in cell biology that is essential to understand
physiological processes of unicellular organisms and the function of some
vertebrate organs. This project will investigate the function of a contractile
protein that may have an essential role in coordinating the direction of cilia
beating in the unicellular organism Tetrahymena. Elucidating the function of
this protein will provide important insights into how coordinated movement
occurs in some cells and tissues.