* 9604844
* Specification of the Zebrafish Ventral Neural Tube
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/1997,01/31/2000
* Marnie Halpern, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Dennis M. Higgins
* 01/31/2000
* USD 304,583.00

PI: Halpern IBN: 9604844 Correct development of the brain and spinal cord of the
vertebrate central nervous system requires cellular interactions between cells
of different types, and a cascade of signals. One well-studied interaction
occurs between the notochord, which is located in the mesodermal, or middle,
layer of the early embryo, and the overlying cells of the outside, ectodermal
layer, which are destined to become the nervous system. Notochord produces a
signaling protein called Sonic hedgehog that induces the formation of
specialized floor plate cells in the neurectoderm. Floor plate cells in turn
have patterning functions mediated by Sonic hedgehog: they induce motor neurons
to differentiate and guide axons within the nervous system. Recent studies in
mutant zebrafish by the PI and her collaborators indicated that zebrafish
mutants without notochords nevertheless develop a floor plate. This suggested
that floor plate may be specified earlier than previously thought, before
notochord formation. Two genes related to hedgehog are expressed before there
are any obvious morphological differences between cells. Surprisingly, however,
the two genes are expressed in discrete cell layers, one that will give rise to
notochord and an overlying layer that is hypothesized to give rise to floor
plate. The investigators will use cell lineage studies to test this hypothesis.
They will also use the technique of transplanting single cells between layers to
determine how distinct hedgehog-expressing cell layers form, and whether cells
in these layers are committed to forming either notochord or floor plate.
Further insight will be obtained through the analysis of mutations that perturb
formation of the discrete hedgehog-expressing cell layers, and as a consequence,
alter the channeling of cells into notochord or floor plate pathways of
differentiation. Results from this research will increase our understanding of
how cells become properly specified in the early embryo, which has importa nt
consequences for the later organization of the nervous system.