* 9604285
* Regulation of Phosphoinositide Metabolism and Early         Responses to Osmotic Stress
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2001
* Wendy Boss, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Randolph Addison
* 05/31/2001
* USD 244,930.00

9604285 Boss Technical The survival of plants depends on their ability to alter
metabolism in response to changes in their environment. Although physiological
changes in response to environmental stresses are well documented, the signal
transduction pathways between the initial stimulus and the induction of gene
expression are not well understood. We have evidence for rapid changes in the
distribution of one isoform of translational elongation factor 1 alpha
(EF-1alpha) and in inositol phospholipid metabolism as a result of hyperosmotic
stress and treatment with the wasp venom peptide, mastoparan. This proposal
focuses on the interaction of inositol lipids and EF-1alpha in initiating early
responses to stress. EF-1alpha is essential for protein synthesis and can
regulate cytoskeletal structure and activate phosphatidylinositol 4-kinase.
Phosphatidylinositol 4-kinase is the first committed enzyme in the synthesis of
polyphosphorylated inositol phospholipids. The inositol phospholipids,
phosphatidylinositol-4-monophosphate (PIP) and
phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate (PIP2) in turn can affect cytoskeletal
structure. Our working hypothesis is that EF-1alpha and PIP and PIP2 play
integral roles in the signal transduction pathway as cells respond and acclimate
to environmental stress. To test our hypothesis, we will study the coordinated
changes in the distribution of ethanolamine-EF-1alpha and PIP synthesis from the
initiation of plasmolysis until the cells reach a new steady state. We propose
to biochemically characterize the glycerylphosphoethanolamine posttranslational
modification of EF-1alpha; to use site-directed mutagenesis to make recombinant
EF-1alpha lacking the ethanolamine attachment site and to determine the effects
of this posttranslational modification on the function of EF-1alpha in vitro.
Finally, we propose to obtain cDNAs encoding PI 4-kinase and make transgenic
plants over producing this protein. The response of the transgenics to
hyperosmotic conditions will be stu died microscopically and biochemically to
determine whether PIP is involved in the initial signaling event or the recovery
to a new steady state. We anticipate observing a difference in the rate or
magnitude of plasmolysis and recovery of transgenics compared to wild type
cells. The proposed work provides an exciting opportunity for studying the
integration of signal transduction pathways during a rapid physiological
response. At the same time, the work will contribute new information in two
areas: 1) The functional significance of the glycerylphosphoethanolamine
posttranslational modification of EF-1alpha. 2) The role of PIP in hyperosmotic
stress. Finally, this work will result in future applications by identifying key
components of regulatory pathways that can be used to genetically alter cellular
homeostasis and cellular responses to environmental stimuli. Nontechnical Plants
respond rapidly to environmental changes and stress by changing the types and
quantities of proteins synthesized that function to assist to adapt the plant to
its new circumstances. How the altered environment is perceived and then
transmitted within the plants cell to alter protein synthesis and cellular
metabolism is a central problem in plant biology. The protein EF-1alpha
(elongation factor-1alpha) is an abundant and highly conserved protein that is
essential for protein synthesis. The EF-1alpha regulates the structure of the
intracellular network of cytoskeleton. The cytoskeleton has a critical role in
defining tand maintaining the shape and morphology of plant cells. This project
will examine how plant stress induces the modification of EF-1alpha and its role
in transmitting the environmental stress signal. This project is important
because it addresses one of the fundamental aspects of plant life, how plants
respond and adapt to environmental change. ***