* 9604535
* The Role of Non-Bilayer Forming Lipids in Chloroplast       Protein Transport
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2002
* Barry Bruce, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Rodewald
* 05/31/2002
* USD 275,000.00

9604535 Bruce Technical This proposal addresses fundamental questions regarding
the mechanism of protein translocation across membranes. Although the protein
transport system being investigated is the targeting and translocation of a
nuclear encoded protein into higher plant chlormplasts, the underlying
mechanisms are potentially relevant to all protein transport systems. The
primary focus is to investigate the role of the non-bilayer forming lipid,
monogalactosyl-diacyglycerol (MGDG), in chloroplast protein transport. We
propose that chloroplast precursors have evolved specific domains in their
transit peptide that interact specifically with MGDG to alter the bilayer
organization. Transit peptide-lipid interactions may be transient, temporally
and spatially, yet may represent an essential first step in chloroplast protein
transport, and perhaps in all transport processes. Our preliminary data
indicates that the precursor to the small subunit of Rubisco (prSSU) contains a
lipid interacting domain that is located primarily at the C-terminus of the
transit peptide (SS-tp). Using liposomes whose composition can be controlled, we
have shown by electron microscopy and fluorescence measurements that the ability
of both purified prSSU and the full-length SS-tp to disrupt bilayers is totally
dependent on the presence of the non-bilayer forming lipid, MGDG. The
experiments outlined in this proposal are a direct extension of our in vitro
analysis of the SS-tp/membrane interaction. The first objective is to refine the
mapping of prSSU sequences that are responsible for lipid interaction/membrane
destabilization. A complete set overlapping peptides will be synthesized that
span SS-tp entirely and extend into the mature domain of SSU. In this way, the
sequences of prSSU that are both necessary and sufficient for lipid interaction
will be determined precisely and the potential involvement of sequences in the
mature domain will be addressed. The second objective is to examine the chemical
proper ties of MGDG that account for its role in transit peptide-mediated
membrane destabilization. By utilizing liposomes containing alternative non-
bilayer forming lipids such as phosphatidylethanolamine and cardiolipin, it will
be possible to distinguish between the non-bilayer forming property of MGDG vs.
other traits, such as hydrogen bonding activity of the qugar head group. The
third objective is to alter the non-bilayer forming tendency of MGDG in vivo by
utilizing Arabidopsis mutants that are deficient in one or more of their fatty
acid desaturases fad. These fad mutants are ideal for our purpose since earlier
in viro research clearly indicates that MGDG prefers to form non-bilayer
structures only when its fatty acids are highly unsaturated. By utilizing
various single, double, and triple fad mutants, we can produce chloroplasts that
contain MGDG variants which are predicted to vary in their preferences to form
non-bilayer structures. These mutants will ppovide the most intact system to
directly evaluate the role of non-bilayer structures in chloroplast protein
translocation. Non-technical Biological membranes consist of a bilayer of lipids
in which are embedded proteins. In order to assemble intracellular structures it
is necessary for proteins to be translocated through the membrane. Much research
has been directed at determining the protein components of membranes that
facilitate the movement and processing of proteins as they transit through a
membrane. Dr. Bruce will look at this process from a different perspective and
he will conduct research to examine what lipid components are essential to
facilitate trafficking of chloroplast proteins. The chloroplast is a useful
model system to conduct these studies because chloroplasts possess unique lipids
not found in other intracellular organelles. Dr. Bruce will use mutants of lipid
synthesis in order to provide experimental models to probe the process of
protein translocation into the chloroplast. This work is important because it
provides a basis of the fundamental process of the assembly of intracellular
organelles. ***