* 9604180
* RUI: PTL-1, A Tau-Like Microtubule Binding Protein in C.    elegans
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2002
* Stephanie Aamodt, Louisiana State University Shreveport
* Standard Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 06/30/2002
* USD 105,416.00

9604180 Aamodt Technical Abstract: The mammalian tau microtubule-associated
proteins have been implicated in axonal outgrowth, microtubule spacing and
microtubule bundling. A caenorhabditis elegans gene with homology to the repeat
region of tau was identified and characterized. This gene was named ptl-1 for
Protein with Tau-Like repeats. The ptl-1 transcript, like mammalian tau
transcripts, is alternatively spliced to produce messages that encode proteins
with variable numbers of repeats. The predicted ptl-1 products have strong
sequence homology to tau over the repeat region and are similar to tau in size,
amino acid content, charge distribution, predicted secondary structure,
hydrophobicity , and flexibility Bacterially expression PTL-1 bound to
microtubules in vitro. These results show that tau-like proteins evolved early
and suggests that they may be present in many different phyla. C. elegans is a
powerful system amenable to genetic, molecular and cellular analysis in which to
study the functions of the tau class of proteins. Three major questions will be
addressed: Does PTL-1 promote tubulin polymerization in a manner similar to that
of mammalian tau? Where is the gene expressed? And what is the function of the
gene product? Recombinant PTL-1 will be tested to determine whether it increases
microtubule nucleation and assembly in vitro as tau does. Antibodies will be
produced against PTL-1 and ptl-1::lacZ fusion genes will be made to determine
when and where ptl-1 is expressed. Finally, a strain of C. elegans that does not
express ptl-1 will be made. If absence of ptl-1 induces a phenotype, the
mammalian tau gene will be expressed to determine whether it can rescue. These
studies will provide information about the role of ptl-1 in C. elegans and the
relationship between PTL-1 and tau. The relevant of this project derives from
its contribution to our understanding of basic cellular and developmental
mechanisms. Lay Abstract: Microtubules are fundamentally important structures in
eukaryotic cells. They function in cellular and intracellular motility, serving
as the means whereby cilia and flagella beat, chromosomes are distributed to
daughter cells during cell division, cellular extensions are properly shaped and
oriented, and intracellular components are moved from one part of the cell to
another. These last two functions are notably critical in neuronal cells that
bear extremely long axons (some axons in higher animals may be several feet in
length!). The axons need to connect the cell bodies to the right terminal point
elsewhere in the body, and neuroexcitatory and other materials need to be
transported from their site of synthesis in the cell body to the terminal end of
the axon in order for the neuron to function properly. Many accessory proteins
are known that bind to microtubules and are somehow involved in their proper
formation and/or function; these are known collectively as Microtubule-
Associated Proteins, or MAPs. One of the predominant MAPs in neuronal cells is
called tau, and although it has been studied extensively in mammalian systems,
there are still many fundamental questions about tau's function in the cell that
remain unanswered. In this project, the recent discovery of a tau-like protein
in the simple model organism, C. elegans (a nematode worm), will be exploited.
The simplicity and well-established background information about the worm,
together with the power of genetics, will allow new discoveries about the
function of this tau-like protein in both the worm and other animals. ***