* 9604849
* Mechanisms Involved in Exocytosis and Rapid Endocytosis in  Chromaffin Cells
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2001
* Cristina Artalejo, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Roy L. White
* 05/31/2001
* USD 179,536.00

9604849 Artalejo The major response of animals, including humans, to fear or
stressful situations is termed the "fight-or-flight" response. Such situations
trigger the sudden release of hormones called catecholamines (e.g. adrenaline)
into the blood stream; these catecholamines then go on to activate a
characteristic set of events including accelerated heart- rate, hair-elevation
etc. One major source of adrenaline is the chromaffin cells of the adrenal
medulla (AC cells). This project concerns the mechanism whereby AC cells are
able to secrete adrenaline into the blood stream so quickly in stressful
situations. The investigators will use cells from bovine adrenal medulla as a
model system, but believe similar processes are operative in other mammals,
including humans. Secretion is initiated by movement of Ca ions from the outside
to the inside of the cell, these Ca ions cause vesicles inside the cell to fuse
with the surface membrane and release their contents. The investigators have
hypothesized that there is a specific type of Ca channel that allows passage of
Ca into the cell and is tightly coupled to the machinery that regulates the
fusion reaction. Such tight coupling would explain why the cells can secrete
"instantaneously" when stimulated. The prime objectives of this proposal is to
validate this hypothesis and to determine how cells recover from the secretory
event and get ready for the arrival of the next stimulus. In the first objective
the investigators will employ a new method for detecting adrenaline secretion
from the cells that has a very fast time-resolution enabling us to measure
secretory events on a millisecond time scale. This will allow them to determine
how Ca entering the cell can trigger the rapid release of adrenaline. In the
second objective, they will employ a different method that allows them to
measure the surface area of the cell. Use of this method enables them to detect
the recovery process that ensue immediately after se cretion of adrenaline has
occurred. In combination, these experiments will give a much more detailed
appreciation of the mechanism of this important physiological event.