* 9604516
* RUI:  Nitric Oxide Inhibition of Molluscan Metamorphosis
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/1997,04/30/2000
* Esther Leise, University of North Carolina Greensboro
* Standard Grant
* Dennis M. Higgins
* 04/30/2000
* USD 127,764.00

ABSTRACT IBN 9604516 LEISE Neurotransmitters are typically small molecules that
are released by an activated nerve cell, allowing it to communicate with other
neurons. Most neurotransmitters are stored within vesicles and released for
short periods of time when a neuron is electrically excited. Upon release, these
molecules diffuse across a narrow synaptic cleft and interact with surface
receptors on their target cells. In the last 15 years, a new class of
neurotransmitters has been identified that acts in a different fashion. These
gaseous neurotransmitters, including nitric oxide and carbon monoxide, are made
enzymatically upon demand, and can diffuse through cells and tissues to interact
with intracellular biochemical pathways. Of these two gases, more is known about
the functions of nitric oxide and how it acts in adult nervous systems. For
example, nitric oxide plays roles in systems as diverse as behavioral
aggression, learning and memory, and the mediation of olfactory responses. The
functions of this molecule in developing nervous systems are, however, still
being elucidated. Preliminary data from Dr. Leise's research have indicated that
nitric oxide may act within developing nervous systems as a natural inhibitor of
metamorphosis. Upon release, nitric oxide typically interacts with the enzyme
guanylyl cyclase to enhance production of the intracellular messenger molecule
cGMP, which in turn can affect a broad range of cellular biochemistry. To
determine if the typical nitric oxide-guanylyl cyclase pathway is part of the
cellular systems that control metamorphosis, Dr. Leise and her coworkers will
conduct a series of related experiments on a species of marine snails. They will
use pharmacological experiments to block the production of nitric oxide, which
should allow metamorphosis to proceeed. They will use biochemical assays to
measure levels of cGMP before, during and after metamorphosis, and they will
also use immunocytochemical procedures to determine which cells prod uce nitric
oxide and which cells are the likely targets that contain the enzyme guanylyl
cyclase. These investigations will determine whether or not nitric oxide plays
an important role in governing the onset of metamorphosis. Even humans retain
vestiges of metamorphosis in the hormonal changes that we undergo during
puberty, and it may be that this new gaseous neurotransmitter plays a role in
this important developmental process.