* 9604000
* Transcriptional Regulation of Carbon Utilization in the     Hyperthermophilic Archaeon Sulfolobus Solfataricus
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/1997,03/31/2000
* Paul Blum, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 03/31/2000
* USD 154,000.00

9604000 Blum This research seeks to identify mechanisms which have evolved to
overcome the inherent biophysical constraints imposed on the regulation of gene
expression at extreme temperatures, as well as further clarify the evolutionary
position of the Archaea. Phylogenetic studies based on comparison of rDNA
sequences have shown that the Archaea are distantly related to both Eubactria
and Eukaryotes. Although Archaea are phylogentically distinct from Eukaryotes,
their transcriptional components exhibit remarkable similarity. However, it is
not know whether this similarity extends to DNA sequences and factors that
regulate transcription. The recently discovered Catabolite Repression (CR)
response in the aerobic, hyperthermophile Sulfulobus solfataricus will be used
as a model system to study gene regulation in archaeons. One component of this
system termed CR-I consists of variations in levels of carbon utilization
enzymes and their respective transcripts elicited by growth on a hierarchy of
sole carbon and energy sources. CR-I regulates expression of malA (maltase),
malE (exogluconase) and the polycistronic malL cluster. Since genomic analysis
indicates that several of these target genes are physically unlinked, CR-I uses
a global regulatory mechanism to control gene expression. Moreover, CR-I appears
to up regulate malA and malE while down regulating malL. This research will
determine if CR-I regulation occurs at the level of transcription initiation and
will identify the cis and trans-acting factors necessary for CR-I control of mal
gene expression. The results of this research will clarify how aerobic
hyperthermophilic Archaea regulate gene expression for the selective consumption
of carbon. While hyperthermophiles are are present in both archaeal sub-
divisions, the Euryarchaeota and the Crenarchaeota, their rDNAs are unusually
deeply rooted suggesting that they were among the first organisms to appear on
earth. This research therefore may provide additional insight into the ev
olutionary origin of gene expression. Phylogenetic studies based on comparison
of ribosomal DNA (rDNA) sequences have led to the discovery of a distinct group
of organisms termed the Archaea which are distantly related to both Eubactria
and Eukaryotes. Although Archaea are phylogentically distinct from Eukaryotes,
their transcriptional components exhibit remarkable similarity. However, it is
not know whether this similarity extends to DNA sequences and factors that
regulate transcription. The hyperthermophile Sulfulobus solfataricus will be
used as a model system to study gene regulation in archaeons. The anticipated
results will clarify how aerobic hyperthermophilic Archaea regulate gene
expression at extreme tempertures, and will provide insight into basic aspects
of archaeal hyperthermophilic metabolism and the evolutionary origin of gene
expression.