* 9604339
* Protein-Protein Interactions in Photosystem II
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/1997,08/31/2000
* Terry Bricker, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas E. Smith
* 08/31/2000
* USD 317,000.00

9604339 Bricker Part 1-Technical This research will further elucidate the
structural organization of proteins within Photosystem II. Protein-protein and
protein-cofactor interactions among the components of the photosytem will be
studied using a combination of biochemical and molecular tools. First, the site-
specific protein-labeling reagents NHS-biotin will be used o probe interacting
domains on the extrinsic proteins of the photosystem. Labeling will be performed
on a number of biochemically resolved Photosystem II complexes and on the
extrinsic proteins free in solution The modified domains on the 33 kDa, 24 and
17 kDa extrinsic proteins will be identified by a combination of affinity
purification, protease digestion and matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization
mass spectrometry. Second, suppressor analysis will be performed on spontaneous
and chemically induced revertants of the CP 7 mutants W167S and RR384385EE.
Intergenic suppressors will be identified, mapped and sequenced to determine the
identity of proteins interacting with these location in the CP 47 protein.
Third, protein footprinting using the non-specific chemical protease Fe-EDTA
will be used to map interactions within the photosystem. Photosystem II
complexes in various states of biochemical resolution will be subjected to
chemical protease treatment. Protected domains on a number of Photosystem II
components (CP 47, D1 and the 33 kDa extrinsic protein) will be identified by
"Western blotting" and probing with N-and C-terminal specific antibody reagents.
These experiments should provide relatively high resolution information
concerning interacting domains on these protein components. Part 2-Non Technical
Elucidation of the functional properties and structural organization of membrane
protein complexes is one of the central objectives of current biochemical
investigation. Biological membranes are involved in virtually every aspect of
cellular organization and activity. One of the most intriguing aspects of
membrane function is its role in the mediation of energy transduction in
photosynthetic organisms. Light energy, which is the product of a most violent
physical process, fusion, is transformed into biological energy equivalents
utilized by the photosynthetic cell. The photosynthetic process provides both
the carbohydrate which lies at the base of virtually all food chains and, as a
byproduct, all of the atmospheric oxygen utilized by higher organisms. This
project investigates the structural interactions between the proteins involved
in oxygen evolution. An understanding of the structure of the oxygen evolving
complex will yield new insights into the how this important membrane protein
complex functions.