* 9604988
* US-India Cooperative Research: Processing, Properties, and  Characterization of Ferroelectric Films, Award in U.S. and  Indian Currencies
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1997,03/31/2001
* Ram Katiyar, University of Puerto Rico-Rio Piedras
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 03/31/2001
* USD 30,102.00

9604988 Katiyar Description: This award supports the U.S.-India Cooperative
Research: Processing, Properties, and Characterization of Ferroelectric Films.
The collaborators are R.S. Katiyar, University of Puerto Rico, S.B. Desu,
Virginia Polytechnic Institute, and D.C. Agrawal, Indian Institute of
Technology, Kanpur. The researchers will study thin films of novel
optoelectronics and ferroelectrics with the aim of enhancing understanding of
synthesis and processing, materials characterization and modelling of thin film
growth and properties. Various techniques will be used to probe the micro-to
nano-scale compositions, structure and characterization in order to establish
structure-property relationships in these novel materials. Fundamental research
on ferroelectric thin films holds great potential for eventual application in
electro-optical devices, microwave electronics, micro sensors, and high density
packaging. Scope: This project supports a new collaboration between two U.S.
research institutions and the Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur. All
facilities are equipped with state-of-the-art instrumentation for the proposed
synthesis, characterization and modelling work. The research is expected to
stimulate a long-term science and engineering link among three centers-of-
excellence. The project is mutually beneficial and meets INT criteria for
support. ***