* 9604432
* Stimulus-Secretion Coupling in Mucosal Mast Cells: Studies at the Single-Cell Level
* NONE,NONE
* 02/15/1997,01/31/2001
* Clare Fewtrell, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Continuing grant
* Ronald M. Weiner
* 01/31/2001
* USD 301,995.00

Abstract 9604432 Fewtrell The role of calcium in stimulus-response coupling in
non-excitable cells is not well understood. The calcium responses of individual
cells within a population are extremely diverse, often displaying marked
oscillations in calcium, however little is known about the specific features of
the calcium signal that are important for the functional response of the cell.
In these studies the temporal relationship between changes in intracellular
calcium and secretion will be studied at the single cell level in non-excitable
cells, using a mucosal mast cell line as a model. The calcium responses of these
cells have been well characterized and the exocytosis of secretory granules
containing histamine, serotonin and other mediators by indo-1 photometry, and
the secretion of serotonin containing granules will be monitored simultaneously
in the same cell by constant potential amperometry. Thus the calcium response
associated with a single exocytotic events or burst of secretion can be
measured. Fluorescence imagining will monitor the calcium responses of a large
number of individual cells simultaneously. The hypothesis that an increase in
intracellular calcium is essential for exocytosis will be tested using a variety
of stimuli to mast cell lines, cell clones and transfected cell lines. The
requirement for protein kinase C activation and its role in modulating the
secretory response will be re-examined at the single cell level. Information
obtained about calcium signaling in mast cells will contribute to the overall
understanding of the role and regulation of this important signaling molecule in
many different cell types and systems. ***