* 9604906
* Customized Desk-top Experiment Management System for        Biomolecular NMR
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/1997,04/30/2001
* Eldon Ulrich, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 04/30/2001
* USD 844,683.00

The goal of this project is to equip the National Magnetic Resonance Facility
at Madison (NMRFAM) 1 with a Customized Desk-top Experiment Management System
(CDEMS) that will provide users with adaptable desk-top access to the software
and hardware resources of the facility. This project is a joint effort between
members of NMRFAM (in the Biochemistry Department) and the ZOO team (in the
Computer Sciences Department, University of Wisconsin-Madison); the latter group
has developed the tools to be used in constructing the CDEMS. NMRFAM is a shared
instrumentation laboratory dedicated to NMR investigations of structure-
function relationships in biomolecules. Hardware at NMRFAM includes five high-
resolution NMR spectrometers (with proton resonance frequencies between 400 and
750 MHz), a Silicon Graphics Inc. (SGI) Power Onyx computer system, and a number
of SGI workstations, the associated software encompasses a wide variety of
commercial and academic software packages used for processing and analyzing NMR
data and for retrieving and examining other information available on the systems
studied. The proposed desk-top access capabilities will enable NMRFAM to project
these assets beyond its walls and to make them freely available to collaborators
and other consumers of its technology. The CDEMS will facilitate collaborations
of scientists over the Internet and will enable users to interact with NMRFAM
staff members in planning and scheduling experiments and in processing and
analyzing data. Users, regardless of their physical location, will be able to
execute, from their own desk-tops, not only simulations and data analyses, but
actual data collection runs. In addition, the CDEMS will be designed to maximize
able the efficiency of available computational resources. .