* 9604921
* Structure and Dynamics of Glassy Chalcogenides:  A Joint    Experimental and Theoretical Approach
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1997,06/30/2001
* Ronald Cappelletti, Ohio University
* Continuing grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 06/30/2001
* USD 255,000.00

9604921 Capelletti Technical Abstract This is a new project in which a joint
experimental and theoretical program to study compound chalcogenide glasses is
proposed using a combination of thermal neutron scattering and ab initio
molecular dynamics. In particular, we propose to study alloys in the family Se-
As-Ge. A remarkably simple feature has emerged from our previous studies of
glasses in this family: the dependence of some properties only on network
topology as characterized by one parameter, the average atomic coordination
number <r>. Recently we have made the first ab initio molecular dynamics
calculations in a compound chalcogenide glass, GeSe_2. This work demonstrates
the power of a combined experimental and computational approach in gaining
understanding of amorphous systems. In this proposal we address the following
issues: atomic structure and dynamics and their relation to network topology and
chemical order/disorder; "floppy" modes and their relation to network properties
and to photo-induced phenomena; and the "Bose peak." We also theoretically
investigate holeburning in glassy As_2S_3 :H. %%% Non-Technical abstract This a
new project of study on chalcogenide glasses. Unlike crystals, glasses are
difficult to study because the atoms are not arrayed in a nice regular pattern.
For this reason, even obvious properties like the excellent transmission of
light through ordinary window glass are not very well understood. Nor is it
understood why some materials form glasses easily while others don't. In this
work we study a family of glasses (chalcogenides) which display a strikingly
simple feature: some properties apparently depend only on the average number of
atoms to which any given atom is linked up (bonded.) Among these properties, for
example, is how the atoms vibrate in the glass. We make measurements which
provide some information about this, but which cannot reveal the atomic motions
in detail. This is where computations come in. By making a reliable computer
model of the same glass (which we can tell by comparing its predictions with
measurements) we can use it to see just how the atoms vibrate. But the model
then provides much more information about these glasses. It gives details about
atomic structure which can be compared to experiment, and about how these
glasses will respond to light. In this way we hope to come to a better
understanding of this glass family, and of glasses generally. ***