* 9604786
* A Light Microscope Equipped with Epifluorescence and DIC    Optics and an Imaging System
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/1997,03/31/2000
* Michael Goldberg, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* Gregory K. Farber
* 03/31/2000
* USD 78,797.00

We propose to obtain an Olympus BX-50 microscope equipped with epifluorescence,
phase, and DIC optics along with an imaging system capable of acquiring and
analyzing high-resolution black-and-white images and lower resolution video rate
color images. Specifically, we propose to obtain a MetaMorph Imaging System with
a Princeton Instruments Pentamax CCD camera and a Dage MTI three-chip color CCD
camera. The MetaMorph system has Windows-based software operated on a Pentium
PC. The configuration of the proposed Olympus microscope has been designed to
facilitate its operation in a multi-user facility and for the projects of four
major users. Two CCD cameras are proposed in order to accommodate the needs of
the user labs for both high-resolution, high-sensitivity image acquisition as
well as video-rate color imaging. Applications range from imaging of static
fixed sections with DIC or immunofluorescence, to following mitochondrial
movement within living plant cells, to observing transfer of fluorescent
proteins during Drosophila mating. The computer interface is designed to allow
rapid image acquisition and sufficient memory to store a stack of sequential
images for further manipulation. Images can be superimposed to enhance signals
or to locate the position of fluorescent antibodies within cells. The microscope
will be equipped with a Z motor so that images of sequential planes of focus can
be acquired. The computer can also control the illumination wavelength by
selecting the appropriate filter cubes. Shutters on the microscope will be
controlled by the software so that image acquisition can be synchronized with
their opening. In samples which may be photobleached or otherwise damaged, this
feature is important to observe the same specimen during development by time-
lapse. The Metamorph software package allows analysis of numerous features of
objects. Among the applications of the users are measurement of cell, nuclei,
and organelle number, comparison of fluorescen t intensities of different
objects and areas, comparison of object shape and distribution in different
cells or regions of cells, etc. Some users also wish to produce videotape movies
of living cells of plants, Drosophila, yeast, and nematodes. The software
package will also be used to process images derived from an existing confocal
microscope, particularly enhancing its capability in 3-D reconstruction and
morphometric analysis. Four major users with diverse projects plan to use the
equipment. Shapes, numbers, size, interactions, fusion, splitting, volume, and
membrane potential of plant organelles labelled with green fluorescent
protein(GFP) and other probes will be examined in different tissues at various
times in development, with particular attention to male reproductive organs.
Mutants with defective pollen development will optically sectioned to determine
the stage of developmental arrest. The destination of GFP-labelled accessory
gland proteins will be observed in the female fruit fly following transfer from
the male during mating. GFP fusions with a Drosophila nuclear envelope protein,
YA, will be used to image the presence and movement in nuclei during the rapid
cell cycles of living embryos. Partitioning defective mutants of C. elegans will
be used to understand how the polarity of the zygote is established after
fertilization and how the differences in spindle orientations in the early
blastomeres are controlled. Cytoplasmic flow rates in these mutants will be
analyzed by following the trajectories of cytoplasmic particles. The
localization and distribution of Drosophila proteins involved in chromosome
segregation during cell division will be examined in vivo. Mutants with
aberration in the accurate segregation of chromosomes to daughter cells will be
characterized.