* 9604246
* Biochemical Characterization of Arabidopsis Calcium         Antiporter, CAX1p
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/1997,09/30/2000
* Philip Rea, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing grant
* Hector E. Flores
* 09/30/2000
* USD 300,000.00

9604246 Rea Re-establishment of the resting state after stimulus-coupled
elevations of cytosolic free Ca2+ requires the rapid removal of Ca2+ from the
cytosol of plant cells. The investigator in collaboration with Drs. Hirschi and
Fink, Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, has recently isolated two
cDNAs, CAXl and CAX2, from Arabidopsis thaliana. These cDNA's suppress a
mutation in a Saccharomyces cerevisiae strain defective in vacuolar Ca2+
accumulation (Hirschi et al., 1996). Experiments on vacuolar membrane-enriched
vesicles isolated from yeast expressing CAXl or CAX2 demonstrate that these
genes encode high efficiency and low efficiency H+/Ca2+ exchangers,
respectively. The properties of the CAXl gene product indicate that it is the
high capacity transporter responsible for contributing to the maintenance of low
cytosolic free Ca2+ concentrations in plant cells by catalyzing pH gradient-
energized vacuolar Ca2+ accumulation. Having cloned CAXl and CAX2 and broadly
defined the functional characteristics of their translation products in yeast,
the investigator aims now to extend his studies of one of these, CAXlp, the
putative vacuolar H+/Ca2+ antiporter, to better defining its transport
capabilities and membrane localization in the intact plant. The main objectives
of the research program are be four-fold: (1) Determination of the plant
membrane fraction(s) with which CAXlp is associated. The investigator's data
strongly indicate that CAXlp corresponds to the vacuolar H+/Ca2+ antiporter but
this remains to be tested directly. (2) The development of procedures for the
purification and reconstitution of CAXlp. This is necessary for studies of the
sufficiency of CAXlp for H+/Ca2+ antiport, and possibly other antiport
functions, and the provision of material for future investigations of transport
stoichiometry and structure-function relations. (3) Elucidation of the
electrogenicity, and thence transport stoichiometry, of CAXlp-mediated H+/Ca2+
exchange. It is critical to know the numbe r of H+ ions exchanged per Ca2+ since
this determines the maximum accumulation ratio that can be achieved by CAXlp
under the conditions prevailing in vivo. This, in turn, will provide indications
of the physiological function of CAXlp. (4) Examination of the capacity of CAXlp
for the transport of Na+ as well as Ca2+ or Na+ as well as H+. The investigator
has shown that CAXlp catalyzes Ca2+ transport in preference to other divalent
cations but it is not known if Na+ can substitute for H+ as driver ion or
whether CAXlp is competent in Na+/H+ antiport as well as H+/Ca2+ antiport, as is
the case for some non-plant H+/Ca2+ and Na+/Ca2+ antiporters. Knowledge of its
membrane localization, sufficiency, likely physiological poise and ion-
selectivity will provide a firm foundation for future investigations, by both
the investigator and others, of the regulation, structure-function
characteristics and physiological impact of CAXlp on general ion homeostasis and
Ca2+-dependent stimulus-response coupling in plants. The coordination of many
plant cell responses to stimuli, such as light, gravity, touch and cold, is
mediated by changes in cytoplasmic calcium ion ( Ca2+) concentration. A major
intracellular reservoir for some of the Ca2+ involved in these processes is the
vacuole. Since the vacuolar concentration of Ca2+ is often 10,000 times higher
than that of the cytoplasm, and the maintenance of low cytoplasmic
concentrations is critical for normal cell function, efficient systems for
concentrating Ca2+ in the vacuole are required. One of these is a transporter, a
calcium-proton antiporter, located in the membrane surrounding the vacuole. This
membrane protein harnesses the electrochemical energy contained in the hydrogen
ion (H+) concentration gradient across this membrane to drive the transport of
Ca2+ from the cytoplasm into the vacuole by exchanging vacuolar H+ for
cytoplasmic Ca2+. This research is concerned with understanding the molecular
mechanism of this transporter.