* 9604841
* Characterization of Ribosomal Plaque Domains in Axons
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/1997,01/31/2001
* Edward Koenig, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 01/31/2001
* USD 315,000.00

9604841 Koenig The proposed study centers on novel, specialized domains located
at intermittent intervals in the outer boundary of axons, called "periaxoplasmic
plaques." The plaques were discovered in isolated axoplasm from the Mauthner
neuron located in the goldfish central nervous system, and their presence has
now been confirmed in axons of rabbit spinal nerve roots; therefore, they are
likely to be specializations common to long axons in general. Identification of
ribosomes in plaque domains suggests that the latter are potential local centers
of protein synthesis concerned with local turnover of axoplasmic proteins. This
premise is a significant departure from prevailing views on how the axon's
vitality and mass are maintained in a steady state. One major experimental aim
is to analyze the principal structural components located within plaque domains
of goldfish and rabbit axons at an electron microscopic level in order to define
the spatial organization of the plaque domain, and to characterize common
features and distinctive differences between older and more recently evolved
vertebrate axons. Another major experimental aim is to test the hypothesis that
plaque domains represent local centers of protein synthesis, and are targeted
endstations for RNA trafficking from the neuronal cell body. For this purpose,
immunostaining, and molecular biological techniques will be used to evaluate
localization in relationship to plaque domains in goldfish and rabbit axons of
elongation factor 1a, an essential cofactor of protein synthesis, and
localization of messenger RNA that codes for specific gene products,
respectively. Labeled RNA constructs will also be microinjectied into the
Mauthner cell to evaluate targeting and transport of RNA to plaque domains from
the cell body. Finally, sites of de novo protein synthesis, assayed by metabolic
radiolabeling in goldfish and rabbit axons, will also be evaluated by
autoradiography in order to determ ine the spatial relationship between the
localization of nascent peptide chains to plaque domains. Information from the
proposed study should contribute to a greatly improved understanding of how
axoplasmic proteins, and vitality of long axons are maintained on a long term
basis.