* 9604985
* Indo-US Workshop on Ground Improvement Using Geosynthetics  March 26-28, New Delhi, India.  Award in US and Indian      Currencies
* O/D,OISE
* 01/15/1997,12/31/1997
* Mysore Nataraj, University of New Orleans
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 12/31/1997
* USD 17,500.00

Description: This award is to support participation by scientists and engineers
from the United States in a `U.S.-India Workshop on Ground Improvement Using
Geosynthetics` to be held March 26-28, 1997 in New Delhi, India. The organizers
are Dr. Mysore Nataraj from the University of New Orleans and Dr. D.V. Singh,
Director of the Central Road Research Institute in New Delhi. The workshop
program will include three themes: use of geosynthetics in barrier systems,
drainage, filtration in expansive soil areas and in erosion control; use of
geosynthetics in low and high volume roads and railway embankment construction;
and use of geosynthetics in embankments on soft soils and marginal soils.
Presentations will be made by scientists, engineers, and practitioners from
academic and industrial organizations in the two countries. An exhibition of
materials currently in use and available from manufacturers in the US and India
will be available. The participants will discuss the potential for expanding the
use of these new materials, and others in their class, to solve many of the
pressing problems in civil infrastructure in India and in the United states.
They will also discuss problem areas that require further research and
development in the materials research, materials processing, or applications'
technologies areas. Scope: This award is to fund travel of a team of U.S.
scientists to participate in an important binational workshop where discussions
will deal with a topic of current economic importance to most of the countries
concerned with building their civil infrastructure such as India and other
developing countries. The topic is also important to countries interested in
rehabilitating their civil infrastructure such as the United States. The
practical experiences and research results to be discussed, and the
deliberations on future research, are intended to accomplish the objective of
reducing the cost of building or repairing roads, bridges, tunnels, and large
structures in general, while reducing the need for polluting materials that the
geosynthetics replace. The results could include collaborative research
involving US and Indian engineers and scientists, as well as enhancing the
potential for the use of materials that are primarily produced, at least for the
time being, by US companies. The project meets the objectives of the Division of
International Programs in promoting collaboration with foreign scientists and
engineers in areas of mutual interest.