* 9604919
* Genetic Organization and Epigenetic Silencing of R-marbled  Maize
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/1997,02/29/2000
* William Eggleston, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Continuing Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 02/29/2000
* USD 267,000.00

9604919 Eggleston The R-marbled (R-mb) complex of r genes in maize exemplifies
many features of epigenetic gene silencing in plants. First, kernel pigmentation
is inhibited irregularly in a pattern characteristic of transposable element
action. Germinal revertants confer strong seed and scutellum color and weak
scutellar node color. Unique among r alleles, in combination with dominant
alleles of the a3 and pl loci, this allele permits variegated anthocyanin
expression in anthers. Even more remarkably, heterozygosity between R-mb and
certain other r alleles on the homologous chromosome leads to heritable
inactivation of the latter (paramutation). No change in R-mb is observed.
Genetic linkage of Lc, a displaced copy of r not normally sensitive to
paramutation, to R-mb leads to a gradual suppression of Lc expression. Questions
to be addressed in this proposal include: How are the determinants of cis and
trans gene silencing in R-mb organized and are they related? Is expression of
gene sin R-mb itself suppressed by these determinants? What types of
molecular/genetic changes alter the potential for silencing? To study those
questions, the R-mb complex will be fractionated by intralocus recombination and
the products analyzed by a of genetic and molecular methods. Results from this
work will lead t a better understanding of mechanisms of gene silencing and
evolutionary forces affecting duplicated sequences in plants and other species.
The results also will elucidate some epigenetic, or non-Mendelian effects to be
expected, and avoided or enhanced, during the use of transgenes in basic
research and in crop and animal improvement.