* 9604140
* RUI:  Swimming in Rainbow Trout:  Ontogeny and Muscle       Function
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2000
* David Coughlin, Widener University
* Standard Grant
* Judith A. Verbeke
* 05/31/2000
* USD 104,514.00

9604140 Coughlin Fish provide an elegant system for the study of muscle
function. Variations in the location and usage of the different muscle fiber
types (slow, intermediate and fast) of fish permit evaluation of how each muscle
type contributes to locomotion. Rainbow trout, Oncorhynchus mykiss, show a
number of interesting characteristics of muscle function during steady or
sustained swimming (i.e. swimming that employs the slow, aerobic muscle fibers
only). Dr. Coughlin will explore how distinct patterns of body curvature and
electrical activation in the muscle of swimming trout affect muscle function and
locomotion. Also, through comparison of the discrete life history stages
observed in trout, such as the parr and smolt stages, the PI will examine how
developmental changes in body shape and muscle kinetics effect swimming
performance. Lastly, through hormone manipulation, rainbow trout development
will be manipulated to allow comparisons of swimming at the different life
history stages with control for natural differences in size at each stage. The
study of fish swimming increases the understanding of muscle function in all
vertebrates. While this study will focus on aerobic muscle function in swimming
fish, it has implications for our understanding of aerobic muscle function in
other systems, especially other cyclically active muscle such as bird flight
muscle and the power generating muscle of mammalian limbs.