* 9604126
* Molecular Genetics of Gibberellin Signal Transduction       in Arabidopsis
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/1997,03/31/2001
* Neil Olszewski, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Randolph Addison
* 03/31/2001
* USD 307,726.00

9604126 Olszewski Technical The question of how signal transduction pathways for
hormones and other signals function is central to our understanding of the
processes of growth and development. The long term goal of this research is to
understand the molecular genetic basis of the signal transduction occurring in
Arabidopsis following the perception of gibberellins (GA), a class of
phytohormones. Although much progress has been made in elucidating the anabolic
and catabolic pathways for active GAs, relatively little is known about GA
signal transduction. Arabidopsis is the best system in which to dissect this
pathway because the genetic analysis of this species has identified more genes
likely to be involved in GA signal transduction than in other plants and because
the only cloned GA signal transduction genes, SPINDLY (SPY) and GAI, are from
this species. The SPY gene is the focus of this proposal. Genetic analysis
suggests that it is a suppressor of GA signal transduction and that a loss-of-
function mutations lead to increased signal transduction. spy mutations
completely suppress the inhibition of seed germination that results from GA-
deficiency and partially suppress the dwarfism and sterility caused by GA-
deficiency. In addition, a strong spy allele completely suppresses the effects
of a semidominant mutation at the GAI locus, which causes GA responsiveness,
suggesting that spy acts downstream of the step that is affected by the gai
mutation. The SPY protein contains ten copies of an imperfect 34 amino acid
motif known as a tetratricopeptide repeat (TPR) that is found in a number of
diverse proteins including several that play roles in signal transduction. TPRs
appear to be involved in protein-protein interactions. Thus SPY is likely to act
by interacting with other components of the GA signal transduction pathway.
Interestingly, homologous genes, encoding proteins of unknown functions(s), are
present in humans and C. elegans suggesting that SPY is the first genetically
characterized me mber of a previously unrecognized family of regulatory proteins
that are present in eukaryotes. Preliminary results indicate that SPY expression
is regulated by both developmental and environmental signals affecting plant
growth. The goals of this proposal are to elucidate the role of SPY in GA signal
transduction and to use it is to identify additional components of this pathway.
Specifically, the developmental expression pattern of SPY mRNA and its possible
regulation by signals that may control plant growth and development by affecting
GA signal transduction will be characterized. The use of reporter genes in these
studies will allow detailed analyses of the effects of many signals. In a
complementary approach, the expression of SPY protein will similarly be
characterized using polyclonal antisera against SPY protein and creating
transgenic plants that express epitope-tagged SPY protein and localizing this
recombinant protein using anti-epitope monoclonal antibodies. A range of
molecular, biochemical and genetic approaches will be used to identify
additional components of the GA signal transduction pathway. Data suggesting
that Arabidopsis contains a second SPY gene has been recently obtained. This
gene will be cloned and sequenced. If the sequence suggests that the gene is,
indeed a SPY gene, its function in GA signal transduction will be determined by
knocking out its expression. Because TPR repeats are believed tobe involved in
protein-protein interactions, immunoprecipitation in conjunction with
biochemical procedures will be used to determine if the SPY protein is a
component of a stable multiprotein complex. If such a complex is detected, it
will be purified and the protein members of the complex will be partially
sequenced in preparation for cloning the corresponding genes. The two hybrid
system of yeast will serve as a backup to this approach. To identify additional
genes involved in GA signal transduction, genetic screens will be employed to
isolate mutations that suppress or enhance the action of spy alleles. Non
-Technical The plant hormone gibberellin is central to signaling several
essential processes involved in plant growth including seed germination, plant
development and reproduction. Synthetic gibberellins have been used for many
years to stimulate plant growth in laboratories and horticulture. The mode of
action by which gibberellins control plant growth has remained unknown.
Understanding how gibberellins exert its effect on plants is central to
understanding the process of plants growth. Dr. Olszewski has identified a
protein called SPY that appears to be a central component of the biological
system by which exogenous gibberellin signals are transmitted within plant cells
to induce specific effects. In this award his group will conduct research to
determine the function and interactions of the SPY protein. Diverse organisms
including humans possess uncharacterized gene sequences that have homology to
the gene encoding SPY indicating that SPY-like protein might be an essential
part of signaling pathways in animals as well as plant cells. Dissection of the
function of SPY in plants may result in a significant advance in understanding
signaling systems by which plant hormones control the growth and morphology of
plants. ***