* 9604446
* Role of a Chaperone-Insertase in the Maturation of          Dinitrogenase
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/1997,04/30/2000
* Gary Roberts, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas E. Smith
* 04/30/2000
* USD 262,000.00

9604446 Roberts Part 1 (Technical) Dinitrogenase is an important enzyme because
of its role in the global nitrogen cycle, but it is also one of the best
understood complex metalloproteins. This base of understanding makes it an
excellent model system for understanding how metal clusters are formed and
inserted into apo-proteins. This research addresses a central issue in that
phenomenon, namely, the requirements and role of the ( protein that inserts the
active site metal cluster into apodinitrogenase. The results will have broad
implications for metal protein maturation, as well as for the mechanisms by
which metals are efficiently utilized by cells. Active dinitrogenase is an (2 (2
complex with an Iron-Molybdenum cofactor (termed FeMo-co) at its active site.
The PI identified a protein, termed ( , that is central to the maturation of
dinitrogenase. ( is a homodimer that monomerizes upon the specific binding of
FeMo-co. In the presence of dinitrogenase reductase and nucleotide, it donates
that FeMo-co to ApoI, creating active dinitrogenasae. When FeMo-co is limiting,
( associates with ApoI, acting as a chaperone to stabilize ApoI in an altered
conformation. ( is therefore a chaperone-insertase and this project will address
a number of the critical features of that complex role. The monomer-dimer
transition of ( upon binding FeMo-co and ('s chaperone role with ApoI suggest
that these steps are supported by dramatic changes in protein structure and this
research will seek to understand the nature and role of those structural
changes. The goals of this proposal are the following: (i) Determination of the
mechanism by which ( serves as a FeMo-co insertase. (ii) Development of a
"structural" understanding of the role of ( in FeMo-co insertase and ApoI
maturation. (iii) Identification of the requirements for dissociation of ( from
ApoI following FeMo-co insertion. An activity that promotes the dissociation of
( from ApoI following FeMo-co had been detected and it will be pu rified and
characterized. The information gained will provide a uniquely defined insight
into metalloprotein maturation, particularly because many of the other relevant
factors in the process have already been characterized. Because the structures
of dinitrogenase and dinitrogenase reductase are known, the structure and
properties of ( will serve to define the maturation process at the molecular
level. It will also address the larger issue of how chaperones assist other
proteins in attaining their final active conformation. Part 2 (Non-technical)
Proteins that contain metal atoms perform many of the most critical functions in
virtually all living organisms. It has been estimated that one-third of all
enzymes require metals for function, and work over the past 20 years has
provided a growing understanding of the role of metals in many of these enzymes.
Surprisingly, however, very little is known about how metal atoms are actually
placed within the appropriate enzymes. This process must involve a number of
factors that have the ability to both identify and bind specific metal atoms and
then to find the appropriate enzymes that should receive these specific metals.
The PI identified one such protein, which inserts the critical metal complex
into the active site of dinitrogenase, the enzyme responsible for all biological
nitrogen fixation on earth. He will characterize the precise way in which this
protein recognizes only one specific metal complex, how it protects that complex
from degradation and how it inserts that complex into dinitrogenase. This
process will certainly have similarities to the processing of other metal
complexes and will therefore have broad biological implications.