* 9604617
* Role of DNA Topology and Chromatin Structure in Phaseolin   Gene Regulation
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/1997,02/29/2000
* Richard Sinden, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Joanne Tornow
* 02/29/2000
* USD 318,000.00

9604617 Hall Phaseolin, the major seed protein of the bean Phaseolus vulgaris,
is highly expressed and accumulated during embryogenesis but is absent from
vegetative tissues of bean plants. A similar pattern of gene expression is
observed in stable transformants of tobacco with the beta-phaseolin (phas) gene.
As for many plant genes, cis-elements essential for spatial regulation of the
phas gene promoter lie close to the transcription start site. Although many DNA
sequence motifs known to interact with transcription factors are present in this
promoter region, none of these transactivators has yet been shown to be tissue
specific. Indeed, the substantial activity seen in transient assays of phas/gus
constructs introduced into leaf cells by bombardment or electroporation
indicates that nuclear factors present in vegetative tissues can interact
productively with phas promoter elements. In contrast, stable transformed plants
using identical constructs show no expression in vegetative tissues or in calli
from such plants even when treated with a range of growth regulators. As for
several animal and yeast genes, these observations suggest the integration into
plant chromatin plays a role in regulating phas gene expression. This research
will use tobacco transformed with a single copy of the phas gene to evaluate the
role of chromatin in phas gene expression. Cis-elements that regulate the phas
promoter in vivo will be identified by footprinting methods that compare the
interaction of cis-elements with cellular factors in vegetative (leaf) and seed
tissues. Mapping of nucleosome position in leaves and seeds will determine if
nucleosomes are positioned over specific regions of the phas promoter, which
could prevent access by transacting factors resulting in the inactivity seen in
vegetative tissues. The goals of this research are generally to understand the
cellular mechanisms that confer stringent developmental and spatial regulation
on the phas gene promoter, and specifically to determine how that promoter is
converted from a totally inactive state in vegetative tissues to a highly active
state during embryogenesis. Phaseolin, the major seed protein of the bean
Phaseolus vulgaris, is highly expressed and accumulated during embryogenesis but
is absent from vegetative tissues of bean plants. The goals of this research are
generally to understand the cellular mechanisms that confer stringent
developmental and spatial regulation on the gene encoding phaseolin, and
specifically to determine how that gene is converted from a totally inactive
state in vegetative tissues to a highly active state during embryogenesis.