* 9604803
* Upgrade of Confocal Microscope for Use in Developmental and Cell Biological Studies
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/1997,06/30/1998
* Robert MacDonald, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 06/30/1998
* USD 54,245.00

The requested funds will be used to upgrade a Bio-Rad MRC-600 confocal
microscope. The items to be purchased are: a Krypton/Argon laser with fiber
optic mount, improved photomultiplier tubes, a 60X 1.2 NA water immersion lens,
and a computer for image processing. The new laser will dramatically improve the
color separation in double label immunofluorescence experiments and allow triple
label experiments to be performed. The fiber optic mount will decrease
vibrations in the scan head and improve resolution at high magnification. The
new photomultiplier tubes will allow the imaging of fainter objects and the
water immersion lens will improve the quality of images from thick specimens. By
having a second computer for off line processing, one researcher can be
collecting data while a second is processing data. The equipment will be used in
both cell biological and developmental experiments. The cell biological
experiments center on the trafficking of molecules through the cell. Studies
will be performed to understand how the Drosophila Wingless secreted protein is
taken up by cells and the potential role of transcytosis in the formation of a
gradient of Wingless protein. These experiments should lead to a better
understanding of how pattern is generated in developing organisms. In other work
the role of the Rab 7 protein in the endocytic pathway will be examined. The
goal of this work is to understand how molecules are targeted to various
organelles. The third main area of cell biological study is the use of cationic
lipids for delivering molecules into cells. This technology will be used to
study a variety of cellular processes. All these studies require co-localization
experiments in which it is critical to maximize color separation. In addition,
the ability to follow the subcellular distribution of molecules requires the
best possible resolution and highest sensitivity. The Developmental studies are
focused on Drosophila. In addition to the Wingle ss experiments described above,
research is being conducted on the transcriptional regulation of leg patterning
and the role of cell lineage in the patterning of the central nervous system.
Both of these studies require an ability to carry out triple label experiments
in which three molecules can be followed simultaneously. The goal of the leg
patterning experiments is to understand how a gradient of positional information
is interpreted and leads to the specification of individual cell fates. The
neuronal lineage experiments will examine the relative contribution of lineage
and positional information to the final phenotype of individual neurons. The
Krypton/Argon laser is essential for the triple label experiments and the water
immersion lens will allow neurons and their axonal projections to be followed
throughout the embryo.