* 9604491
* Functions of Tubulin and Dynein Genes in Arabidopsis
* BIO,MCB
* 04/15/1997,03/31/2001
* Sue Wick, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 03/31/2001
* USD 330,000.00

Snustad 9604491 Technical The long-term goal of the proposed research is to
understand the roles of microtubule-based components of the cytoskeleton in
plant growth and development. Morphogenesis in plants is controlled primarily by
cytoskeletal processes that establish the planes of cell divisions and the axes
of cell elongations, and microtubule arrays that are unique to plant cells -
preprophase bands and phragmoplasts. Little progress has been made towards
understanding the molecular mechanisms by which these processes occur. Moreover,
we still know essentially nothing about the structure or function of
microtubule-associated motor proteins in plants. The specific objectives of the
proposed investigations are to first, identify insertional mutations in some of
the 17 characterized tubulin genes of Arabidopsis. These will be used to
investigate their effects on the phenotypes of homozygous mutant plants, and to
construct and study multiple mutants carrying insertions in two or more tubulin
genes. The second objective is to begin to investigate the complexity of the
dynein gene families in Arabidopsis and characterize them to the degree needed
to screen for insertional mutations in these genes. The third objective is to
identify insertional mutations in some of the dynein heavy-, intermediate- and
light-chain genes. The fourth objective is to characterize the Arabidopsis
gene(s) encoding proteins homologous to the 8 kD dynein light-chains of animals
and protists. RNA gel blot hybridization experiments will be used to determine
the pattern(s) of transcript accumulation for the 8 kD light-chain gene(s), and
immunofluorescence microscopy will be used to localize the 8 kD protein(s) in
plant cells, especially in germinating pollen and elongating pollen tubes. The
progress of individual objectives will depend on the results of the screens for
insertional mutations. When an interesting mutation is identified, it will
become the focus of future experiments. The major goal will be to id entify the
functions of individual gene products, not to accumulate mutations in all genes.
Non Technical The shape and pattern of growth of plant cells is defined by
intracellular filaments termed the cytoskeleton. The shape and orientation of
individual plant cells is critical to forming the morphology of plants. The
cytoskeleton is constructed from several different proteins including tubulin
and dynein that are synthesized as products of a gene family. Whether different
members of the tubulin and dynein gene families have different functional roles
is unknown. In this research the investigators will isolate mutants in which
individual genes of tubulin are disrupted to be nonfunctional and used to
construct plants in which multiple tubulin genes are disrupted. These
experiments will lead to a precise definition of which tubulin genes are used in
specific aspects of plant development. Parallel studies will be conducted on
dynein. The size and diversity of the dynein gene family will be characterized
and mutants with disrupted dynein genes will be constructed. This research is
important because it will examine one of the basic processes that controls the
shape, size and morphology of plants. ***