* 9604295
* A Molecular Genetic Analysis of Transcription Termination   in Yeast
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/1997,09/30/1998
* Linda Hyman, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 09/30/1998
* USD 98,950.00

9604295 Hyman Eukaryotic mRNA 3'-end formation occurs by a complex mechanism
involving pre-mRNA cleavage and subsequent enzymatic addition of multiple
adenosine residues to create a poly(A) tail. Mutations in RNA sequences that
direct polyadenylation also result in defects in termination of transcription
suggesting that these two processes may be coupled in an as yet undetermined
mechanism. Termination of transcription by RNA polymerase II is most likely a
complex process involving one or more accessory factors. This research is aimed
at understanding how the mechanisms of mRNA polyadenylation and transcription
termination converge to form a functional mRNA 3'-end. A yeast model system will
take advantage of combined molecular genetic and biochemical approaches to
identify trans-acting factors and corresponding genes required for mRNA 3'-end
formation and determine their function. The synthesis of a functional eukaryotic
messenger RNA requires the formation of a mature mRNA 3'-end, which occurs by a
complex mechanism. Mutations in RNA sequences that direct 3'-end formation also
result in defects in the termination of transcription suggesting that the two
processes may be coupled in an as yet undetermined mechanism. This research is
aimed at understanding the mechanistic relationship between mRNA 3'-end
formation and transcription termination in a yeast model system.