* 9604289
* RUI:  DNA-Protein Interactions Regulating Transcription of  the Skeletal Muscle Actin Gene
* BIO,MCB
* 02/15/1997,01/31/2000
* Sandra Sharp, California State L A University Auxiliary Services Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 01/31/2000
* USD 270,000.00

9604289 Sharp Two families muscle-specific transcription factors - the
myogenesis regulatory factor (MRF) family which is expressed only in skeletal
muscle, and the myocyte enhancer factor-2 (MEF2) family which is expressed in
all muscle types - are required for skeletal myogenesis in mammals, and have
been shown to act synergistically. Members of each family bind to specific DNA
sequences in the promoter regions of muscle-specific genes and activate
transcription. This research will determine how these two families of
transcription factors act synergistically to activate the transcription of the
skeletal muscle (skm) actin gene. Unlike other muscle-specific genes which
demonstrate MRF/MEF2 synergism, the MRF and MEF2 binding sites of the skm actin
gene are physically separated from each other on the DNA. Co-transfection and
mutagenic analysis will be performed using an skm actin gene promoter-
chloramphenicol acetyltransferase reporter gene construct. Co-transfection into
non-muscle cells of this reporter gene with DNA constructs expressing specific
MRF and/or MEF2 transcription factors will be used to evaluate the effect on
transcription of particular combinations of MRF and MEF2 proteins. The role of
specific DNA binding sites within the skm actin gene promoter will be determined
using the same reporter gene in which specific MRF or MEF2 binding sites have
been mutated. The results of this research will provide the basis for future
analysis of the promoter-specific and transactivator-specific regions of the MRF
and MEF2 proteins, and should lead both to broader regulatory models that can be
tested in the context of other promoters and to a better understanding of the
process of myogenesis. The process by which skeletal muscle precursor cells
develop into skeletal muscle is regulated by an intricate interplay of molecular
mechanisms. One approach to understanding these mechanisms is to study the DNA-
protein interactions which regulate the expression of muscle-specific genes
during development. This research will determine how two families of muscle-
specific proteins which are required for skeletal muscle development act
synergistically to activate the expression of the skeletal muscle actin gene.
The results of this research should lead both to broader regulatory models that
can be tested in the context of other genes and to a better understanding of the
process of skeletal muscle development.