* 9604413
* Studies on Role and Regulation of the Ventral Nervous SystemDefective Homeobox Gene During Drosophila Neurogenesis
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/1997,02/29/2000
* Dervla Mellerick-Dressler, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Dennis M. Higgins
* 02/29/2000
* USD 283,509.00

PI: Mellerick-Dressler IBN: 9604413 The central nervous system (CNS) of both
vertebrates and flies is composed of thousands of nerve cells, or neurons, each
uniquely positioned, that express a specific combination of neurotransmitters
and ion channels, and make appropriate contact with other neurons and target
cells. The aim of this research is to understand how individual cell identities
are specified during nervous system development. Because of the complexity
inherent in mammalian nervous system development defined by both cell numbers
and cell types, CNS specification is being studied in the fruit fly, Drosophila
melanogaster, in Dr. Mellerick-Dressler's laboratory. Although relatively
simple, Drosophila has proven to be an elegant and highly relevant model for
analyzing gene function. The primordium of the nervous system is patterned along
both the dorsal-ventral axis and the anterior-posterior axis by a variety of
genes that regulate gene expression. One of these genes, called ventral nervous
system defective (vnd) or NK-2, is expressed in a restricted dorsal-ventral
population of cells that give rise to neurons in both fly and mammalian embryos
suggesting that this gene family directs patterning. Indeed, fly embryos die and
the central nervous system develops abnormally when mutations are present in the
vnd/NK-2 gene, indicating that this gene is critical for neural development. To
test the hypothesis that vnd/NK-2 functions in neuronal patterning, existing
vnd/NK-2 mutants will be examined for altered expression of genes that are
normally expressed within the vnd/NK-2 expression domain. The functional
significance of the temporal and spatially restricted pattern of vnd/NK-2 gene
expression will be addressed by generating and analyzing two different types of
genetically altered "transgenic" fly embryos -- one that expresses vnd/NK-2 in
all cells, the second that over-expresses the gene within a restricted
population of cells during CNS development. Finally, with the even tual aim of
addressing whether expression of vnd/NK-2 is functionally significant after
embryogenesis, the temporal and spatial localization of the vnd/NK-2 gene
product will be determined in wild-type flies after embryonic CNS development.
The working hypothesis underlying this research is that many aspects of vnd/NK-2
function and regulation are evolutionarily conserved. Thus, the results from
this work may also contribute to understanding how vertebrate vnd/NK-2 like
genes function during neural development.