* 9604914
* Development of A Laser Scanning Microscope For Combined One- and Two-Photon Excitation Fluorescence Imaging
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/1997,11/09/1998
* Brian Herman, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 11/09/1998
* USD 177,413.00

We propose the development of a new instrument which builds upon established
institutional strengths and combines the advantages of fluorescence lifetime
measurements with those of two-photon excitation microscopy. Lifetime
measurements also provide the opportunity to study the rotational mobility of a
fluorescence lifetime probe using time resolved emission anisotropy (providing
the lifetime of the excited state is long enough), and can also be used to gain
information about the kinetics and degree of interaction of cellular
constituents on a molecular scale. Two-photon excitation microscopy provides the
advantages of greatly reduced photobleaching and photodamage greater detection
efficiency and deeper penetration into tissue specimens. The proposed instrument
will thus provide the unique advantage of generating 2- or 3-dimensional maps of
the fluorescence lifetime with high spatial and temporal resolution and minimal
phototoxicity. There is a pressing need for instrumentation that will allow the
real time observation of the molecular activity of cells and tissues under
native conditions. The proposed instrumentation will provide new views of
physically distinct environments within living cells, tissue and whole embryos.
The availability of such instrumentation will provide many benefits to the large
number of academic, medical and industrial scientists.