* 9604358
* Mechanism of Lmx-1 Dorsalization of the Vertebrate Limb
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/1997,04/30/2001
* Robert Riddle, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Klein
* 04/30/2001
* USD 285,000.00

Riddle 9604358 Until recently, little was known about the molecular basis of
dorsoventral (D/V) patterning in the vertebrate limb. The transcription factor
Lmx-1 is expressed in the dorsal half of the vertebrate limb bud, and its
expression confers dorsal pattern to tendons and muscles. As such, it offers a
powerful tool to study this limb patterning. Lmx-l's ability to direct pattern
formation is linked to its ability to regulate transcription: it contains zinc
finger domains (called LIM domains) which are believed to facilitate protein-
protein interactions, and a homeodomain (HD) which binds to specific DNA
targets. As a first step in understanding how dorsal pattern formation is
established, Dr. Riddle plans to identify the domains in the protein which are
necessary for Lmx-1 activity. To accomplish this, he will generate mutant
proteins lacking the HD domain, the LIM domains, or the carboxy teminus (a
putative activation domain), and then misexpress them in the developing chick
limb using a replication competent retroviral vector. The activity of these
mutant proteins will be assayed in three ways: 1) their ability to dorsalize
ventral cells (the normal ectopic Lmx-1 phenotype), 2) their ability to
interfere with normal dorsal patterning (a dominant negative effect), and 3)
their ability to form ectopic digits (also a normal ectopic Lmx-1 phenotype). He
will also determine which domains are sufficient for Lmx-1 function by
generating chimeras with other LIM HD proteins and misexpressing them in the
developing limb. Chimeras containing Lmx-1 DNA-binding domains will be used to
determine whether proper DNA-binding is sufficient to activate Lmx-1 targets.
Chimeras with Lmx-l LIM domains will be tested to determine whether the LIM
domains are sufficient to confer Lmx-l-like patterning to another LIM HD
protein. While Lmx- 1 can confer a dramatic phenotype, the factors which it
regulates are unknown. Therefore, a cDNA difference analysis protocol will be
used to identify genes which are tar gets of Lmx-1 activity. cDNAs will be
formed from mRNA isolated from Lmx-1- and mock-infected ventral limb buds and
used in a PCR based-subtractive hybridization protocol. Potential downstream
targets will be sequenced and their expression patterns defined as a first step
in their characterization. Interesting cDNAs will be misexpressed in the limb to
directly define their role in limb formation. Finally, time permitting, Dr.
Riddle will use the yeast two-hybrid system as a means of identifying cDNAs
which encode potential Lmx-1 interactors. Wild-type Lmx- 1 as well as mutated
forrns of Lmx-1 will be used as "baits" to identify factors which bind to the
protein. All potential interactors will be tested for their ability to bind
Lmx-1 specifically. The expression pattern and nucleotide sequence of these
interactors will be determined as a first step in their characterization. The
interactor will be misexpressed in ovo to define their affect on limb
morphogenesis, These experiments will allow Dr. Riddle to further develop a
model for understanding the molecular basis of D/V patterning in the vertebrate
limb.