* 9604412
* Molecular Mechanisms of Chloroplast Division in Higher      Plants
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/1997,07/31/2000
* Katherine Osteryoung, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 07/31/2000
* USD 351,879.00

9604412 Osteryoung Technical abstract: Organelle replication is critical for
growth and development in all eukaryotes. However, very little is known about
the molecular mechanisms by which organelles divide or how their numbers are
controlled. Dr. Osteryoung has identified a cDNA from Arabidopsis thaliana,
designated cpFtsZ, that may play a central role in the division of chloroplasts.
This nuclear gene encodes a chloroplast-localized homologue of the bacterial
protein FtsZ. FtsZ is a key structural component of the bacterial cell division
machinery that assembles to form a ring-like structure at the division site
during bacterial cytokinesis. Discovery of eukaryotic cpFtsZ suggests that
division mechanisms in organelles and prokaryotes are similar, and for the first
time opens the door to a molecular dissection of the organelle division process
in eukaryotes. The goal of this project is to begin a detailed analysis of the
role of cpFtsZ in chloroplast division, using Arabidopsis thaliana as a model
system. To test the hypothesis that cpFtsZ is important for chloroplast
division, transgenic plants will be generated with enhanced or reduced
expression of cpFtsZ, and the effect of such genetic manipulations on
chloroplast number will be assessed. The question of whether the cpFtsZ gene
maps to and/or complements any of the known mutations in Arabidopsis that affect
chloroplast division will be addressed. The localization of the cpFtsZ protein
within the chloroplast will be investigated in dividing and non-dividing
chloroplasts. The relationship between cpFtsZ expression and chloroplast
division will be examined by analyzing the spatial and temporal patterns of
cpFtsZ expression in relation to patterns of chloroplast division. Because
preliminary data suggest that there are multiple FtsZ homologues in Arabidopsis,
additional FtsZ related genes will be isolated and the subcellular localization
of their gene products will be established. Additional plastid-localized FtsZ
homologues , if extant, would suggest the possibility of differential regulation
in different cell types or of functional heterogeneity among related proteins.
The longer-term goal of this project is to develop a comprehensive model
describing the biochemical and molecular processes that govern chloroplast
division in higher plants. Lay-language abstract: In plants, the chloroplast is
the key subcellular organelle that is responsible for photosynthesis, the
process that converts sunlight energy to a form of chemical energy, i.e.,
through photochemical conversion of carbon dioxide plus water to sugar. This
fundamental life process is what enables much of life (plants and animals) as we
know it to exist on earth. Chloroplasts are generally regarded as having evolved
from free-living bacteria that entered into a close symbiotic (endosymbiotic)
relationship with other cells. Although most of the components of the
chloroplasts are made of gene products encoded by the plant cell's nuclear
genes, chloroplasts are nonetheless semi-autonomous, in that they have their own
genes and protein synthetic machinery, and they increase in number by a process
of division much like cell division. When plant cells divide, as they must as
the plant grows and develops, it is critical that the chloroplasts also divide
so that they can be distributed among the progeny cells. How this occurs is as
yet a mystery. Dr. Osteryoung has discovered a gene in plants that is homologous
to a gene that plays a key role in bacterial cell division. She hypothesizes
that this protein functions in chloroplast division in a manner similar to how
it functions in bacterial cell division. The goal of this project is to test
this hypothesis. The results of this research are expected to advance our
understanding of how chloroplasts divide in order to be properly distributed
among the various cells of a growing and developing plant. ***