* 9605193
* U.S.-Czech Research on Involvement of Melatonin and Calcium in Plant Photoperiodism
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2001
* Carl Johnson, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 06/30/2001
* USD 36,375.00

INT 9605193 Johnson This U.S.-Czech research project between Carl H. Johnson of
Vanderbilt University and Ivana Machackova of the Czech Institute of
Experimental Botany will examine the chemical basis of plant flowering. Results
should contribute to our basic understanding of the photoperiodic time
measurement (PTM) system and the process of information transfer to flowering
tissue, meristems, in plants. Specifically, Drs. Johnson and Machackova plan to
use the tobacco plant as the model system because much is known about PTM in
tobacco and a variety of strains in the same genus display different
photoperiodic phenotypes. The researchers will build this inquiry upon recently
discovered information about melatonin, a crucial hormone for PTM found animals,
and new evidence suggesting that cytosolic free calcium fluxes are involved in
the phototransduction pathway. Since melatonin is similarly found in higher
plants, this project will attempt to determine the mechanisms controlling the
circadian production of melatonin in plants and the roles, if any, played by
melatonin and/or cytosolic free calcium in photoperiodic induction of flowering
in higher plants. This project in cell biology fulfills the program objective of
advancing scientific knowledge by enabling leading experts in the United States
and Eastern Europe to combine complementary talents and pool research resources
in areas of strong mutual interest and competence. ??