* 9605140
* Research in Theoretical Nuclear Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 05/15/1997,04/30/2001
* Akif Baha Balantekin, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Sidney A. Coon
* 04/30/2001
* USD 483,369.00

This proposal covers a broad range of topics. Future projects include
understanding physics opportunities presented by recent and forthcoming solar
neutrino experiments, exploring the role of neutrinos in supernova dynamics,
investigating consequences of quantum dissipative tunneling in nuclear
reactions, exploring phase transitions in nuclei with multi-fragmentation, as
well as developing new mathematical techniques to address the physics questions
arising in these studies. Observed solar neutrino flux is deficient relative to
that predicted by the standard solar model. Neutrino oscillations in the
presence of matter and magnetic fields were invoked to explain this deficiency.
We will be studying a new aspect of the neutrino transport in matter, behavior
of neutrino oscillations in stochastic media. There has been much progress in
our understanding of supernovae. Explosion models are improved and supernovae
were proposed as a site where heavy elements are created. Neutrinos have a
significant impact on these phenomena. Dissipative tunneling is especially
important for low-energy fusion reactions. These reactions are not only of
interest to nuclear astrophysics, but they also provide new insights into the
reaction dynamics and nuclear structure. Multi- fragmentation is the statistical
emission of fragments from a nuclear system, which is undergoing expansion under
the influence of thermal pressure and nuclear binding. It is a probe of dynamics
of phase transitions. The theoretical research proposed will be done in
intensive collaboration with experimental groups in the U.S. and abroad.