* 9605053
* Aromatization in Brain and Pituitary
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/1997,09/30/1999
* Gloria Callard, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Roy L. White
* 09/30/1999
* USD 97,234.00

9605053 Callard While estrogen is generally regarded as a circulating steroid
hormone derived from ovaries, testes, and placenta, it is well-established that
this hormone is also produced in the brain, pituitary, and retina. Indeed
estrogen is synthesized in these neural tissues from circulating gonadal
androgen through a process referred to as aromatization. Estrogen production is
controlled by an enzyme catalyst termed aromatase, which is the product of the
CYP19 gene. Dr. Callard is interested in understanding how brain production of
estrogen and consequent estrogen-dependent neural processes are controlled.
Towards this aim, she has identified a model system in which aromatase and
androgen receptors are extremely high in the brain. In examining the molecular
mechanisms operating on CYP19 gene expression in this model, Dr. Callard
recently found, for the first time, the presence of two functional CYP19 genes.
One is expressed at high levels in brain and other neural tissues exclusively,
and the second is expressed at much lower levels in both brain and ovary. Using
innovative molecular technology, she will now characterize the molecular
mechanisms unique to each of the two CYP19 genes. Since brain-formed estrogens
have a critical role in neural development during fetal and newborn stages and
have been implicated in the maintenance of brain function throughout life, Dr.
Callard will use this information to examine who estrogen production is
optimized for timing, location in different cell-types and neural circuits, and
functional condition such as age, gender and hormonal status. This new knowledge
will not only increase our understanding of the basic mechanism by which
estrogen becomes available to act within brain cells but also places this
process into a functional and evolutionary perspective.