* 9605207
* Heavy-Ion Reactions and Nuclear Structure
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2000
* B. Alex Brown, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Winston Roberts
* 05/31/2000
* USD 1,120,000.00

We propose to develop new theoretical models for the prediction of nuclear
structure properties. These models will be applied to exotic nuclei at the
extreme limits of stability, which are studied at the National Superconducting
Cyclotron Laboratory (NSCL) and other radioactive beam laboratories. They will
also be applied to the properties of nuclei at high excitation energy, where the
unsolved problems of many-body quantum chaos become important. These models are
needed for the prediction of astrophysically important nuclear reaction rates,
as well as for the interpretation of electroweak interactions in nuclei. We also
propose to develop models for nuclear collisions at energies between the nuclear
binding energy and the highest energies experimentally available. These
collisions are of extreme interest, because they hold the promise to reveal the
existence of phase transitions of nuclear and quark matter. This is relevant to
understanding the history of the early universe as well as the interior of
stars. Our work is in direct support of experiments at the NSCL and the
Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider. Our work directly relates to two of the highest
three priorities identified by the nuclear physics long-range plan. Aspects of
our work are computationally intensive and will make use of state-of-the- art
facilities.