* 9605178
* US-India Cooperative Research: Study of Molecular Motions   and Phase Transformations in Atomic-Scale Structures and    Liquid Crystals, Award in US and Indian Currencies
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1997,04/30/2001
* Suresh Sharma, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 04/30/2001
* USD 31,560.00

9605178 Sharma Description: This award supports the US-India Cooperative
Research: Study of Molecular Motions and Phase Transformations in Atomic-Scale
Structures and Liquid Crystals. The project is under the direction of S.C.
Sharma, University of Texas at Arlington (UTA) and P.C. Jain, University of
Delhi (UD). The researchers will study the effects of molecular structure on
phase transition in liquid crystalline materials and will investigate
relationships between defects and optical properties of surface- aligned liquid
crystalline films. Using techniques sensitive to phase transition, they will
measure optical properties of surface-aligned liquid crystalline thin films. The
outcome will be a better understanding of the processes occurring at the surface
and in the bulk, and their effects on the optical properties of a much broader
class of layered materials. Scope: This collaboration will initiate a new joint
research program between the University of Texas and the University of Delhi.
The PIs are established researchers who have published important results
obtained from their experimental techniques. Both the expertise and facilities
available at UTA and UD are complementary. This project has excellent potential
for addressing important scientific questions and improving the quality of
liquid crystalline films and other materials. The research is mutually
beneficial and the support requested is primarily for travel and per diem. ***