* 9605215
* Relativistic Quantum Mechanics of Few Particle Systems
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2000
* Michael Fuda, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing grant
* Winston Roberts
* 05/31/2000
* USD 165,000.00

A previously developed relativistic, separable potential model of the pion-
nucleon system will be extended to higher energies and to a larger number of
coupled channels, including a photon-nucleon channel. An exchange model will be
developed as an alternative to the separable potential model. These models will
be used to calculate meson-baryon scattering and production processes,
properties of the baryon resonances, and meson photoproduction from nucleons.
Previously developed one boson exchange models of the two-nucleon system will be
extended by including other exchange processes, and by allowing for coupling to
nucleon delta and delta-delta states. Inclusion of this coupling will make it
possible to account for inelastic processes. Various schemes for calculating the
electromagnetic form factors of the deuteron will be investigated, with
particular attention paid to the restrictions imposed by relativity and gauge
invariance. Calculations on the three-nucleon system will be carried out using
invariant three-nucleon mass operators constructed from two-nucleon mass
operators. Such calculations lead to results for the three-nucleon bound states
and scattering amplitudes which satisfy the requirements of relativity, and
therefore make it possible to study relativistic effects in the three-nucleon
system.