* 9605232
* U.S.-Czech Materials Research on Metastable Structures in   the Intermetallic Compound TiAl
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1997,12/31/2000
* Vaclav Vitek, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 12/31/2000
* USD 35,004.00

INT 9605232 Vitek This U.S.-Czech research project between Vaclav Vitek of the
University of Pennsylvania and his partners, Vaclav Paidar of the Czech
Institute of Physics and Mojmir Sob of the Czech Institute of the Physics of
Materials, will examine metastable structures in the lamellar TiAl (titanium
aluminum), a ductile intermetallic compound. The research plan entails analyzing
configurations produced by large scale distortions that transform the initial
structure creating new structures with different symmetries. Two types of
distortions will be considered: 1) large homogeneous straining and 2) shuffling
of atomic planes. The collaborative work is expected to yield new knowledge
about these atomic interfacial structures, specifically, the lattice
transformations connecting the interface, including dislocations and twin
nuclei. Results will help explain the high ductility and toughness of the
lamellar TiAl by characterizing the bonding in an ideal lattice and in defective
regions. Such information may be useful in future production of strong, light
density-high temperature tolerant intermetallic compounds for rotating machinery
and aerospace applications. This project in materials research fulfills the
program objective of advancing scientific knowledge by enabling leading experts
in the United States and Eastern Europe to combine complementary talents and
pool research resources in areas of strong mutual interest and competence. ??