* 9605829
* Collaborative Research:  An Integrated NMR Microcoil        Detector for Microspectroscopy
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/1997,09/30/2001
* Andrew Webb, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 09/30/2001
* USD 150,000.00

Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is one of the most powerful
methods available for determining the three dimensional structure of complex
chemical and biochemical molecules. The information derived from NMR has proved
essential in determining primary, secondary and tertiary structures of proteins,
as well as investigating enzymatic mechanisms and the binding sites of
therapeutic drugs. It is also used extensively in chemical synthesis, being able
to determine structure and stereochemistry of the products of intermediate steps
in a multi-stage synthesis. In spite of its great potential, the application of
NMR techniques to the nanoliter volume samples often encountered in
microanalytical chemical analysis and studies of biological systems at the
cellular has been limited. However, recent advances in the design of solenoidal
NMR microcoils by our group (Olson et al., 1995) provide a basis for applying
NMR methods in a variety of new applications. For example, we have begun to
investigate chemical and biological applications in NMR studies of the mass
limited quantities encountered in combinatorial chemistry (Gordon et al., 1994),
in biological product analysis from single cells entrapped in gel microdroplets
(Weaver et al., 1991) and as detectors in nanoliter volume microelectrophoresis
systems (Fan and Harrison, 1994; Jacobson et al., 1994). The major drawback in
such new applications of NMR techniques is the intrinsic low sensitivity of NMR
compared with other analytical methods. The problem is often compounded by the
very small mass of sample which is available. This can be due to: (i) the
quantity which can either be synthesized or isolated, (ii) limited solubility in
suitable solvents, or (iii) degradation over the long data acquisition times.
Almost every commercial high resolution NMR spectrometer uses a small RF coil
which fits around a 5 mm fused-silica tube giving an effective cell volume of
approximately 0.5 ml. It has long been recognized that this radiofre quency (RF)
coil can be reduced in size, but the advantages of this reduction have not been
demonstrated until recently. Our group showed that by using solenoidal coils of
diameters 300-400 microns, improvements in S/N of over 100 can be achieved over
a conventional 5 mm coil for mass limited samples. Further improvements in the
SNR can potentially be made by reducing the coil diameter yet further. However,
fabrication of solenoids at such dimensions becomes highly problematic.
Switching to lithographic fabrication techniques, however, opens up a new window
of opportunity. The major problems are efficient interfacing of the microscopic
planar coils with the rest of the spectrometer. In our recent NSF SGER grant
(NSF BIR 93-19399, "Monolithic Gallium Arsenide Receiver for NMR Microscopy") we
successfully designed and constructed a hybrid version of the proposed RF
coil/preamplifer system at 300 MHz for 1H-NMR application studies at 7.05 T. The
results obtained using this hybrid prototype in NMR spectroscopy experiments
agree well with theoretical predictions and demonstrate the feasibility of using
active monolithic detectors for improved detection performance in cellular
studies. In addition, we fabricated a 500 MHz integrated circuit NMR detector
for further improvement in SNR. This design can be easily extended to higher
frequencies. The goal of the proposed research is to build a family of
monolithic GaAs NMR receivers that will interface with current (250, 300, 500
MHz) and emerging (750, 1000 MHz) NMR microscopy systems. We will extend this
design to a broadband multistage amplifier configuration that will operate over
a frequency range 100 - 500 MHz, eliminating the need for tuning and matching of
the receive coil. We propose to design these detector systems using an
integrative approach that involves circuit simulation (Microwave Design
Software, HP), device fabrication (Center for Compound Semiconductor
Microelectronics, UIUC), electrical characterization (S-parameter and noise
measur ements), and NMR evaluation (at each of the target magnetic field
strengths).