* 9605110
* Summer Program for Undergraduate Research in Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/1997,04/30/2000
* Carmen Mannella, Health Research Incorporated/New York State Department of Health
* Standard Grant
* William R. Gordon
* 04/30/2000
* USD 150,000.00

This proposal is a request for renewal of a summer REU program held at the
Wadsworth Center of the New York State Department of Health in Albany, NY. The
research scientists who supervise the students in this program are also faculty
in the Department of Biomedical Sciences of the State University of New York at
Albany's School of Public Health. The Wadsworth Center is a unique scientific
institution with state-of-the-art facilities, in which basic research programs
have developed alongside mission-oriented public health laboratories. The
research interests of the participating BMS faculty cover a broad range, with
emphasis in molecular genetics, cell biology and structural biology. Ten
undergraduate students interested in research careers are recruited from
institutions with limited research opportunities for undergraduates, including
small colleges in the Northwest and historically black colleges in the south.
Another 4-6 students participate in the program with stipend support from the
Wadsworth Center. Laboratory projects in basic biological research topics are
chosen that are interesting, likely to yeild results within the time- frame of
the program, and allow for some degree of student development and independence.
Weekly group meetings are used to discuss science- and career-related issues
(including the proper conduct of science) and to monitor student progress. The
students give short oral presentations of their work in a symposium in the last
week of the program, and also submit written reports before they leave, to
stress the importance of communication skills within science.