* 9605147
* NSF-REU Site for for Research in Physics
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/1997,02/29/2000
* Joseph Becker, San Jose State University Foundation
* Continuing grant
* Terrence W. Rettig
* 02/29/2000
* USD 268,794.00

*** Becker San Jose State University, a campus of the California State
University, is a modern urban comprehensive university in which faculty are
required to do research. There is a large 18-faculty Department of Physics with
approximately 35 undergraduate Physics majors in their Junior and Senior years,
including approximately fifteen students who are female or members of under-
represented minorities. The REU Site that has been in operation since 1989 in
the SJSU Physics Department will be continued. An innovative component of this
REU Site includes support for students in industry-university collaborations:
Four teams consist of a Physics faculty member, a physicist from an industry or
government laboratory, and an NSF-REU student participant. Most of the projects
are in the areas of optics, condensed matter, and computational physics. All
these projects complement the Physics Department's officially recognized
"Concentration in Lasers and Optics", "Concentration in Condensed Matter", and
the "Concentration in Computational Physics". These three areas represent the
major scientific focus in the hightech "Silicon Valley" surrounding this
University. These on-going research projects will provide both experimental and
theoretical research experience for undergraduates in physics. Undergraduate
students are placed in fourteen projects which range from experimental diode
laser spectroscopy of stable isotopes in carbon dioxide to theoretical studios
of electrical and optical properties of quantum well semiconductors, to rare-
earth spectroscopy. The proposed program's major goal is to involve
undergraduate students, especially minorities, in research who might not
otherwise have the opportunity. ***