* 9605171
* US-Kenya Workshop:  Global Analysis, Intepretation, and     Modelling (GAIM), Mombasa, Kenya, March 3-13, 1997
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/1997,02/28/1998
* Dork Sahagian, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Jones Tsuchitani
* 02/28/1998
* USD 20,000.00

This award will support the participation of two American and four African
scientists in a US-Kenya Workshop on Global Analysis, Interpretation, and
Modelling (GAIM), to be held at Mombasa, Kenya, March 3-12, 1997. The co-
organizers are Dr. Dork Sahagian, Executive Director for the Global Analysis,
Interpretation, and Modelling Task Force of the International Geosphere
Biosphere Program (IGPP) with the International Council of Scientific Unions,
and faculty member of the Institute for the Study of Earth, Oceans, and Space at
the University of New Hampshire; and Dr. Wandera Ogana, Dean of Sciences at the
University of Nairobi in Kenya. The workshop will include seven participants
from the United States, and about twenty-five from South Africa and the rest of
the Subsaharan Africa region. Global and environmental changes confront all
regions of the world, and are particularly challenging to developing regions
which often contain both the cause and the effect of the environmental change.
Based on data collected on the complex global biogeochemical cycles of the
earth's physical-climate systems, the GAIM Task Force will develop an integrated
set of biogeochemical Earth System Models, to be used to predict future
environmental changes and their regional and global impacts. Many African
researchers have been studying these issues, but little is known about the data
they have collected. This workshop, with its focus on modelling and data
analysis of the biogeochemical and ecological processes important in both global
and African environmental change, will enable all participants to present their
current research activities and interact with each other. During the workshop
the African participants will also be introduced to four research models
relevant to African hydrology, climate, and ecosystems, and team modelling
projects will be started. During the following year participants will continue
to work on these projects, in collaboration with their US colleagues, after
which a follow-up workshop will be held to discuss their results. This grant
will support the participation of a prominent researcher and young investigator
from the United States and four African researchers, three of whom are in the
early to mid stages of their careers to participate in an international
activity.