* 9610026
* Experimental Testing of an Equivalent Rock Mass Properties  Theory
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2001
* William Pariseau, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Clifford J. Astill
* 06/30/2001
* USD 166,430.00

9610026 This research will experimentally test a promising analytical
approximation for determining elastic moduli and strengths of jointed rock
masses. The approximation in question is an equivalent properties theory that
avoids the usual restrictive assumption of a representative volume element
(RVE). The non-representative volume element (NRVE) theory tested here produces
results that compare favorably with the true equivalent properties obtained for
detailed computations. Comparisons form a series of numerical experiments in the
elastic domain (Hooke's law), the seepage domain (Darcy's law) and the coupled
domain (Biot's law) and recently in the elastic-plastic domain are usually
within a few percent. The additional testing and verification undertaken here is
therefore expected to be worthwhile. The main benefit of a technically sound
procedure for estimating rock mass properties from the properties of the joints
and intact rock between the joints is more accurate engineering design of
excavations in jointed rock masses. Excavation analysis in very blocky rock
masses and, at the other extreme, rock masses that are almost free from joints
may be handled by existing methods. However, there is a large class of problems
in between that could benefit from a demonstrably more reliable determination of
rock mass properties. Benefits would eventually appear in the form of improved
stability and economy of rock mass excavations. *****