* 9610486
* Optimization of Multiclass Queueing Networks
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2000
* Dimitris Bertsimas, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence M. Seiford
* 05/31/2000
* USD 225,000.00

9610486 Bertsimas Multiclass queuing networks give rise to a rich class of
models for manufacturing, and computer-communication systems. The practical
needs to evaluate and improve the performance of such systems have motivated
extensive research efforts on the analysis, optimization and stability of these
models. This research will make contributions to the development of solution
methods for several open problems in the analysis of multiclass queueing
networks. Specifically, the investigator will study the effects of variability,
changeover times, and general holding-time distributions in developing improved
bounds on the optimal performance of these networks. The research draws on a
mathematical programming-based approach (the achievable region approach) to
performance optimization of stochastic systems. The overall objective of the
research is to derive heuristic scheduling policies with sub-optimality
guarantees based on relaxations derived from the achievable region approach.
Multiclass queueing networks have proved quite useful in the computer and
communications field, where they have become the models of choice for design,
analysis, and optimization of telecommunications systems. While their use as
models for manufacturing systems has thus far been impeded by certain technical
limitations, this research specifically addresses issues that can potentially
overcome these limitations. The potential is high that this research will lead
to significant breakthroughs on some extremely difficult problems, thereby
enabling the successful application of these models in manufacturing systems,
most notably in the area of semiconductor manufacturing.