* 9610115
* Intrinsic Barriers as a Guide to Rates and Mechanisms of    Reactions on Solid Surfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/1997,08/31/1999
* Richard Masel, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Geoffrey Prentice
* 08/31/1999
* USD 205,000.00

ABSTRACT CTS 9610115 Richard I. Masel Professor Richard I. Masel, of the
University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, is being funded by the Chemical
Reactions Processes-Kinetics and Catalysis program to continue his studies of
adsorption of small organic molecules on model transition metal surfaces. He
will continue to develop a theoretical approach to predicting surface chemical
mechanisms. The basic hypothesis of the theoretical model is that intrinsic
barriers calculated for decomposition reactions in the gas phase are equal to
the intrinsic barriers for those decompositions on surfaces. Experimentally, the
model is tested with EELS and TPD spectroscopies. In this work, Masel proposes
to do more detailed characterization of the intrinsic barriers for C-C, C-O, C-H
and O-H bond scissions, in terms of parameters such as substituent groups in the
organic molecules or presence of coadsorbates, and nature of the chemisorbing
surface. It is focused on the measurement of heats of reaction, bond energies,
and intrinsic activation barriers for specific test reactions, for which model
predictions will be made with the aid of computational quantum chemistry. The
role of net charges in the intrinsic barrier model will also be assessed. This
research is of major significance for the theory and practice of catalysis and
surface chemistry.