* 9610091
* Bayamon Science and Mathematics Systemic Initiative Planning Phase
* EHR,ESR
* 02/01/1997,01/31/1998
* Acenet Bernacet-Mendez, Puerto Rico Department of Education
* Standard Grant
* Gerald E. Gipp
* 01/31/1998
* USD 100,000.00

ABSTRACT PUERTO RICO DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION (Bayamon Educational Region) Urban
Systemic Initiative Program Planning Award 96-10091 The five educational
districts serving the city of Bayamon, Puerto Rico, have joined together to
propose a self-study on the status of K-12 science and mathematics, and
technology education (SMTE) for the purposes of designing a plan for the
systemic reform of SMTE in the Ponce schools. Bayamon has a total population of
48,594 children between the ages of 5-17, of which 77% live in poverty according
to the U.S. Census. The five educational districts in (Bayamon I-IV) serve a
student population of over 33,453 in 66 schools. These districts are part of the
Puerto Rico Department of Education which is the central educational agency on
the island comprising 100 districts with eight educational regions. Over 809
teachers are providing instruction in science or mathematics in the five Bayamon
districts. The Planning grant will support the establishment of an ongoing
system to monitor the quality of the city's science and mathematics program and
the articulation of a coherent and comprehensive plan to transform science and
mathematics to higher level learning opportunities for all students. The effort
will be carried out in collaboration with the central level programs of Science
and Mathematics of the Department of Education, The Resource Center for Science
and Engineering (RCSE) at the University of Puerto Rico, the city of Bayamon,
community organizations and the private sector. The Puerto Rico Statewide
Systemic Initiative program will play a major collaborative role in supporting
the planning activities, as well as other such as Dwight D. Eisenhower Programs,
Title I, Puerto Rico Education 2000, and School to Work programs.