* 9610323
* Analysis and Improvement of the Tube Hydroforming Process   for Manufacturing of High Strength/Low Weight Components
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/1997,09/30/2001
* Taylan Altan, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Delcie R. Durham
* 09/30/2001
* USD 195,001.00

The objective of this project is to develop computer modeling techniques for
evaluating formability in tube hydroforming without costly and time consuming
tryouts. The study will: (1) identify the critical process parameters in tube
hydroforining and determine the interactions between them; (2) establish a
method for estimating material properties, needed for process simulation, under
high pressure; (3) develop criteria for predicting fracture and wrinkling in
computer simulations; (4) develop techniques to determine the required
properties of the initial tube using reverse engineering techniques once the
final part properties are specified; and (5) establish a method for economic
evaluation of tube hydroforming against conventional manufacturing processes for
a given application. This research project could generate valuable knowledge so
that the full potential of this hydroforming process could be dramatically
improved by: (1) reducing the trial and error in the tool and process
development, thereby increasing the machine utilization rate and saving valuable
engineering effort; and (2) expanding the geometric capabilities of the process
to manufacture parts with ever increasing geometric complexity. In addition to
contributing to the fundamental understanding of the tube hydroforming process,
this project will contribute to the development of Finite Element Analysis based
guidelines for tool and process design to achieve the maximum process/shape
capability in tube hydroforming.