* 9610145
* Chemistry and Chemical Evolution of the Atmosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/1997,07/31/2001
* Ronald Prinn, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 07/31/2001
* USD 223,775.00

9610145 Prinn The project is a modeling study of reactive chemical compounds in
the troposphere. Two tasks will be undertaken. First, atmospheric chemistry
routines will be developed in a 3-dimensional Model for Atmospheric Transport
and Chemistry (MATCH). The routines will focus on marine atmospheric processes
that determine concentrations of chemically and climatically important species
(oxidants, sulfur species, aerosols). The improved MATCH model will be applied
to an analysis of measurements made during the Southern Hemisphere Marine
Aerosol Characterization Experiment (ACE-1) and during the North Atlantic
Regional Aerosol Characterization Experiment (ACE-2). This application to ACE
data sets is intended to aid the interpretation of the field observations for
remote (ACE-1) and perturbed (ACE-2) marine sites. The second task will focus on
improving climate-interactive models for natural fluxes of trace gases (e.g.,
CH4, N20). These interactive models will be incorporated into MATCH. Observed or
inferred chemical concentration data corresponding to present and past
atmospheric states will be used to validate the trace gas flux models. Overall,
the model improvements, coupled with the analysis and interpretation of ACE data
sets, will advance the understanding of critical, reactive trace gases in the
troposphere and their changing concentrations over time.