* 9610438
* Synthesis, Characterization and Evaluation of Promoted      Molybdenum Carbide and Nitride Hydrodesulfurization         Catalysts
* MPS,CHE
* 04/15/1997,03/31/2001
* Mark Bussell, Western Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Bernasek
* 03/31/2001
* USD 195,000.00

This Research in Undergraduate Institution project, supported jointly by the
Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program of the Division of Chemistry and the
Chemical Reaction Processes Program of the Division of Chemical and Transport
Systems, focusses on the synthesis and characterization of molybdenum carbide
and nitride catalysts for hydrodesulfurization chemistry. Synthesis of these
materials and promotion by Co and Ni, evaluation by spectroscopic studies of
adsorbed probe molecules such as CO and NO, and determination of HDS activity
for a number of model feedstocks forms the range of studies being carried out by
Professor Bussell and his students at Western Washington University. This work
introduces undergraduates and masters degree students to state of the art
research in heterogeneous catalysis, and provides important new information
about the fundamentals of hydrodesulfurization catalysis on novel bimetallic
systems. The removal of sulfur from crude oil and coal is an important
application of heterogeneous catalysis. This hydrodesulfurization chemistry is
the focus of this research project. Novel molybdenum carbide and molybdenum
nitride catalysts are synthesized and characterized in this work, and the effect
of Co and Ni promoters on the activity of these materials is evaluated. This
work provides fundamental information for the design and preparation of
important new catalytic systems.