* 9610306
* CRB: An Invasion by an Exotic Ant: Community Responses and  Methods for Control
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2001
* Ted Case, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Susan Mopper
* 06/30/2001
* USD 175,000.00

9610306 Case An important issue in conservation biology is how native species
respond to disturbance and invasions by exotic species. Since the invasion of
California by the Argentine ant (Linepithema humile) nearly 100 years ago, many
studies have addressed the impact of L. humile on the native ant community.
However, the implications of such a change on the rest of the community have
still not been examined. Preliminary work has shown that the Argentine ant is
extremely abundant in upland scrub habitats (coastal sage scrub and chamise-
chaparral) in coastal southern California. The coastal horned lizard, an ant
specialist and sensitive species for the state of California, was absent from
the small fragments surveyed and only found in areas without the Argentine ant
in larger unfragmented areas. This research will consist of a series of
experiments to determine which factors facilitate the invasion of the Argentine
ant in to natural habitats and measure the impact of the invasion on various
trophic levels throughout the community. Specifically, the investigator will
test the hypotheses that 1) habitat modification facilitates the invasion of an
exotic species, 2) the Argentine ant through exploitation and interference
competition affects not only other arthropods, but vertebrates as well and 3)
the native ant community will return to a pre-invasion state with the thorough
removal of Argentine ants. These studies will provide information for the
control of this exotic pest as well as help determine management guidelines for
the preservation of sensitive habitat and species therein.