* 9610075
* Glacial Variables: Towards Fully Automatic Run-Time Code Generation
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1997,08/31/1999
* Michael Wolfe, Oregon Graduate Institute of Science & Technology
* Standard Grant
* Frank D. Anger
* 08/31/1999
* USD 124,603.00

Program specialization has a distinguished history. Under the name of self-
modifying code it has been used in the past for performance improvements. Under
the name of partial evaluation it has been used as a transformation to
automatically generate compilers from interpreters for declarative languages.
Recently, a number of research groups have applied run-time partial evaluation
to do run-time code generation (RTCG) as a performance optimization, but they
require extensive programmer annotations to determine where to apply the
transformation. Transformations do not always yield good optimizations,
particularly where the cost/benefit tradeoffs are not highly obvious. This
project is developing automatic methods (algorithms and heuristics) for
selecting where to apply run-time code generation (RTCG), and examining the
interaction between RTCG and scalar and memory-hierarchy optimizations. The
project is applying RTCG to a large number of complete scientific applications
to determine its applicability. Heretofore RTCG has been applied to benchmark
kernels and language interpreters, but not to any wider domains. This project
aims to demonstrate that RTCG is ready for production use and that it can be
deployed in compilers without requiring extensive reprogramming of applications
to make use of its performance improvements.