* 9610330
* SGER:  Development of GFP-chromosome Tagging System
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/1997,06/30/1998
* Dean Dawson, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 06/30/1998
* USD 49,623.00

Dawson 9610330 The yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae has been a favored organism
for the study of meiotic chromosome behavior because of its genetic
tractability. Its primary deficiency as an organism for studying meiosis is that
its chromosomes are very small and their behavior can not be observed in meiotic
cells. The goal of this Small Grant for Exploratory Research is to develop a
novel system that could allow the visualization chromosomes in living meiotic
yeast cells. The system would be based on the binding of green fluorescent
protein hybrid molecules to sites placed on specific chromosomes. Current
understanding of the behavior of meiotic chromosomes has been gleaned primarily
by a combination of genetic and cell biological studies. Often these studies
have been performed in different organisms. For example, yeast has lent itself
well to genetic studies while plants and insects, because their chromosomes can
be visualized in living cells with a light microscope, have provided cell
biologists with invaluable insights. The coupling of these approaches would be
especially powerful because it would permit the visualization of chromosome
behavior in mutants known by genetic analysis to be defective in aspects of
meiotic chromosome segregation (pairing, recombination, synaptonemal complex
formation, spindle assembly and chromosome movement). In the past decade a large
collection of yeast mutants with meiotic defects have been identified. The
development of a system for viewing chromosome behavior in these mutants and
wild type cells would have a tremendous impact on our understanding of the
manner in which proper chromosome behavior is established, a process essential
to all sexually reproducing higher organisms.