* 9610170
* Data Mining, Information Retrieval and Pattern Matching -   Application-driven Algorithmic Research
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/1997,12/31/2002
* Amihood Amir, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* David Du
* 12/31/2002
* USD 211,383.00

Pattern Matching is coming of age. The last six years have seen great progress
in the area of Pattern Matching Algorithms. In particular, researchers have
looked into generalized versions of the problem. The field has evolved from
being an important theoretical foundational area to being well-poised on the
verge of practical usability in many diverse applications, from multi-media to
computational molecular biology. The project is seeking a pro-active role in
bringing these new results into the relevant applicant domains, as well as
feedback and direction about the important missing parts in the theory of
pattern matching. This involves joining some large applied projects as an
algorithmic group. The research problems described here are motivated and
inspired by the needs of these projects. These problems require achieving new
insights into the nature of pattern matching, as well as results of the
following nature: Efficient algorithms for association generation in dynamic
data bases. Efficient generation of generalized associations (e.g.\ with
negations). Efficient algorithms for approximate matching in hyper-text.
Efficient algorithms for approximate dictionary matching. New multidimensional
adaptive compression schemes that allow efficient compressed searches and space
and time efficient local decompression. Generalization of Pattern Matching.