* 9610289
* PPD: Scientific Visualization Using Tactile Feedback for    Visually Impaired Students
* EDU,EES
* 04/01/1997,03/31/2000
* James Mayer, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence A. Scadden
* 03/31/2000
* USD 204,560.00

PI: Anshuman Razdan Scientific visualization provides scientists with tools to
model and visually observe three dimensional data. This technique has advanced
scientific understanding in numerous scientific fields such as biology,
chemistry and engineering. The traditional method of visualization is to model
the data into one of the many surface modeling schemes and display the data on a
computer screen. This approach has obvious limitations for people that are
visually impaired. This project will test a novel way to provide analogous
information to these individuals whether they are students, scientists or
researchers. Data are modeled in the normal manner, but instead of displaying
the model on a computer screen, a three-dimensional wax-based model will be
created. The data, after being geometrically modeled, will be converted into a
physical model using a Layered Manufacturing (Rapid Prototyping) machine. The
tactile model will maintain the appropriate ratios so as not to distort the
proportions of the data. A Scanning Probe Microscope (SPM) has been chosen as
the test-bed to provide 3D data. A SPM is used to probe objects on a nano scale
and its output is inherently three dimensional. The only way to currently
observe experiments and data performed on SPM is a visual display on a screen.
With the proposed technique, a visually impaired student will be able to feel
the surface representation of the 3D data on the physical model as seen on a
SPM. The use of 3D physical models for tactile feedback will be developed in
three Arizona State University classes: a junior level course in Chemical
Engineering, a sophomore level course in Physical Science for in-service and
preservice teachers, and a junior level interdisciplinary science course.
Activities will be created to demonstrate the viability, importance and success
of this project. Workshops will be organized to bring educators, scientists,
special education teachers and students to both evaluate and provide input to
this project. The project has broad implications for science education for all
students because they will be able to touch, feel and observe tangible three-
dimensional data models.