* 9610163
* Modeling Assembly Layouts Using the Datum Flow Chain
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/1997,05/31/2001
* Daniel Whitney, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 05/31/2001
* USD 240,000.00

Research will be carried out to create methods to lay out, analyze, outsource,
assemble, and debug complex mechanical assemblies. To accomplish this, ways must
be found to capture their fundamental structure, including the designer's
strategy for locating the parts accurately with respect to each other. A concept
called the `datum flow chain` will be defined and elaborated to capture this
logic. Graph theory will be used to define the properties of datum flow chains.
They will be explored computationally and tested on real assembly examples from
the aircraft and auto industries to see how well they can capture the
information designers need in order to solve typical assembly process design
problems as well as to see how well they scale to large problems. The properties
of different kinds of assembly features will be defined and modeled
mathematically, including those that do not constrain a joint completely. A
design process will be created that permits layout designers to explore the
consequences for assembly and tolerances resulting from choices among different
datum flow chains, feasible assembly sequences, choices of assembly mating
features, and tolerances on the location and shape of these features. If
successful, this research will result in increased understanding of how to model
mechanical assemblies and make it easier to analyze them very early in the
product design cycle. This capability could be beneficial to companies that want
to improve the speed of their product development process. Improved models of
assemblies could also be incorporated into engineering education, providing
deeper understanding of the fundamentals of engineering systems and better
preparing students to be productive in industry.