* 9610491
* Applications of Strain Gradient Plasticity: Modeling and    Experiments
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/1997,03/31/1999
* Abhijit Chandra, Michigan Technological University
* Continuing Grant
* Sunil Saigal
* 03/31/1999
* USD 131,754.00

9610491 Huang Efficiency and effectiveness of numerous engineering applications
(typically macroscale) are significantly influenced by the underlying microscale
phenomena. Consequently, macroscale design considerations of engineering
products and manufacturing processes require detailed microscale insights.
Texture formation in bulk and sheet forming, shear banding (that essentially
governs chip formation characteristics in machining), strength and toughness of
particle/fiber reinforced composite materials, and mechanical properties of thin
film interfaces are examples of this class of problems, A multi-scale
representation capable of capturing the micro-scale effects and synthesizing its
essence within the context of an otherwise macroscale model is necessary for
effective consideration of such engineering problems. Moreover, interests in
several microscale engineering problems, e.g., MEMS, nano- and sub-micron scale
surface modification techniques in electronic packaging and failure of fine line
interconnects in microelectronic circuits, have also increased significantly in
recent years. Experimental observations (e.g., micro-indentation, torsion of
thin wires, strength of thin films) show that material behavior at the
microscale is significantly different from that at the macroscale. These
microscale experiments also exhibit considerable influence of geometric
parameters on material properties. Predictions based on conventional
constitutive models fail to account for such microscale phenomena that may have
profound implications in design and manufacturing of a wide spectrum of
engineering devices. For example, the conventional plasticity theory cannot
explain the increased hardness in micro-indentation tests as compared to macro-
indentation of the same material. Material removal characteristic s in machining
of metals are crucially dependent on the thickness of the generated shear band;
conventional plasticity provides no direct avenue to estimate such parameters.
The strain gradient plasticity recently proposed by Fleck and Hutchinson (1993)
satisfies the Clausius-Duhem thermodynamic restrictions on the constitutive law
for second deformation gradients, and is potentially capable of effectively
probing micron and sub-micron scale material behavior. It can also provide an
effective transition for incorporating the microscale effects within a
generalized framework of plasticity. However, a material length scale is
introduced in the strain gradient plasticity, and needs to be determined from a
set of independent microscale experiments. Accordingly, the proposed work first
focuses on developing- two independent sets of experiments: (1) bending of
micron-thick Cu beams and plates using Atomic Force Microscopy, and (2)
measurement of shear band thickness and sub-structures (in compression tests)
using optical-, electron- and atomic force microscopy. Observations from these
experiments, in conjunction with suitable modeling efforts, will provide
independent estimates of the "material length scale". Comparison of these
results with others will facilitate investigations of the validity of the
"material length scale" as a material parameter. The experiments will also be
used to (i) quantitatively estimate the material length scale for individual
materials, and (ii) establish the region of interest of strain gradient theory
for particular materials. We will then utilize the strain gradient plasticity
theory to probe different engineering applications where microscale phenomena
play important roles. In machining, we will directly estimate the shear band
thickness for different FCC, BCC and HCP materials under va rious cutting
conditions, and (i) validate predictions against observations from proposed
machining- experiments; (ii) quantitatively investigate the influence of shear
band thickness on quality and integrity of the finished surface. For composites,
we will investigate the influence of particle/fiber size on effective strength.
Micro-mechanical sensors, actuators and transducers commonly use thin film bi-
layers (thin film on thin film). We will carry out modeling- and experimentation
on such systems.