* 9610231
* Collaborative Research:  Social Structure, Agreement,       and Conflict in Groups in Extreme and Isolated              Environments:  A Cross-Cultural Comparison
* GEO,OPP
* 04/15/1997,12/31/2001
* Lawrence Palinkas, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 12/31/2001
* USD 123,165.00

9610231 Palinkas Despite a vast amount of research, little is known concerning
the effect of group structure, and individuals' understanding of that structure,
on conflict and psychological well-being in Antarctic groups. The first segment
of our research endeavor has addressed three specific questions: 1) What are the
characteristics of the social relations among individuals working and living
together in extreme and isolated environments?; 2) What do individuals
understand about their group, how does that understanding develop, and how is it
socially distributed?; and 3) What is the relationship between that
understanding and both individual and group performance? In the proposed second
segment, we wish to determine whether there is significant variation from one
cultural setting to another in terms of the role the above factors play in the
functioning of these groups. Answers to these questions are important if we are
to advance our knowledge of how individuals and groups adapt to extreme
environments, particularly with respect to cross-cultural similarities and
differences. The overall objective of the proposed new segment of this research
program is to compare and contrast the group dynamics at the United States
Amundsen-Scott South Pole Station with four culturally distinct Antarctic
groups: India's Maitri Station, China's Great Wall Station, Russia's Vostok
Station, and Poland's Arctowski Station. Both quantitative and qualitative data
will be collected on the formation of group structure, status and role
consensus, perceived social conflict, group morale, and individual psychological
well-being for three consecutive years at the four stations. Quantitative models
on the formation of group structure will be developed. In addition, recent
methodological developments in the study of social networks and intracultural
variation will allow for the testing of a number of related hypotheses
concerning aspects of cognition, social structure, and grou p functioning in a
cross-cultural context. This study will: 1) contribute significantly to the
theoretical understanding of the role of social structure and cognition in the
functioning of groups in isolation, 2) complement current work on health and
adaptation in polar environments, 3) provide for models of the formation of
group structure that will aid in the development of improved procedures for
assembling groups for the Antarctic and other isolated environments (e.g. space
stations), and 4) allow for the valid comparison of intercultural variation in
human group dynamics in isolated and extreme environments.