* 9610059
* GOALI:  Academic-Industrial Partnership for Studies of Reservoir Stimulations, Drilling, Transportation, Emulsion  Stability, and Foaming Bubble Reactor
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/1997,10/31/2000
* Daniel Joseph, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Mihail Roco
* 10/31/2000
* USD 351,084.00

Abstract CTS-9610059 D.D. Joseph and G.S. Beaver U. of Minnesota This a Grant
Opportunity for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) award for collaborative
research in the area of multiphase flow processes between the University of
Minnesota and a group of oil companies (Dowell-Schlumberger, Intervep, STIM-Lab
Consortium of 18 companies, and Syncrude Canada). The main focus will be on
experimental investigation of elementary particle or bubble interaction
mechanisms in non-Newtonian fluids and their effects on the macroscopic flow
pattern and rheological behavior. Direct numerical simulation (DNS) techniques
developed by the same group will be used to interpret and generalize the
experimental results. These methods will address fundamental two-phase flow
phenomena in five applicative areas: particle migration in shear flow of
fracturing fluids and drilling muds, cutting transport, lubricated pipelines of
concentrated oil in water emulsions, and rheology and stability of concentrated
emulsions. The collaborating companies will provide considerable input in the
project direction, research activities, and student support. The project will
provide a scientific foundation for the complex multiphase flow processes
encountered in various technologies in oil industry, with application to
production, processing and transport of hydrocarbons and hydrocarbon products.