* 9610054
* Conformation-Driven Molecular Computing
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/1999,06/30/2001
* Michael Conrad, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Sloan
* 06/30/2001
* USD 50,062.00

CONRAD, Michael&lt;br/&gt;CCR-9610054&lt;br/&gt;Wayne State
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The high recognition capacity of proteins and
other biological macromolecules derives largely from shape-based interactions.
The pictures of a lock-key or jigsaw-like fit is frequently used to describe
this type of molecular level pattern recognition. The goal of this research
project is to harness this powerful intrinsic form of pattern recognition to
solve computational problems. The basic idea is captured in the self-assembly
model of computing. Signal patterns impinging on a device are transduced to
molecular conformations which then self-organize to form a higher level complex
(or mosaic). Shape features common to different mosaics represent different
families of input patterns. Enzymes that recognize these shape features control
the output of the device. The solution of potentially difficult symbolic pattern
recognition problems is converted in this way to a macromolecular self-
organization process driven by free energy minimization. Devices of this type
cannot be programmed in a conventional sense, because of the difficulty of
predicting the structural and functional consequences of conformational
interactions. However, they are well suited to molding through directed
evolution (due to the high structure-function plasticity of biological
macromolecules) and to adaptation through error feedback acting on the internal
structure of the device.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chemical implementation of this
scheme can operate on the basis of the conformational responses of single
proteins to different patterns of milieu features. Shape-based enzyme
recognition serves to transform input signal patterns (coded in chemical form)
to output activity (detected spectroscopically). The particular protein being
used for this purpose is mitochrondrial malate dehydrogenase, a readily
available enzyme of carbohydrate metabolism, that could in the future easily be
coupled to other enzymes to build up a repertoire of special purpose pattern
processors that can be utilized as co-processors for a conventional machine
linked into computational networks capable of performing complex recognition-
action tasks.&lt;br/&gt;