* 9610270
* Geometric Techniques for Multidimensional Databases
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/1997,12/31/2001
* Mario Lopez, University of Denver
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 12/31/2001
* USD 333,743.00

Storage and retrieval of multidimensional data is necessary for many scientific,
geographic, engineering, and business applications. Traditional database
secondary storage indexing techniques such as B-trees and hash tables are not
suitable for dealing with multidimensional data, as data access is performed by
concentrating on only one-dimension at a time and large quantities of extraneous
data may be retrieved. The main goal of this project is to explore and develop
techniques for efficient loading, retrieval, and update of large disk-resident
multidimensional data for both single machine and parallel machine
architectures. Storage and processing of both point and region data are
considered. The database community has independently developed a number of disk-
based multi-dimensional indexing schemes, without applying results from relevant
fields that may significantly improve loading and retrieval performance.
Accordingly, the approach used in this project is firmly grounded within the
realm of computational geometry, a discipline that has produced numerous
techniques for the efficient processing of memory-resident multidimensional
data. The generalization and improvement of these techniques to handle
efficiently disk-resident data is an important part of this research.
Additionally, the use of parallelism to provide improved load and query response
times for very large data sets is also considered. The resulting indexing
techniques will enable higher level database architectures to provide efficient
access to the very large multi-dimensional datasets of the future, thus enabling
database technology to keep up with demands placed upon it from science and
business as a whole.