* 9610444
* Photonic Band-Gap Materials and Related Topics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1997,06/30/2000
* Peter Kuchment, Wichita State University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 06/30/2000
* USD 100,000.00

9610444 Kuchment The problem of creating photonic crystals has two major
components: a mathematical one and a technological one. The mathematical part
consists of non-standard spectral problems for the periodic Maxwell operator and
some of its scalar counterparts. The aim of the proposed research is to develop
novel analytic and numerical methods of analysis of frequency spectra depending
on geometric and physical characteristics of the band-gap material. In
particular, it is planned to develop new asymptotic models of the problem in 2D
and 3D, to study numerically and analytically the asymptotic models for
different geometries of PBG materials in 2D and 3D, to study relations between
spectral properties of photonic crystals and of other mesoscopic physical
systems, to study novel possibilities of localization of light, to study
geometries that promise to open large spectral gaps, and to obtain new analytic
results about effects caused by localized impurities. Photonic band-gap
materials, often referred to as photonic crystals, have attracted a lot of
attention since the idea was suggested in 1987. A photonic crystal is an
artificial composite optical material that is an optical analog of a
semiconductor. The main property of interest is existence of a range of
frequencies (``colors") of light that cannot propagate in this medium. It is
expected that creation of such a material would bring about a technological
revolution in optics, laser technology, computing, information transmission, and
other areas. Significant increase in efficiency of laser devices, highly
efficient planar antennas, optics protecting against enemy's laser beams,
perfect mirrors, laser diodes, memories, switches, and lossless optical
information transmission lines are among numerous applications. This award is
supported by the Division of Mathematical Science and the Experimental Program
to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).