* 9612453
* Presidential Awards For Excellence In Science, Mathematics  and Engineering Mentoring.
* EDU,ESR
* 10/01/1996,09/30/1998
* Diola Bagayoko, Southern University
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra King
* 09/30/1998
* USD 10,000.00

9612453 Bagayoko Bagayoko is Professor of Physics and Chancellor s Fellow at
Southern University. His accomplishments include: I. Establishment of the
Timbuktu Academy, which has a summer program for 100 plus middle and high school
students annually and an academic year program for undergraduates, and is
nationally recognized as an exceptional program for mentoring minority students
in SEM disciplines -- Bagayoko has intensively mentored over 200 students
through the Physics Department and the Academy since his arrival at Southern in
1984; II. Demonstrable student outcomes -- among Academy students, two have
received the University s highest academic awards, University Grand Marshals;
two have received Ph.D.s in Physics and five others are completing their Ph.D.;
10 students have received the M.S. degree in Physics; many of these students are
themselves making meaningful contributions to science and society; III.
Significant institutional impact and replicability -- started in Physics, the
Academy program has expanded to Chemistry and Engineering; while Southern is a
predominantly Black institution, students from a variety of backgrounds have
been included and succeeded in his program, e.g., Asian, Hispanic, and
Caucasian; and IV. Strong testimonials from current graduate students about the
influence of Bagayoko personally and the Academy program on their academic and
career pursuits.