* 9612157
* Rate Enhancement and Microstructure Control of Copper CVD   Processes
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/1997,12/31/2000
* Gregory Griffin, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 12/31/2000
* USD 302,014.00

Abstract - Griffin - 9612157 Chemical vapor deposition (CVD) of copper thin
films is being studied as a potential technology for interconnect metallization
in future generations of deep sub-micron integrated circuits. As interconnect
linewidths decrease and clock frequencies increase, the on-chip resistance-
capacitance time delays become the major limitation in achieving high circuit
speed. Smaller linewidths also lead to higher current densities, which raises
concern about reliability issues such as electromigrations and stress-induced
void formation. Copper offers several intrinsic property advantages over
aluminum, the current material of choice for metallization. These include lower
resistivity, improved electromigration resistance, and increased resistance to
stress-induced voidage. This project is an inter-disciplinary, multi-
investigator program of combined experimental and theoretical research aimed at
further developing the process technology needed for the chemical vapor
deposition of copper thin films for ULSI device metallization. This research is
aimed at developing a fundamental, quantitative understanding of the reaction
mechanism for deposition processes based on Cu(II) reduction chemistry. By
studying this group of reactions, the PI s will be exploring an alternative to
the Cu(I) disproportionation process. The higher reactivity of the Cu(I)
reactants used for the latter process may eventually lead to problems with film
nucleation and grain size control, as the microelectronics industry moves
progressively toward higher aspect ratios for via fills. The bis(beta-
diketonate) reduction chemistry can also provide a more versatile pathway for
CVD of other metals (i.e., volatile beta-diketonate compounds exist for most
transition metals, while the disproportionation pathway is essentially unique to
copper).