* 9612240
* Optical Coherence Microscopy in Developmental Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/1996,05/31/2000
* Scott Fraser, Harvey Mudd College
* Standard Grant
* Gregory K. Farber
* 05/31/2000
* USD 682,121.00

PROJECT SUMMARY An optical coherence microscope (OCM) will be designed and
constructed to study fundamental problems in developmental biology. The
microscope will be capable of imaging cells located up to one millimeter below
the surface of living tissue, even though light scattering in the specimen would
render it opaque to a conventional or confocal light microscope. Depth
penetration is achieved by use of a near infrared superluminescent diode light
source with a coherence length of 20 um together with a coherence gate based on
a Michelson interferometer. This combination excludes light back-scattered from
out-of-focus planes, giving a depth resolution of 10 ~m. Lateral resolution of
10 um or better is achieved by focusing the illuminating beam down to a small
spot. Two-dimensional lateral scanning of the beam spot produces an optical
section at a fixed depth in the sample. A three-dimensional image is obtained by
stacking successive optical sections at different depths. Such three-dimensional
scans should take less than a minute. OCM will be used to study two key systems
in developmental biology, the frog Xenopus laevis and the plant Arabidopsis
thaliana. In the frog embryo, the processes of gastrulation and neurulation will
be monitored in real time. Specifically, the relative motions of the surface
cells (ectoderm) and deeper cells (mesoderm) will be followed to better define
the spatial relationships between the responding and signaling cells during
interactions critical to neural patterning and to better characterize the
segmentation of the mesoderm into axial and paraxial structures. These events
occur several hundred micrometers into the embryo, at a depth inaccessible to a
confocal microscope because of multiple scattering. In Arabidopsis, embryo
formation o ccurs deep within maternal tissues and is therefore inaccessible to
confocal microscopy. OCM will be used to observe plant embryo development in
vivo (in the seed-containing silique) for the first time. Two specialized
embryonic tissues, the shoot and root meristems, somehow direct the plant's
subsequent embryonic and post-embryonic development. Wild-type and mutant
Arabidopsis plants will be used to study the role of the shoot apical meristem
in embryonic development. Post-embryonically, the shoot apical meristem directs
the pattern of leaf initiation (phyllotaxy). The role of the meristem in
initiation of such patterns is hidden by overlying leaves. With OCM it will be
possible for the first time to observe in real time the earliest morphological
changes associated with phyllotaxis. These observations of morphology will be
correlated with genetic analysis and other experimental manipulations to probe
the fundamental molecular mechanisms underlying plant development. A
collaborative team of faculty with backgrounds in biology, biophysics, computer
engineering, optical sciences, and physics will direct the research program,
with extensive participation of undergraduate students both during the summer
and throughout the academic year. In addition to the specific research goals
described in this proposal, another key objective is to engage undergraduates in
significant research projects that will help prepare and motivate them to pursue
careers in multidisciplinary activities in science and technology.