* 9612487
* Short-Range Ensemble Forecasting of Quantitative            Precipitation
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/1996,06/30/2001
* Steven Mullen, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 06/30/2001
* USD 250,045.00

9612487 Mullen The U.S. Weather Research Program (USWRP) is an interagency
activity designed to perform and implement the research necessary to improve the
delivery of weather services to the nation. Under this Program, the National
Science Foundation and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration are
jointly evaluating and supporting research of high priority to the USWRP. It is
well known that the atmosphere is a chaotic system. As a consequence, small
errors in the initial conditions of any numerical weather prediction model
amplify as the forecast evolves. Because the atmospheric state can never be
measured exactly, initial conditions will always contain errors whose magnitude
and structure can only be estimated. Hence an infinite spectrum of plausible
initial conditions exists, all of which are consistent with analysis
uncertainty. A procedure for defining the scope of forecasting uncertainty and
improving forecasts is known as ensemble forecasting (EF). EF involves running
multiple forecasts starting at the same time, but from different, equally-likely
initial conditions. The Principal Investigator will address four fundamental
aspects of short-range EF of quantitative precipitation forecasting (QPF) at the
mesoscale: Estimate limits of predictability for QPF by current operational
forecast models; Investigate minimum number of ensembles needed to robustly
estimate forecast evolution of probability density function of QPF; For QPF
forecasts, determine relative importance of model differences verses
uncertainties in initial conditions; Determine the relative merit of using short
range ensemble forecast at a lower resolution verses a single, high resolution
deterministic forecast. The Principal Investigator will collaborate in this
effort with scientists within the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration. Successful completion of this research could lead to substantial
improvements in abili ty to forecast precipitation. ***