* 9612080
* Theory and Computer Tools for the Analysis and Synthesis    of Multi-Energy Domain Engineering Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/1996,05/31/2000
* Kamal Youcef-Toumi, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Alison Flatau
* 05/31/2000
* USD 141,000.00

This research project develops an interactive environment which allows a user to
perform analysis, and synthesis of interacting multi-energy domain systems (such
as mechanical, electrical, magnetic, fluidic, thermal, and hybrid systems which
may consist of a combination of the above mentioned domains). The approach used
addresses the multi-energy domain feature by using an energy method for the
system representation, which is based on energy methods and the bond graph
representation of physical systems. All information pertaining to mass balance,
momentum balance and energy balance are included in this representation. The
system's structural information is also preserved under this representation.
Useful information is extracted from bond graphs representation of physical
system. The energy method relates the properties and the constraints from all
energy domains in a unified approach. The main results of this research include
modeling theory of multi-energy domain interacting systems and a generic
software package for modeling, analysis and synthesis of components, machines
and processes. The tools allow the user to rapidly set up a simulation for
analysis and performance evaluation. This interactive environment has the
capability of suggesting design alternatives thereby assisting in the synthesis
process and allowing the user to have a system's point of view. The final
product will result in an important impact on both industries and academia by
enhancing their efficient analysis and synthesis capability.