* 9612370
* Interface Structure and Emission Efficiency of Polymeric    Light Emitting Diodes
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/1996,02/29/2000
* Yongli Gao, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 02/29/2000
* USD 370,952.00

9612370 Gao This multidisciplinary research project addresses basic materials
synthesis and processing research on polymers relevant to potential photonic
applications such as full color displays; specifically the research aims at
greater understanding of interface electron transfer in polymer LED proto-type
structures, including the synthesis, processing, fabrication, in-situ and ex-
situ characterization, and molecular modeling of such materials and structures.
Using surface analytical tools the research will focus on the morphological and
electronic structures, chemical reactions, interdiffusion, and charge transfer
of those interfaces from a microscopic or atomic viewpoint. The basic goal is to
understand fundamental mechanisms, and to utilize this knowledge to demonstrate
capabilities for high efficiency performance and longer lifetimes suitable for
display technology. %%% The project combines fundamental materials
chemistry/physics and materials processing studies with advanced
characterization tools and analysis methods to address forefront issues in a
topical area, display technology, of high scientific value and potential
technological benefits. The research will contribute basic materials science
knowledge at a fundamental level to several aspects of advanced polymer light
emitting structures and Configurations. The knowledge and understanding gained
from this research project is expected to contribute in a general way to
improving the performance of advanced display devices by providing a fundamental
understanding and a basis for designing and producing improved materials, and
materials processing routes. An important feature of the program is the
integration of research and education through the training of students in a
fundamentally and technologically significant area. ***