* 9612864
* Topics in Signal Design and Signal Analysis for Wireless    Communication
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2001
* P. Vijay Kumar, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Rodger E. Ziemer
* 08/31/2001
* USD 270,000.00

Some signal design/analysis problems relevant to wireless communication are
under investigation. Problems in the first class relate to a code-division
multiple-access (CDMA) communication scheme in which the receiver makes optimum
multi-user decisions. The effect the selection of a particular sequence family
has on the performance of the system is under study. One measure of performance
is the capacity, i.e., the number of active users that the system can support.
Signature sequences influence this number through their periodic and aperiodic
correlation properties. These correlation values tend to diminish performance by
reducing the minimum Euclidean distance between distinct multi-user signal sets.
Preliminary investigations turned up an interesting example involving Gold
sequences of small length in which correlations reduced the Euclidean distance
between a multi-user signal and its nearest neighbour to zero. The obvious upper
bound on capacity obtained by replacing each aperiodic correlation by the
maximum over the entire sequence family provides much too conservative an
estimate. Thus improved upper bounds are currently being sought. This requires a
better understanding of the distribution of aperiodic correlation values
obtained by picking a randomly-delayed random subset of the entire family of
signature sequences. This distribution is under study both for a family of
signature sequences in general as well as for specific families known to be
efficient with respect to periodic correlation measures. The understanding
gained, will be used in the design of improved signal sets. For example,
preliminary investigations suggest that when communicating data using phase-
shift keying, improved performance will result if each user's phase transitions
never exceed 90 degrees since this has the effect of distributing the aperiodic
correlations across the real and imaginary axes as opposed to simply the real
axis. The second class of problems under investigation deals with the
IS-54/IS-136 North American digital cellular standard. Here the goal is to come
up with an efficient forward error-correction (FEC) scheme well matched to the
IS-54/136 channel. The motivtion came from previous work in which a nonlinear
binary FEC code identified by the author (the Nordstrom Robinson code) turned
out under soft-decision decoding, to improve uniformly upon the performance of
the convolutional code used in the current IS-54 standard. This was to the
surprise of many in both industry and academia as the binary code is of short
block length (16) and has a small minimum distance (6), whereas the IS-54
employs a rate 1/2 convolutional code of contraint length (6). The reason for
this improved performance is under investigation and attempts are under way to
identify the code best matched to this channel. Some other problems of a
miscellaneous nature, all relevant to improved wireless communcation are also
being studied.