* 9612685
* Laser Studies of Equilibrium and Time Dependent Processes   at Liquid Interfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 12/01/1996,11/30/1999
* Kenneth Eisenthal, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Janice M. Hicks
* 11/30/1999
* USD 678,931.00

Kenneth Eisenthal of Columbia University is supported by the Experimental
Physical Chemistry Program to continue his studies on chemical reaction dynamics
and chemical equilibria at liquid interfaces. He will further develop and refine
methods that will extend the ways in which interfaces can be investigated. The
major focus of his research will be the use of second harmonic generation (SHG)
and infrared plus visible (or ultraviolet) sum frequency generation (SFG) to
investigate acid-base reactions/dynamics at air/water, oil/water, and
solid/water interfaces. This research includes studies of ground electronic
state acid-base equilibria and the photochemistry and photophysics of
intermolecular proton transfer and excited electronic state acid-base
equilibria. The significance of the proposed research derives from the
inhomogeneous nature of the physical and biological world and thus the
prevalence of interfaces separating the various phases and structures of matter.
For this reason it is important to develop an understanding of interfaces at the
microscopic level. There is also a significance that extends beyond fundamental
science because of the major role interfaces play in technology (etching of
computer chips, liquid phase catalysis and transfer), in the environment
(air/water, soil/water, air/atmospheric aerosols, and air/stratospheric acidic
ice surfaces), and in medicine (drug delivery in pharmacology, anesthesia and
general membrane chemistry and photochemistry).