* 9612745
* Quantitative Genetics Gordon Conference, Ventura, CA, February 9-14, 1997
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/1997,01/31/1998
* William Beavis, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Allen Moore
* 01/31/1998
* USD 5,000.00

9612745 BEAVIS Recently, there have been tremendous advances in understanding
the molecular mechanisms underlying traits that are controlled by single genes.
This knowledge has come from methods developed by molecular biologists. However,
most human diseases and virtually all economically important traits in natural
and domesticated species are controlled by multiple genes with complex
interactions among genetic and environmental factors. Historically, knowledge
about the genetics underlying such traits has come from statistical methods
developed by quantitative geneticists. The purpose of this Gordon Research
Conference on Quantitative Genetics and Biotechnology is to promote exchange of
information between scientists trained in molecular biology with those trained
in quantitative genetics. It is one of the few meetings that brings together the
specific mix of disciplines of evolutionary biology, human genetics, and plant
and animal breeding. This type of meeting is a valuable means of disseminating
information and ideas to an extent that could not be achieved through the usual
channels of publication and presentation at large scientific meetings. Funds
from NSF pay for travel costs for invited participants. This conference will
provide insights into uses and limitations of various research tools that are
not obvious in the individual disciplines. In addition, molecular biologists and
quantitative geneticists form collaborations among laboratories. These
synergistic collaborations have contributed to understanding the genetic basis
of complex traits and evolutionary relationships in many organisms. This
information will result in the development of treatments for human diseases as
well as in more productive agricultural products.