* 9612434
* Presidential Awards For Excellence In Science, Mathematics  and Engineering Mentoring.
* EDU,ESR
* 10/01/1996,09/30/1998
* Walter Smith, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra King
* 09/30/1998
* USD 10,000.00

9612434 Smith Smith is currently Professor of Science Education in the
Department of Curricular and Instructional Studies at the University of Akron
and his career has focused on mentoring underrepresented groups, especially
women and Native Americans. His accomplishments include: o Serving effectively
as perhaps the nation s first male Associate Dean of Women at the University of
Kansas; o Producing COMETS, a widely respected curriculum to encourage girls in
grades 5-9 to pursue careers in science; over 8000 copies of this National
Science Teachers Association (NSTA) publication are used around the world;
COMETS has also received an AERA award; has produced curriculum materials, also
published by NSTA, to encourage senior high and undergraduate women in science;
o Producing curriculum for use by Native American students, conducting research
in the same area, and leading workshops for over 750 teachers; o Serving as
mentor and advisor to many Native American teachers, including 32 MASTERS
science teachers, half of whom are Native American; these mentees have developed
programs like TIPS (Teaching in Pueblo Schools) where senior high students from
Sante Fe Indian School returned to their home schools as cross- age tutors to
teach science from a native American perspective to younger siblings; o Directly
impacting graduate and undergraduate minority students. One of his doctoral
students, a Cherokee, is President of Haskell Indian Nations University in
Kansas; and three have received Presidential Awards for Excellence in Science
and Mathematics Teaching; and o Receiving the National Science Teachers
Association (NSTA) Distinguished Service Award for Education.