* 9612781
* Prerecorded Video Over Packet-Switched Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/1997,08/31/2000
* Gnana Anandalingam, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing grant
* Karen R. Sollins
* 08/31/2000
* USD 237,184.00

In recent years there has been an explosion of research in packetized VBR video,
with the great majority of the work addressing live video such as video
conference and the broadcast of a sporting event. While this research on live
video certainly merits the attention it has received, we feel that the majority
of the video carried on high-speed networks will emanate from prerecorded
sources. These sources include full-length movies, music video clips, and
educational material. From the perspective of the transport network, prerecorded
VBR video sources are fundamentally different from live video sources: for live
video, the exact dynamics of the VBR traffic are unknown; for prerecorded
sources, the traffic is fully known before it is transmitted into the network.
Surprisingly, little attention to date has been given to the management of
prerecorded video traffic in high-speed networks. There is an emerging type of
prerecorded traffic that will likely dominate the broadband residential networks
of the future --- Video-on-Demand (VoD) traffic. It is expected that the
telecommunication networks of the future will offer a rich variety of VoD
services. For example, a costly service would allow the movie to instantaneously
begin at the viewers request and would provide full VCR control (pause, rewind,
and fast-forward). An inexpensive service would require the viewer to schedule
the commencement of the movie minutes or hours in advance and provide no VCR
control. This research will develop, analyze and compare a wide variety of end-
to-end traffic management schemes for prerecorded video. A central theme of the
research is that VoD traffic is prerecorded, and that video providers,
networking companies, and equipment manufacturers should fully exploit this
important property. Traffic management schemes will be designed which allow
varying degrees of VCR control, schemes which guarantee zero cell loss, and
schemes which permit infrequent cell loss. Initially, the research wi ll assume
that an ATM network transports the video directly between the provider's server
and viewer's set-top box. But prerecorded traffic management schemes will also
be developed for architectures with neighborhood caches and for architectures
based on future generations of the Internet. This research will also investigate
how the traffic management schemes impact the resource management of the
provider's VoD server, and how VoD services should be priced. The research will
lead to a comprehensive methodology for the analysis of prerecorded video over
packet-switched networks. This research is described in greater detail on the
following Web page: http://www.seas.upenn.edu/~ross/nsf/prerecorded.html .