* 9612710
* Development, Characterization and Applications of Support Materials for HPLC, HPCE, CEC and SFC
* NONE,NONE
* 12/01/1996,11/30/2000
* Joseph Pesek, San Jose State University Foundation
* Continuing grant
* Janice M. Hicks
* 11/30/2000
* USD 232,200.00

This Research at an Undergraduate Institution project, supported in the
Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program, focusses on the preparation and
characterization of stationary bonded phases on high performance liquid
chromatography packing material surfaces and on the walls of open capillary
chromatography columns. During this three year continuing grant Professor Pesek
and his research students at San Jose State University will continue studies on
silanization/hydrosilation reaction schemes that they have developed for making
these robust chromatography stationary phases. These modified surfaces will be
characterized using the spectroscopic methods diffuse reflectance infrared
spectroscopy, cross-polarization magic angle spinning nuclear magnetic resonance
spectroscopy and electron spectroscopy for chemical analysis. Differential
scanning calorimetry and thermal gravimetric analysis will also be used in this
work. This project is intended to develop new, rugged, and more efficient
stationary phases for use in separation science. The materials that serve as
stationary phases in chromatographic separation methods determine whether a
chromatography procedure will be successful and whether the procedure will be
reproducible over an acceptable period of time. This Research at an
Undergraduate Institution project will involve undergraduate and Master's level
students in the preparation of stationary phases that are superior in use to
existing materials. These new chromatographic stationary phases can be used to
separate useful amounts of desired compounds and to quantify and identify the
compounds present is a sample. These new stationary phases have application in
chemical process control, synthesis, and biotechnology.