* 9612142
* Supporting the Conference Series: NSF/CBMS Regional ResearchConference in Mathematics
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/1997,03/31/2002
* Ronald Rosier, Conference Board Math Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 03/31/2002
* USD 181,673.00

The Conference Board of the Mathematical Sciences will continue to administer
the conference series known as the NSF/CBMS Regional Research Conferences. In
the twenty-eight year history of this series, a total of 257 such conferences
have been held. Under its cooperative agreement with NSF, CBMS solicits
proposals for individual conferences, organizes a panel review for the
proposals, and oversees the publication of the monographs. The purpose of these
conference is to stimulate interest and activity in mathematical research. Each
five day conference features a distinguished lecturer who delivers ten lectures
on a topic of important current research in one sharply focussed area of the
mathematical sciences. The lecturer subsequently prepares an expository
monograph based upon these lectures, which is normally published as a part of a
regional conference series. Depending upon the conference topic, the monograph
is published by the American Mathematical Society, the Society for Industrial
and Applied Mathematics, or jointly by the American Statistical Association and
the Institute of Mathematical Statistics. Each conference is funded separately
by NSF. Support for about 30 participants is provided and the conference
organizer invites both established researchers and interested newcomers,
including postdoctoral fellows and graduate students, to attend.