* 9612647
* Active Layer/Landscape Interactions:  A Retrospective and   Contemporary Approach in Arctic Alaska
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/1996,12/31/1998
* Frederick Nelson, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Michael T. Ledbetter
* 12/31/1998
* USD 521,215.00

This project addresses the central hypotheses of the Arctic System Science LAII
Flux Study by examining spatial (local and regional) and temporal (interannual
to interdecadal) variations in soil active layer thickness. this is done on
representative landscapes by using different probing and soil coring approaches
(grids, transects, and point data). Standard 1 km x 1 km grids are located in
different landscape units across the Alaska Arctic Slope. the LAII sites, which
are shared by other Flux Study projects, were selected in most cases based on
availability of long-term data sets including soil thaw and local climate
records. The study relies upon high frequency, site specific determination of
active layer thickness as a function of climate, soil properties, and landscape
units (geobotanical complexes). the historical boundary between the base of the
recelt soil thaw and the upper permafrost is established by coring the frozen
ground and observing the distribution and morphology of the ground ice. The thaw
depth measurements are used to validate or modify active layer models and to
assess climate change upon the arctic tundra ecosystem. The carbon status of the
soils and near-surface permafrost are established across landscape units and
serve as a basis for carbon balance extrapolations to regional scales.