* 9612779
* Administration, Maintenance and Development of La Selva     Biological Station
* BIO,DBI
* 02/01/1997,01/31/2002
* Gary Hartshorn, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 01/31/2002
* USD 2,675,000.00

This project will provide continued support of core programs of the
organization for Tropical Studies (OTS) as it takes on an increasing role in
global efforts to train students in rain forest ecology and to understand,
sustainably manage, and conserve ecosystems in the wet tropics. In the last 17
years training and research opportunities have increased dramatically through
OTS. Spectacular biodiversity, diverse habitats for observation and
experimentation, classroom space, availability of well-trained field technicians
and natural history guides,advanced laboratory facilitates, a state-of-the-art
Geographic Information/Database Management System, and a welcoming
sociopolitical environment have all contributed to OTS's continuing growth. The
National Park adjacent to the La Selva site increases long-term ecological
security, and a comprehensive Master Plan and independent advisory committee
guide management and facilities development. More than 60 graduate and
undergraduate courses and over 250 researchers use the La Selva station each
year. La Selva serves an unusually broad segment of the US academic community
and is playing an increasingly important role in the development of science in
Latin America and beyond. In so doing OTS merits long-term support. For economic
reasons there will be only a handful of sites in the humid tropics where fully
equipped field stations can be developed adjacent to very large protected areas
with intact ecosystems. Very few other continental tropical areas have such a
long, continuing history of easy access by US students and scientists. La Selva
--with its exceptional facilities and protected habitats, location within the
democratic Republic of Costa Rica, and intense activity by the US scientific
academic community--is a world center for the study of tropical rain forests and
their associated altered ecosystems. As such,the station is a valuable element
of the nation's programs for undergraduate and graduate education, biodiversity,
and global change, and serves a constituency that extends far beyond OTS member
institutions.