* 9612022
* The Study of the Effect of Pre-Existing Residual Stress in  Rough Hard Turning on New Residual Stress in Dry SuperfinishHard Turning
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/1996,09/30/1998
* C. Richard Liu, Purdue Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Ming C. Leu
* 09/30/1998
* USD 76,151.00

9612022 Liu Hard turning is an attractive alternative to the conventional
precision machining practice of forming, turning, hardening, grinding and
superfinishing, because several process steps can be eliminated. However,
achieving this attractive result has been limited by lack of knowledge and the
risk of thermal damage and residual stresses. This project's objectives are to
understand and model: how pre-existing residual stresses affect subsequent
residual stresses and chip formation, and how cutting conditions and the ratio
of feed to depth of cut affect residual stresses. This investigation will
involve both mathematical modeling and experiment. An experimental design
matrix, replicated twice, will be used to assess the effects of 3 levels of
flank wear, 2 feeds, two depths of cut, 2 cutting speeds and 2 tool nose radii.
X-ray diffraction will be used to measure residual stress, and the experimental
method of Tay et. al. used to determine temperature distributions. This will be
complemented by a modeling effort using the finite element method to predict
residual stresses based on a thermal-mechanical model of machining. Success in
this project potentially eliminates lengthy and costly operations like finish
grinding and superfinishing, in the production of precision components like
bearings. This means higher productivity while maintaining quality.