* 9612130
* Electron Correlation Effects in the Nickel-Sulfide-Selinide System
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/1997,08/31/2003
* Jurgen Honig, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* David Nelson
* 08/31/2003
* USD 464,306.00

Abstract 9612130 Honig This project is the continuation of research completed
under terms of the predecessor grant on the physical characteristics of the
NiS2-x SeX system. As x is increased there is a continuing shift away from the
strongly insulating characteristics of NiS2 toward the strongly metallic
properties of NiSe2. One thus anticipates a compositional region in which the
system exhibits interesting electrical anomalies. This is indeed the case for
0.3 &lt; x&lt; 0.5. Further, over the entire x range, the cation sublattice is
left intact. Moreover, there is almost no change in the crystal structure except
for the continuing increase of lattice parameter with x. Thus, the system lends
itself very well to a study of changes in electron correlation effects in a
system with essentially the same structure and with fixed valency of the cation.
Using single crystals that have been grown from a Te flux and annealed for
control of stoichiometry, it is proposed to conduct detailed X-ray and neutron
scattering studies, magnetization measurements, AC conductivity investigations,
specific heat studies, optical refectivity measurements, and studies on the
effects of applying pressures sufficient to alter the phase transformations that
are encountered in this system. The experimental results, as well earlier
measurements obtained under terms of the predecessor grant, are to be
rationalized in terms of existing theories dealing with electron correlation
phenomena. %%% There is continuing interest in the characterization of metal-
insulator transitions and related phenomena. What sets the NiS2Sex system apart
from almost all others in the category is the remarkable alterations and
neardiscontinuities in electrical properties that can be achieved by changes of
composition in the anion sublattice while keeping the cation sublattice intact.
This comes about because NiS2 is a very good insulator whereas NiSe2 is a metal;
these materials can be mixed in all proportions. T hus, it is anticipated that
interesting electrical anomalies might be encountered over some intermediate
composition range of the alloy. This is indeed the case for the range 0.3 &lt; x
&lt; 0.5. It was on this basis that funding was requested for initiation of
research in this area. The above variations occur in the absence of significant
alterations in crystal structure when the material passes through various phase
transitions with changing temperature in the relatively complex phase diagram.
Any crystallographic changes that might become detectable in very careful
studies devoted to this topic are not likely to play a significant role in the
various electronic phase changes that are the object of the proposed study. One
can thus investigate the effect of changing electron correlations without the
complications of large scale concomitant structural alterations or of any
compositional changes in the cation sublattice array. It is important to search
for and study singlevalent system that display transitions from a weakly to a
strongly correlated electron regime - a problem that is generally conceded to be
of fundamental importance. These requirements are met by the proposed system.