* 9612533
* CYBERCHASE
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/1996,04/30/1997
* Ruth Burns, Educational Broadcasting Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Hyman H. Field
* 04/30/1997
* USD 50,000.00

AWARD NUMBER: 96-12533 Ruth Ann Burns ABSTRACT: WNET is conducting a six-month
development phase to engage a lead mathematics consultant, an advisory
committee, and producers to develop more fully the format, individual program
content, and outreach components for a television-based project called
Cyberchase, a multi-component project designed to excite, inspire, and involve
9-11 year olds in mathematics. The project currently is planned to include a
weekly half-hour television series, a variety of educational print materials,
and on-line activities. The series concept revolves around a multi-ethnic group
of friends who are hooked on a riveting computer game call Cyberchase. At the
start of the show, cast members are pulled into the computer and, with the
program's viewers, become protagonists on intriguing missions that demonstrate
real world applications of mathematics. A host confronts the players with
challenges that must be met in order to progress onto the next adventure. During
the planning phase, the project staff will bring scholars, educators, and
programmers together in planning sessions to develop and refine program ideas
and outreach strategies. The scope of work will include research in three
primary areas: Program Content; Program Design (graphics, animation); and
Interactivity, Multi-media, and Educational Outreach. The PI will be Ruth Ann
Burns, Vice-President and Director of WNET's Educational Resource Center, and
Executive Producer of the PBS Mathline Middle School Math Project. The Lead Math
Consultant will be Carey Bolster, Director of the Middle School Math Project, a
service of PBS Mathline. Sandra Sheppard, WNET's Director of Educational Video
Services, will serve as Project Director and supervise all aspects of the
research and development phase for the inter-related educational media
components of the project. They will work with an advisory committee that
includes Solomon Garfunkel, Iris Carl, Jimmie Rios, and Eve Hall.