* 9612906
* Vanguard II: Supporting Systemic Innovation in DoDEA
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1998
* Beverly Hunter, Bolt Beranek and Newman Inc
* Continuing grant
* Nora Sabelli
* 06/30/1998
* USD 1,807,214.00

9612906 Hunter Vanguard will create and evaluate a model process for systemic
reform and ongoing innovation within a large school system. The essential
elements of the Vanguard model are as follows: * An entire K-12 school community
builds its capacity to serve as a testbed for innovation for the overall school
system. * A structure and culture become institutionalized in the testbed school
community that encourages voluntary groups of teachers and others to initiate,
investigate, plan, implement, and evaluate innovative practices that take into
account new standards of student performances, as well as new opportunities
offered through technologies. * Computer-based technology, LAN/WAN Internet
access, and electronic resources are ubiquitous across the school community and
the members of the community are fluent in the use of such resources. * The
processes of building local capacity (e.g. professional development) are carried
out in a manner that operationalizes and tests emerging policy initiatives of
the school system leadership. * Linking across the curriculum, linking across
the community, and linking across the entire school system, are leveraged
strategies for creating new environments for learning and teaching in the modern
age. * The linkages between the testbed school community and the rest of the
system (e.g. in teacher-led professional development forums or student work
groups across schools) - made possible through the technology infrastructure and
applications-promote rapid diffusion of the innovations across the system. *
Innovations in curriculum, instruction, collaboration, assessment, and school
restructuring are evaluated using a wide range of assessments of student
learning as well as costs, possible cost-displacements, and scalability across
the system . * The processes by which the school system supports and learns from
the testbed schools become institutionalized across all levels of the school
system, thereby creating a school system in whic h innovation is a way of life
rather than an occasional add-on activity. Vanguard builds upon past and current
research on educational reform and technology. The success of Vanguard could
have a significant impact on our understanding of how school systems can make
the transition from the industrial age to a knowledge-based society. ***