* 9612172
* Synthesis of Precise Unnatural Oligomers Using              Well-Defined Synthetic or DNA Templates
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1997
* James Tour, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/1997
* USD 50,000.00

9612172 Tour New routes are described for the facile construction of organic
oligomers of precise molecular weight, constitution, and in some cases, even
stereochemistry, using unnatural and natural (DNA) templates (parents) of
specific length, constitution, and conformation. Taking advantage of precisely-
defined synthetic templates that are rigid-rod- like, the rapid construction of
oligomers of nearly the same length as the templates will be attempted.
Unnatural monomers will be ionically- or hydrogen-bonded to the templates via
non-covalent bonding moieties (NCBMs), then oligomerization will be induced
chemically or photochemically to afford a supramolecular parent-daughter duplex.
The polymerizations should be kinetically favored since the templated reaction
is pseudo-solid state or pseudo- topochemical in its monomer-monomer
orientations. Cleavage of the ionically- or H-bound parent-daughter duplex would
afford a new synthetic daughter oligomer that retains the specific length
information of the parent template, as well as, possibly, the stereochemical
information such as the helical sense. Methods can be envisioned to re-use the
parent template and the daughter(s) as new templates, thus making the entire
process catalytic in template, and ultimately natural-like or polymerase chain
reaction-like (PCR-like) in its productive capabilities. %%% These precise
macromolecular systems are becoming important for electronics, photonics,
molecular electronics, catalysis, separation science, nano-engineering, and
nano- bioengineering. This project, if successful, could significantly simplify
the preparation of precisely defined macromolecular architectures which are
currently prepared only by laborious step-wise procedures or multiple analytical
separations. ***