* 9612041
* The Pilot Study for the Implementation of Engineering       Criteria 2000
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/1996,06/30/2000
* Edward Parrish, Accreditation Board for Engineering and Technology Inc (ABET)
* Standard Grant
* Herbert Levitan
* 06/30/2000
* USD 137,700.00

PROPOSAL ABSTRACT Proposal Number: 9612041 P.I.: Peterson, George D.
Institution: Accreditation Board for Engineering and Technology Inc. (ABET)
Proposal Title: The Pilot Study for the Implementation of Engineering Criteria
2000 Abstract: This project by the Accreditation Board for Engineering and
Technology, Inc. (ABET) is a Pilot Study for the Implementation of Engineering
Criteria 2000. This is an outgrowth of a consensus building process to develop a
reformed accreditation criteria that will maintain strong focus on quality and
professional preparation while offering flexibility for major innovations in
curricular design and delivery methods. Engineering Criteria 2000 is a
simplified, flexible set of outcome assessment based criteria that responds to
the national call from leaders in industry, government, and academe for a
reformed criteria. The Pilot Study, leading to the implementation of Engineering
Criteria 2000 in the Fall of 2001, consists of a series of workshops, structured
reviews, and pilot accreditation visits. Participants include institutional
representatives such as deans, department heads, industry advisory
representatives, faculty liaisons, and ABET representatives including team
chairs, visiting teams, and members of the professional societies who work
together to forge a reformed process for accreditation under Engineering
Criteria 2000. The Pilot Study will produce case studies and training materials
covering such topics as the Development of Program Goals and Objectives,
Assessment Plans, and Assessment Measurement and Tools suitable for a diverse
spectrum of institutions and evaluators.