* 9612887
* Indian Ocean Experiment
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2000
* Veerabhadran Ramanathan, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 08/31/2000
* USD 1,142,866.00

Abstract ATM-9612887 Ramanathan, V. University of California, San Diego Title:
Indian Ocean Experiment (INDOEX) The Indian Ocean Experiment (INDOEX) is an
international field experiment with participation from France, Germany, India,
the Netherlands, and the United States. The main effort under the U.S. component
focuses on assessing the role of sulfates and other continental aerosols in
global radiative forcing and is being supported jointly by the Department of
Energy and the National Science Foundation. In addition, complementary studies
involving investigations of a variety of related chemical and radiative
processes will be undertaken by scientists from other federal agencies and other
international partners. The composite observing system consists of a wide range
of platforms, from ships to aircraft, as well as surface-based and balloon
measuring systems, and satellite data. The main part of the three year effort
will be four-month intensive field phase which begins January 1999. The ultimate
goal of this program is to obtain a better understanding of the decadal and
longer time scale climate forcing. The equatorial Indian Ocean during the
northeast winter monsoon season provides a unique natural laboratory for this
experiment. The experimental area is probably the only place in the world where
an air mass which has been modified by intense sources of continental aerosols,
anthropogenic trace species,a nd their reaction products (e.g., sulfates and
ozone) from the northern hemisphere comes into contact with the pristine air of
the southern hemisphere, which has been transported via cross equatorial
monsoonal flow, at the Intertropical Convergence Zone. The juxtaposition of
these two very distinct air masses will allow a through examination of both the
direct and indirect effects of the aerosols on the radiative properties of the
atmosphere. C4's Principle Responsibilities * Male site, including deployment of
radiometric, chemical and aerosol i nstruments and data collection (Refer to the
proposals INDOEX, pp 29, 42-44; and, INDOEX: Resilient and Streamlined
Implementation Plan, p. 4) * Developing CIDS, integrate data sets (INDOEX, p.
23; Resilient &amp; Streamlined, p.3) including those from US, European and
Indian platforms. * Home institution for the International Project Office
(INDOEX, p. 59) C4 Personnel with Principal Responsibility: The above
responsibilities are to be carried out by the following personnel: A. Direct
support for the following personnel are not being requested via the INDOEX grant
proposal, their time spent will be as a resource to this project: * V.
Ramanathan: Chief scientist, chairs International Steering Committee,
coordinates US programs on Indian ships. *H. Nguyen: coordinates C4 and European
programs, and the pe-INDOEX Cruises. Coordinates administrative-related issues
of the Male site. * Jurgen Lobert: Male site scientist, coordinates the
scientific issues related to the site. B. Direct support for the following
personnel is being requested: * Project Director, TBN, who will report to V.
Ramanathan, coordinates all scientific interactions between the Project Office,
the International Steering Committee, and the US Steering Committee.