* 9612187
* Planning Activities:  Development of the University of      Mississippi Biological Field Station
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/1996,02/28/1998
* Luther Knight, University of Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* None
* 02/28/1998
* USD 24,170.00

For a number of years, The University of Mississippi Biological Field Station
(UMBFS) has been a research site for the study of toxicology and human impacts
on aquatic organisms and ecosystems. This Field Station is a site where
scientists from the University and other institutions representing many
disciplines, including biology, geology, engineering, toxicology, and
pharmacology, can participate in interdisciplinary basic ecological research, as
well as applied research that will affect human health, the environment, and
agriculture. Due to recent administrative changes, UMBFS is now poised to
broaden its scope of ecological research and its educational mission. UMBFS is
located in northern Mississippi approximately 18 kilometers northeast of the
Oxford campus. Acquired by The University of Mississippi in 1985, UMBFS includes
an area of approximately 296 hectares, and encompasses pine and mixed hardwood
forest, bottomland forest, open fields, springs, ponds, and mesocosms offer
unique opportunities for experimental research on aquatic ecosystems. A
comprehensive programmatic educational educational and research plan developed
to best utilize the UMBFS to reach the broadest constituency possible. The UMBFS
is a multi- faceted facility that will, when fully developed, provide the
infrastructure for educational and research activities concerned with
terrestrial, aquatic, and wetlands ecology. Current research projects focus on
impacts to the environment from interactions of agrichemicals, toxicological
investigations, fish genetics and behavior, avian and herpetological population
dynamics, and studies of agricultural water use and conservation. Recently,
UMBFS's mission has been broadened to provide enhanced opportunities for both
research and education in aquatic and environmental sciences. To further this
mission, this project will help support planning and program development.