* 9612730
* Probing Membrane Structure and Dynamics with Near-Field     Scanning Optical Microscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 12/01/1996,04/30/2000
* Robert Dunn, University of Kansas Main Campus
* Continuing grant
* Steven Bernasek
* 04/30/2000
* USD 234,000.00

This new research project, supported in the Analytical and Surface Chemistry
Program, focusses on studies of model lipid bilayers and actual biomembranes.
During the tenure of this three-year continuing grant, Professor Robert Dunn and
his students at the University of Kansas will examine nanometric domains of
membrane bound proteins using a variety of microscopic methods. These techniques
include confocal optical microscopy, scanning force microscopy, and near field
scanning optical microscopy. The goals of this research are to use these methods
to identify and characterize these nanometric lipid domains and to investigate
the effect of bending strain on protein reactivity in these model membrane
systems. Actual biomembranes derived from soybean protoplast will also be
examined, and attempts will be made to identify active lipid microdomains in
these materials. The function of small protein domains in biological membranes
is not fully understood. Using a combination of state of the art surface
microscopy techniques, Professor Dunn will identify and characterize these
domains in both model lipid bilayers and actual biomembranes derived from
soybeans. An understanding of the structure and function of these protein
domains will be very useful in the subsequent rational design of membrane
biosensors, in addition to increasing our understanding of protein function in
membrane systems.