* 9612469
* Resampling Methods for Quantitative Genetic Analysis
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1997
* Patrick Phillips, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* THOMAS QUARLES
* 07/31/1997
* USD 49,966.00

The solution to many questions in evolutionary biology and agricultural science
depend on the accurate estimation of the level of genetic variation and
covariation present in the populations being studied. Estimation and testing of
the these so-called quantitative genetic parameters has been traditionally based
on restrictive assumptions and a limited set of experimental procedures. The
work proposed here aims to eliminate many of these restrictions by utilizing
recently developed resampling methods (primarily the jackknife and bootstrap) as
a means of providing a more general approach to the statistical hypothesis
testing of quantitative genetic parameters. Software for streamlining parameter
estimation and for performing the resampling analysis will be developed and
tested. A primary concern regarding the use of resampling techniques is that
they must be revalidated for each application in which they are used. A great
deal of time will therefore be devoted to testing the statistical properties of
the newly devised resampling procedures. Monte carlo simulations of data sets of
known distribution will be analyzed using the resampling methods developed
above, and the error estimation and power properties of these methods tested for
accuracy against the expected results. Once developed and validated, this
software will greatly simplify the analysis of quantitative genetic data, and
provide many biologists with greater confidence in the conclusions they reach.
Although quantitative genetics has been used for many decades in agricultural
systems, it is only in the last fifteen or twenty years that evolutionary
biologists have begun to make use of quantitative genetic methodology. One of
the central questions that has arisen during that time is nature of the
evolutionary change in the pattern of genetic variance and covariance among
traits. This line of questio ning is usually developed in terms of asking
whether the genetic variance-covariance matrix remains unchanged through time.
Software to be developed in this proposal will allow a much broader set of
questions regarding the evolution of genetic covariance structure to be asked.
By utilizing recent developments in the analysis of variance-covariance methods,
biologists employing the methods developed here will be able to address an
entire hierarchy of hypotheses regarding the relationship between genetic
variance-covariance matrices from two or more populations. Once these hypotheses
are addressed, the net pattern of selection that led to the divergence of the
two populations can be reconstructed and tested. In all, a coherent set of
methods and procedures will be developed that will free those doing quantitative
genetics from the tedium of analysis and allow them to pursue many new and
exciting avenues of research.