* 9612167
* Managing Technological Innovation in Electronic Document    Delivery Workshop; Baltimore, MD; October 24-25, 1996
* ENG,IIP
* 08/15/1996,06/30/1998
* Christine Nielsen, University of Baltimore
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Hennessey
* 06/30/1998
* USD 20,000.00

9612167 Nielsen Large, decentralized engineering and scientific organizations
headquartered in the U. S. have identified electronic media as a strategic
technology for communication and information dissemination to their members and
other stakeholders. This workshop brings together representatives of leading
technical professional organizations, industry leaders in electronic publishing,
and university researchers to address issues in the strategic management of
electronic document creation and delivery. Conversion to electronic media for
communication and information dissemination represents a significant
organizational culture change that can be studied as a process of technology
diffusion within a social system. Discussion at the workshop will focus on
technological choices, major impediments to adoption, and means for overcoming
them. Recommendations will be made for effective creation and delivery of
electronic documents that are responsive to the information needs of engineering
and scientific communities. The workshop will result in recommendations
regarding technological choices, recommendations for overcoming obstacles to the
implementation of electronic publishing, and mechanisms focused on the
engineering and scientific communities' requirements. Workshop proceedings will
be widely disseminated to allow implementation of the recommendations in a
straightforward manner.