* 9612267
* Defects and Impurities in Optical Glass
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2001
* Turan Erdogan, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 08/31/2001
* USD 949,789.00

9612267 Houde-Walter The proposed research is a multidisciplinary effort
involving University of Rochester and Stanford University, along with industrial
collaborators from Eastman Kodak and Corning, to study the environments of rare-
earth dopants and defects in optical glasses. The PIs propose to carry out
spectroscopic analyses of impurities and defects in optical glasses to determine
the nature of rare-earth environments. These analyses include optically detected
magnetic resonance, nuclear magnetic resonance , x-ray absorption fine
structure, electron spin resonance, and Raman spectroscopy. An understanding of
the properties of these defects is critical to the production of glasses that
exhibit higher gain and photo-induced index changes per induced absorption.
These glasses, in turn, will make possible the development of new types of
devices for optical telecommunications. %%% The proposed research is a
multidisciplinary effort involving University of Rochester and Stanford
University, along with industrial collaborators from Eastman Kodak and Corning,
to study the environments of rare-earth dopants and defects in optical glasses.
The PIs propose to carry out spectroscopic analyses of impurities and defects in
optical glasses to determine the nature of rare-earth environments. Optically
detected magnetic resonance, nuclear magnetic resonance , x-ray absorption fine
structure, electron spin resonance, and Raman spectroscopy will be used to study
defects in rare-earth doped glasses. An understanding of these defects will
enable materials researchers to produce glass with improved optoelectronic
properties, which in turn will make possible the development of new types of
devices for optical telecommunications. ***