* 9612322
* Mechanisms of Chemical Demulsification
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/1997,04/30/2000
* Darsh Wasan, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Thomas W. Chapman
* 04/30/2000
* USD 150,000.00

Abstract Proposal No: 9612322 Proposal Type: Investigator Initiated Principal
Investigator: Darsh T. Wasan Affiliation: Illinois Institute of Technology This
grant is awarded through the Separations and Purification Program subelement of
the Interfacial, Transport and Separations Program of the Chemical and Transport
Systems Division. The principal investigator is Dr. Darsh Wasan of the Illinois
Institute of Technology. The objective of the research is to understand the
underlying mechanisms behind the phenomenon of demulsification, where droplets
of oil(or water) flocculate and eventually coalesce to form separate oil and
water phases. The research involves the development of novel techniques to
measure characteristics of the demulsification process. These include the
development of a "surface force" apparatus based on differential interferometry
to measure film disjoining pressure, the development of interfacial rheometry
and tensiometry, piezo-imaging spectroscopy to characterize film rupture and
droplet coalescence, and hydroaccoustic spectroscopy to differentiate droplet
flocculation from the coalescence. Demulsification is a widely used process in
the chemicals and petroleum industry. For example, oil-recovery processes lead
to the formation of emulsions, and demulsification is important in separating
the oil from water. Emulsions formed in the cleanup of oil spills and hazardous
materials also need to be broken so that the chemical additives used in
extraction can be recycled. The phenomenon is complex and there is a need to
understand the underlying scientific issues.