* 9612905
* A Community Based Approach to Technology Infusion
* EHR,DRL
* 07/01/1996,04/30/1999
* William Spitzer, TERC Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Nora Sabelli
* 04/30/1999
* USD 1,785,366.00

Feldman 9612905 The goal of the Hanau Model Schools Partnership is to infuse
technology throughout the Model Schools so that learning with technology becomes
a deeply accepted part of daily school life. Our two-year implementation plan
will focus on these three schools of the Partnership. We will also develop
strategies to assist Department of Defense Education Activities (DoDEA) in
scaling up technology infusion from one set of schools to the entire system and
thereby shed light on the process of technology infusion for school districts
nationally. The implementation plan for technology infusion was developed
through an intensive seven-month planning process that involved the staff at
TERC and members of the Hanau school community, the Hessen District Office, and
the DoDEA office in Washington DC. This plan focuses on four key principles that
we believe to be essential if a technology initiative is to be successful. *
Community-based planning. Successful technology infusion efforts must be
strongly grounded in the communities in which they occur. Community-based
planning anchors the vision and the process of identifying and aligning
resources for the initiative. * Sustained professional development. Technology
infusion efforts must provide teachers with sustained support for making deep-
seated changes to their practices. Such support must include formal and informal
professional development opportunities, as well as on-site support for day-to-
day classroom implementation. * Access to new technologies. Technology infusion
must provide students and teachers with equitable access to the new technologies
* Contiuous evaluation. Communities successfully engaged in technology infusion
continually reflect upon their practice as they change and grow. These
principles derive from what we have learned from our partners in Hanau,
investigation of the literature on technology integration and educational
reform, and discussions with national experts in these fields. Weaving t hese
principles together as components of a comprehensive initiative is a powerful
strategy for educational improvement. In this proposal we describe the work
accomplished during the planning phase of the project-what we did and what we
learned. Next we outline the implementation plan, describing the major
activities and the ways in which we aim to fulfill them over the two years of
the project. We discuss the significance of this project for DoDEA and others
concerned with scaling up from model schools to the full system. Finally, we
conclude with a discussion of what we envision teaching and learning may look
like in the model schools at the end of the project. ***