* 9613063
* NSF/EPA:  Nearcritical  Water for Environmentally Benign    Chemical Processing
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/1996,08/31/1999
* Charles Eckert, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 08/31/1999
* USD 180,000.00

9613063 Eckert Nearcritical water (NCW) is an environmentally-benign solvent
that offers tremendous opportunities for pollution prevention for a wide variety
of manufacturing processes in the chemical, petrochemical, pharmaceutical, and
plastics industries. In the range 250-350C, NCW has a density and dielectric
constant similar to that of ambient acetone, permitting the dissolution and
reaction of both organic and ionic species, as well as the swelling of polymers.
Unlike supercritical water, which is used for complete oxidation (usually
>400C), the more moderate temperatures permit a wider range of useful reactions.
Finally, NCW has an ionization constant which is three orders of magnitude
greater than water at ambient temperatures and pressures. This latter property
should facilitate promotion of acid- and base- catalyzed reactions in the
absence of added mineral acids and bases. This investigation proposed first to
gather, evaluate critically, expand, and model the database of thermodynamic
data (primarily solubilities) for organics in NCW. Next kinetic data will be
obtained for a variety of important reactions which are of industrial interest.
Such information will facilitate the commercialization of this technology by
industry, especially by the active collaborator on this proposal, DuPont. The
reactions that will be run will be: o Friedel-Crafts alkylation reactions o
Friedel-Crafts acylation reactions o Oxidation of alkyl aromatics o Hydrolytic
depolymerization of condensation polymers o Isomerization reactions o Hydrolysis
of cellulose We already have preliminary kinetic data that demonstrate that one
alkylation reaction can be run successfully without any added acid catalyst, and
that an acylation reaction can be run with only traces of a catalyst in place of
the 2-3 fold molar excess of AlCl 3 usually used. As a result of these
investigations, new processes will be available using "green chemistry" for
sustainable development. NCW will replace ma ny less desirable solvents, such as
aromatic hydrocarbons and chlorinated compounds, it will avoid the use of
polluting mineral acids and hazardous catalysts, it will permit the minimization
of even the elimination of unwanted byproducts, it will provide better control
of reactions which can be run homogeneously instead of heterogeneously, and it
will facilitate closed processes by reuse of waste material. ***