* 9613555
* Molecular-Based Study of Reversed Micelles in Supercritical in Carbon Dioxide for Solvent Substitution in the           U.S. Chemical Industry
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/1996,09/30/2000
* Peter Cummings, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 09/30/2000
* USD 345,656.00

9613555 Cummings It is proposed to use small angle x-ray (SAXS) and neutron
(SANS) scattering plus complementary molecular dynamics (MD) and Monte Carlo
(MC) simulations to develop a molecular-level understanding of the formation and
stability of reverse micelles (RMs) in supercritical carbon dioxide (SC-CO2).
The results of this project will contribute to the fundamental knowledge base
for the U.S. chemical industry to substitute SC-CO2 for many of the toxic or
hazardous solvents presently used in most industrial chemical reaction and
separation processes. Despite its attractive features as a solvent substitute,
SC-CO2 is not a good solvent for certain classes of substances, e.g. 1) water,
water-soluble, and polar substances or 2) most high molecular weight substances
such as synthetic polymers or proteins. Techniques have been proposed, however,
for processing these insoluble substances in SC-CO2 through the use of RMs.
Recently, after a decade-long search, appropriate surfactants have been
discovered to disperse both aqueous systems and polymers in RMs andSC-CO2. The
aim of this work is to understand how the detailed molecular characteristics of
the newly discovered surfactants contribute to the formation of RMs to
understand what makes a successful CO2 -philic surfactant tail, to characterize
the interfacial layer between the continuous SC-CO2 phase and the microscopic RM
core, to establish the basis for predicting and measuring the size and shape of
RMs, in short, to provide the molecular foundations for the needed knowledge
base for widespread industrial utilization RMs in SC-CO2 as substitute for
liquid solvents. It is proposed to apply four molecular-based techniques to
study RMs in SC-CO2: 1) SANS for its ability to vary contrast between specific
molecular components through selective deuteration, 2) SAXS for its high
productivity and different contrast compared with SANS, 3) MC for its efficient
exploration of the configuration space, and 4) MD for its capability to explore
dynamical processes at a molecular level. Scattering can tell much about the
microstructure (spheres? rods? lamella? biocontinuous structures?) and
macrostructure (clustering?) of RMs which is unavailable by other means. Both
the 30-m SANS instrument at ORNL with the existing high pressure SAXS cell, will
be used to characterize RMs with both polymer and water cores. And the massively
parallel Intel Paragon supercomputers at ORNL, will be used to simulate RMs from
the newly discovered surfactants in SC-CO2 using accurate models developed from
the OPLS parameter set. The combination of the power of the Paragon
supercomputers and the efficiency of our parallel techniques will permit
determination of the stability of preconstructed RMs. A primary goal will be to
make quantitative comparisons between the stable RM structures as determined by
SANS and SAXS experiments and those determined by simulation. Then, it is
proposed to use simulation experiments, with available thermodynamic data, to
understand the balance of interactions that is required to form stable RMs in
SC-CO2, and thus to understand the molecular structure required for a successful
surfactant. With anticipated success in the proposed SANS, SAXS, MC, and MD
studies, a full repertoire of molecular-based tools for study of RMs in SC-CO2
would be available. With these tools it is proposed to test and adapt existing
thermodynamic models of aqueous RMs, e.g., those Nagarajan, Blankschtein, and
Holland, to RMs in SC-CO2 . With both molecular and thermodynamic models, it is
proposed to suggest novel surfactants for synthesis and testing. Achieving even
a small fraction of this degree of success, will substantially enhance the
knowledge base for widespread substitution of SC-CO2 to replace conventional
liquid solvents in the U.S. chemical industry. A more competitive industry with
reduced emissions will be the ultimate result. ***