* 9613861
* Rearrangements of Carbenes and Diazirine Excited States
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/1997,01/31/2000
* Matthew Platz, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 01/31/2000
* USD 573,400.00

Dr. Matthew S. Platz of the Department of Chemistry at Ohio State University is
supported by a grant from the Organic Dynamics Program to continue his studies
of the rearrangements of carbenes and excited states of diazirines. He will
study alkyl, dialkyl, cycloalkyl, and acyl carbenes generated by laser flash
photolysis of nitrogenous and non-nitrogenous precursors, examining the
influence of carbene structure and isotopic composition, temperature, and
solvent polarity on the rate of carbene rearrangement. Calculational studies
will address the possible roles of quantum mechanical tunneling and dynamical
effects in these rearrangements. Rearrangement and cleavage mechanisms of
diazirines will be probed by low-temperature high resolution fluorescence
spectroscopy. New types of carbene precursors, more efficient than those
currently used, will be used to generate carbenes at low temperature, allowing
their study by UV-visible and infrared spectroscopy and experimentally
addressing the issue of ground state electronic structure for simple dialkyl
carbenes. In contrast to typical stable organic compounds, which are based on
carbon atoms connected to four other atoms, carbenes, which contain carbon
bonded to only two other atoms, are high-energy compounds. None-the-less,
carbenes appear to be formed in a large number of chemical reactions, and
development of an understanding of their properties and chemistry remains an
important research goal. Professor Platz will study the influence of several
critical variables on the reaction chemistry of carbenes and will couple these
studies with calculational work in order to assess the influence of electronic
structure and quantum mechanical effects on these reactions. He will prepare
organic compounds which serve as precursors to carbenes, allowing the formation
of ordinarily reactive carbenes under conditions which permit their experimental
study, and will analyze the chemistry of other carbene precursors, widely used
throughout the world research community, which appear to display more complex
chemistry than generally appreciated.