* 9613753
* Theoretical Investigation of Geochemical Processes
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/1997,01/31/2003
* Harold Helgeson, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 01/31/2003
* USD 393,096.00

9613753 Helgeson The objectives of this project over the next five years include
1) chemical and thermodynamic assessment of the interdependence of
thermobarophilic microbial metabolism, petroleum generation and maturation,
reversible and irreversible diagenetic reactions, and the organic chemistry of
interstitial fluids in sedimentary basins, 2) comprehensive calculation of
chemical affinities and Gibbs free energy minima to quantify the chemical
parameters that control the biochemical and organic-inorganic reactions that
take place in hydrocarbon reservoirs, and 3) determination of the thermodynamic
behavior of thermophilic biomolecules at elevated temperatures and pressures in
order to better characterize reaction pathways and the role of microbes in
diagenetic processes. The methods to be employed consist of thermodynamic
calculations and computer experiments carried out with the aid of equations of
state using compositional and thermodynamic data reported in the literature to
characterize the causes and consequences of microbial activity in diagenetic
processes. The significance of the proposed research to the advancement of
knowledge is to improve our understanding of the effect of hydrocarbons and
mineralogic substrates on microbial metabolism and the biogeochemical role of
thermophilic microbes in catalyzing irreversible reactions among minerals and
organic and inorganic aqueous species and biomolecules in diagenetic processes.
It has become increasingly apparent in recent years that understanding the
biogeochemistry of the organic-inorganic interface and the role of thermophilic
microbes in catalyzing diagenetic reactions in sedimentary basins is critical to
accurate description and interpretation of phase relations in these basins. A
myriad of reversible and irreversible reactions occur among biomolecules and
other organic aqueous species, minerals and inorganic aqueous species, and
hydrocarbon solids, liquids, and gases in diagenetic processes, all of which are
in prin ciple amenable to thermodynamic analysis. This approach can be used to
assess reaction pathways and the energy, carbon, and nutrient sources used by
thermophiles in mediating diagenetic reactions. It can also be used to quantify
the relative stabilities of extracellular enzymes and other biomolecules
required to support life at high temperatures. Experimental data reported in the
literature indicate that biomolecules become increasingly sensitive to their
chemical environment with increasing temperature. However, if the chemical
potentials of H2 (and therefore O2), H2O, CO2, NH3, and H2S are favorable,
biomolecules may persist at high temperatures for periods of time well in excess
of those required for regeneration of the molecules by thermophilic microbes.
Calculation of the relative stabilities of biomolecules in the interstitial
fluids of sedimentary basins as a function of the fugacities of these gases can
be carried out with the aid of group additivity equations of state developed in
this laboratory with prior NSF support. Combining these equations with
thermodynamic data and equations of state parameters permits investigation of
the chemical and thermodynamic consequences of reactions among biomolecules and
a wide variety of minerals, gases, hydrocarbon liquids, and both organic and
inorganic aqueous species at elevated temperatures and pressures. These include
irreversible reactions which provide an energy source for microbial metabolism,
as well as reversible reactions representing local and partial metastable or
stable equilibrium states such as those described by Shock (1987, 1988, 1989,
1990a), Helgeson et al. (1993, 1995), Helgeson and Amend (1994), Seewald (1994,
1996), and Schulte and Shock (1996). The purpose of this proposal is to request
long-range support for continuation of this research in order to investigate and
quantify thermodynamic constraints on the biogeochemical role of microbes in
diagenetic processes.