* 9613706
* A Joint Research Effort between UMCP and UNAM:              "Environmental Risk of Arsenic:  Geochemical Processes and  Speciation"
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/1997,10/31/2000
* Allen Davis, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* A. Frederick Thompson
* 10/31/2000
* USD 119,264.00

9613706 Torrents Understanding the sources and sinks of heavy metals in the
environment is critical to developing technologies to prevent pollution from
these elements. The proposed research addresses the physical and chemical
interactions of arsenic with soils and sediments before it ultimately finds its
way into ground or surface water. This topic is of particular importance in all
Latin American countries and especially Mexico. Arsenic pollution of groundwater
and surface waters leads to human health problems such as cancer, and is
particularly problematic in mining areas where complex geochemistries determine
its fate. To help understand how the reactions of various minerals interact
under natural conditions and how the site geochemistry influences the migration
of As metals and metalloids, the research will study As speciation and sorption
as a function of soil mineral composition, pH, Eh, and the presence of dissolved
organic and inorganic ions. The major objective is to quantify the relative
importance of the different processes on As mobility. Specific objectives
include: developing meaningful laboratory leaching tests to assess how labile As
and As-rich-tailings are; developing analytical and extraction techniques to
determine As- speciation in soils; quantifying the importance of Fe and Mn
oxides in As retention; quantifying factors controlling As dissolution. An
understanding of As geochemistry can lead to better means of pollution
prevention, especially from mining sources. The proposed work is part of an
ongoing collaboration agreement between University of Maryland College Park
(UMCP) and Universidad Autonoma de Mexico (UNAM) to build a program in
Environmental Engineering which will facilitate the visits by
students/researchers, develop an infrastructure to facilitate "sandwich' degrees
(students from UMCP to conduct field work in Mexico and students from Mexico to
participate in courses at UMCP), train Mexican students in topics of interest to
their own country, and identify and establish new areas of common interest
between the two universities. The proposed research will use both surrogate
contaminated soils spiked with different levels of As under different pH and
redox conditions, and real As-rich tailings and will include a mixture of
laboratory and field work. Well controlled laboratory studies will be designed
to elucidate mechanisms. The field studies, conducted in Mexico, will elucidate
the relative importance of the different mechanisms from both a kinetic and a
thermodynamic approach. The approach taken in this proposal and the knowledge
gained will not only benefit the environment surrounding mining communities but
also extensive geothermal and agricultural areas where arsenic concentrations
are often high. Knowledge gained will provide a basis upon which pollution
control technologies may be established.***