* 9613350
* Collaborative Research:  Distribution of Photosynthetic     Capacity in Conifer Canopies:  The Role of Shoot Geometry,  Leaf Morphology and Nitrogen Concentration
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/1996,06/30/1999
* Barbara Bond, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Zoe Eppley
* 06/30/1999
* USD 79,752.00

9613350 Yoder Nitrogen is one of the most important elements controlling plant
growth in both natural and agricultural ecosystems. Ecophysiology theory
suggests that the distribution of nitrogen within a plant canopy should match
the distribution of intercepted light; that is, there should be much more
nitrogen near the top of the canopy (where light levels are highest) than in the
more shaded areas near the bottom of the canopy. However, when theoretical
predictions have been compared with actual plant canopies, the results have been
mixed at best. Nitrogen distribution in most canopies does show the same general
pattern as that predicted by theory. However, the mechanism by which nitrogen
content changes differs between species, and the difference in nitrogen levels
from the top to the bottom of the canopy is rarely as large as the theory
predicts that it should be. The investigators have developed a hypothesis that
explains this variation in mechanismsand also suggests some reasons why the
variation in nitrogen does notalways match the pattern of light distribution,
especially in older leaves. They propose to test this hypothesis in three
different western conifer species: Douglas-fir (Pseudotsuga menziesii), the most
important timber species in the Pacific Northwest; Pacific silver fir (Abies
amabilis) an important tree of high altitude forests; and ponderosa pine (Pinus
ponderosa), the dominant tree in dry forests throughout the western United
States. If the hypothesis proves correct, it will provide a better understanding
of the organizing principles for shoot structure and function within complex
canopies, and will assist in efforts to "scale up" gas fluxes from leaves to
canopies--a critical component of attempts to model and predict the consequences
of climate change in western conifer forests.