* 9613817
* Adaptive Power Control & Link Quality Maintenance           in Wireless Communication Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/1997,09/16/1998
* Nicholas Bambos, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* Dwight D. Fisher
* 09/16/1998
* USD 154,325.00

Wireless networking is rapidly becoming a major component of the modern
communications market and increasingly competes with wired networking, in terms
of business volume, driven by the demand for personal communication systems &
services. The ubiquitous untethered access that wireless networks provide to
users, coupled with the high bandwidth of wired networks, offers a comprehensive
solution to modern global communication requirements. Contrary to the protected
environment of the wire, the wireless channel can be highly erratic and
essentially stochastic; interference is an omni-present fact one has to cope
with. Historically, networking science has evolved based on the wired network
paradigm, where concepts like routing, admission control, packet & circuit
switching, congestion management etc. first emerged. However, the advent of
wireless networks introduces a whole new dimension to the networking problem,
which this project is exploring. Modern applications (multimedia) are rapidly
driving wireless communication to the point where advanced networking
capabilities, previously limited to the wired world (active congestion control,
guaranteed quality of service etc.) need to be readily available; yet, they have
to be supported by the highly erratic radio channel and under node mobility,
making sporadic connectivity and unpredictable propagation events (shadowing,
fading etc.) the rule rather than the exception. This dichotomy introduces a
number of interesting research issues which this project explores. They are
mainly centered around the control of transmitter power of network nodes for the
quality of qervice maintenance of network links in the presence of interference,
node mobility and severe channel impairements. Such control results in prolonged
lifetime of battery powered (mobile) nodes, higher network capacities, and more
stable and efficient system operations, all of which are of high practical
importance. -------------------- Details abo ut the project will be appearing on
the web site: http://www.netlab.stanford.edu/wirelss_nsf.html