* 9613640
* Conference on Evolution of Plant Development: to be held    January 20-26, 1997, Taos, NM
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/1997,12/31/1997
* Susan Wessler, Keystone Center
* Standard Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 12/31/1997
* USD 16,000.00

9613640 Wessler The meeting goal is to bring together the separate communities
of plant developmental and evolutionary biologists. This will be only the second
large conference devoted exclusively to this topic. The first, held in 1993, was
also a Keystone Symposium that we organized. The excitement generated by this
well-attended first meting led us to conclude that it is the same as those for
this second meeting. We continue in our attempt to join two fields that have
just begun to collaborate. The first field is molecular genetics of plant
development where the most exciting work is currently focusing on (i)
identifying the regulatory genes directing patterns of cell differentiation and
(ii) understanding how genomic plasticity contributes to generating the vast
morphological diversity observed in the plant kingdom. The second field is
morphological and molecular plant evolution, with exciting work both in the use
of molecular methods to establish evolutionary history of higher plants, and on
new ideas of how plant morphology has evolved. There have been profound
discoveries in plant biology since 1993 including the isolation of the first
plant resistance genes, the demonstration that floral induction is
evolutionarily conserved in diverse species, the synteny of plant genomes, and
the isolation of genes responsible for major morphological differences in
closely related plants. By concentrating on these and other recent advances in
plant developmental biology that shed light on evolutionary history or
mechanisms, our program is able to focus on an intellectually coherent and
challenging set of topics. Students and postdoctorals should benefit
tremendously from the multidisciplinary tone of the talks and the discussions
since they have a tendency to focus intensely on narrow research projects. This
meeting should be a well-spring of new research directions that can be
integrated into their plans for the future.