* 9613738
* The Role and Regulation of Chloride Cells in Antarctic Fish
* GEO,OPP
* 05/01/1997,04/30/2001
* David Petzel, Creighton University
* Standard Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 04/30/2001
* USD 114,445.00

9613738 Petzel Antarctic fish have the highest serum osmolality of any seawater
teleost. Maintenance of fluid balance is crucial for survival. Upon warm
acclimation from -1.5o to 4oC the fish lmse 20% of their serum osmolality
through extrusion of NaC1 across the gill. NaC1 extrusion in fish is primarily
performed by chloride-secreting cells located on the gill arches and gill
opercula. The driving force for NaC1 transport is the Na/K-ATPase. To date, no
information is available concerning role and regulation of the elevated serum
osmolarity in Antarctic fish. Questions which arise include: What role does the
chloride cell play in mediating salt extrusion? Which hormones regulate chloride
cell activity? The chloride cell physiology and regulation in Antarctic fish
will be compared with a New Zealand fish which is eurythermal. The goals of the
proposed research are to determine the plasticity of Antarctic and New Zealand
fish gill function at the physiological level (through studies of ion transport
activity) and molecular level (through studies of the Na/K-ATPase enzyme),
specifically this research will: 1) determine the gill extrusion mechanisms
underlying the increase in gill Na/K-ATPase activity upon warm acclimation in
Antarctic fish and 2) determine the hormonal regulation of the gill extrusion
mechanisms. Previously it was shown that upon warming of Antarctic fish there is
an increase in NaC1 extrusion as a result of increases in gill total Na/K-ATPase
enzyme levels. The proposed experiments will measure chloride cell morphology,
metabolism, physiolmgy and regulation in parallel with effects of warming and
cooling on the whole fish. Measurements of chloride cell morphology will include
changes in diameter and number of cells at different temperatures. In order to
ascertain the role of Na/K-ATPase in mediating the enhanced salt extrusion upon
warming, we will measure total enzyme activity and total number of enzymes. The
role of the chlor ide cell in transport of C1 and Na will assayed by placing the
gill opercula sheet epithelia in Using chambers to determine the influence of
fish warming on short-circuit current, which is a direct measurement of chloride
transport through chloride cells. Finally, regulation of chloride cell function
will be determined by altering palsma levels cortisol, prolactin and endogenous
endocrines. The results from the proposed experiments will, for the first time,
describe in detail the underlying mechanism(s) mediating the enhance hypo-
osmoregulation observed in Antarctic fish and will allow the comparison of these
results to those observed in a eurythermal New Zealand fish.