* 9613890
* Dissertation Research:  The Domestic Use of Mound Sites:    Implications for Inequality in Hopewell Households
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/1996,02/28/1999
* Jeffrey Hantman, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/28/1999
* USD 11,162.00

Under the direction of Dr. Jeffrey Hantman, MS Adrienne Lazazzera will collect
data for her doctoral dissertation. For the past year MS Lazazzera has conducted
archaeological excavation at the site of Fort Ancient, and with NSF support she
will obtain radiocarbon dates and contract for the analysis of botanical
remains. She will also study comparative materials from other Hopewell sites.
Fort Ancient is a Middle Woodland hilltop earthwork which dates from ca. 200 BC
to 400 AD and is situated on the bluffs above the Little Miami River in Ohio.
Over 3 miles of earthen walls enclose approximately 100 acres. Although it was
built over several hundred years, Fort Ancient is properly considered monumental
architecture since its construction necessitated extensive leveling of the
hilltop itself and extending portions of the plateau to accommodate the site's
architectural plan. Based on work at other Hopewell sites, most archaeologists
believe that they served primarily ritual functions since large burial mounds
and elaborate grave items are often present. While work at Fort Ancient has
uncovered a large ossuary burial as well as stone covered graves and indications
of other ritual activities, the researchers have also discovered solid evidence
for occupation of the interior of the earthwork by domestic family groups. This
finding is extremely unexpected and thus makes the site of great archaeological
interest. Although the excavation of the site will, hopefully, be completed in
the summer of 1996 and many of the materials have been analyzed, it is still
necessary to obtain absolute dates for different features within the site and to
analyze the botanical remains. These latter permit reconstruction of both
environment and diet and provide insight into the seasons of occupation The
Hopewell culture has proven an enigma to archaeologists. It marks an early stage
in the development of complex society in North America and it is unclear, even
with many sites excavated, how this prehistoric society was structured.
Extensive earthworks such as Fort Ancient and associated elaborate burials with
precious trade goods suggest the presence of a stratified society with chiefs or
elites which could command and control labor. However excavation of habitation
sites has not provided evidence of such stratification since domestic units have
the same range of material present. Until the recent Fort Ancient research,
archaeologists had believed that large earthwork/mound sites were not the focus
for habitation and that they served special purpose and ritual functions only.
The discovery of supposed habitation sites at Fort Ancient now substantially
changes this picture. If habitations were present this suggests that a
stratified society model is correct. MS Lazazzera's work with help to solve this
question. This research is important for several reasons. It will provide data
of interest to many archaeologists and shed new light on an important but poorly
understood period of American prehistory. It will increase understanding of how
complex societies develop and assist in training a promising young scientist.