* 9613108
* Multiuser Detection in Non-Gaussian Channels
* CSE,CCF
* 04/01/1997,03/31/2000
* Harold Vincent Poor, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Rodger E. Ziemer
* 03/31/2000
* USD 362,495.00

The dramatic growth of interest in wireless communication systems has motivated
an attendant interest in signal processing techniques for data demodulation in
multiple-access communication channels. Multi-user detection provides a useful
theoretical basis for the study of optimum signal processing in such channels.
One principle established through the study of multi-user detection is that
multiple-access channels can be reduced to ambient-noise-limited channels with
appropriate signal processing. The primary framework within which multi-user
detection has been developed has been the Gaussian code-division multiple-access
(CDMA) channel, in which the ambient background noise is white and Gaussian.
Experimental evidence suggests that the ambient noise in many channels of
interest in wireless applications (e.g., urban and indoor radio channels, and
underwater acoustic-modem channels) is significantly non-Gaussian. In
particular, it is known that such noise environments can be better modeled as
being derived from more general linear processes, in which both Gaussian and
impulsive components can arise. It is further well-established in the context of
single-user communications that non-Gaussian noise can be quite detrimental to
the performance of systems optimized for Gaussian noise, whereas it can be quite
beneficial if appropriately modeled and ameliorated. Thus, as work in multi-user
detection moves closer to practice, it is of interest to examine the multi-user
detection problem in the context of more realistic ambient noise models. The
proposed study will address this issue in depth. Specifically, three research
problems arising in the area of multiple-access communications in non-Gaussian
channels will be addressed - the analysis of extant multi-user detectors in non-
Gaussian ambient noise; the design of optimum and near-optimum multi-user
detectors for non Gaussian channels; and the design of waveform sets for non-
orthogonal signaling through non-G aussian channels. The results of this study
should be quite beneficial in practical communication systems, particularly in
areas such as urban mobile telephony, indoor wireless communications, and
tetherless underwater acoustic communications (which is of emerging interest in
oceanographic instrumentation). For the foreseeable future, there will be
considerable commercial and scientific interest in techniques that allow
wireless networks to operate with better performance for more users/subscribers
and with lower transmitter power requirements. This means that signal processing
techniques that can significantly improve the performance of wireless systems in
real channels, such as those proposed for study here, will be of significant
interest to the commercial and scientific sectors.