* 9613273
* Two-Stage Fermentation of Whey Permeate for Biodegradable   Deicer Production
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/1996,12/31/2000
* Alexander Mathews, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* A. Frederick Thompson
* 12/31/2000
* USD 242,942.00

9613273 Mathews Biomass wastes such as liquid whey effluents from the dairy
industry are a burden on the environment due to their high biochemical oxygen
demand (BOD). Treatment of these wastes to meet environmental standards is both
capital and energy intensive. This proposal examines the use of whey permeate in
the production of a road deicer substitute for sodium chloride, since currently
used deicers cause extensive corrosion-related damage to the highway
infrastructure and environmental damage to water supplies and soils. The
proposed research will examine the use of biomass wastes in the production of
substitute deicers, calcium magnesium acetate (CMA) and calcium magnesium
propionate (CMP), via a two-stage bacterial fermentation process. In addition, a
mathematical model will be to describe continuous cell- recycle fermentation in
coculture systems. Growth kinetics studies will be conducted using the bacteria
Propionibacterium acidipropionici and Lactobacillus plantarum in monoculture and
coculture systems. The effect of substrate concentration, pH and other
parameters on growth and organic acid productivity will be determined. A
synergistic growth kinetics model that includes substrate and product inhibition
kinetics will be developed, and kinetic constants will be obtained from the
data. Continuous flow cell-recycle fermentation studies will be conducted for
coculture and two-stage fermentation systems to determine acid productivity and
product concentrations. A model will be developed to describe continuous flow
cell- recycle fermentation for single and coculture systems, and the model will
be verified with the experimental data. This research will develop data and
basic knowledge required in the design of an innovative fermentation system for
the conversion of whey effluents to useful chemicals. The methodology and
approach developed can be utilized in processes to convert a variety of
inexpensive sugar substrates and biomass hydrolysat es into low-cost
biodegradable deicers.