* 9613076
* NSF/EPA Partnership for Environmental Research:             Environmentally Conscious Design and Manufacturing with     Input-Analysis and Markovian Decision Making
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1999
* Sudhakar Pandit, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 08/31/1999
* USD 180,000.00

*** 9613076 Olson This award is made under the NSF/EPA Partnership for
Environmental Research. The research explores and creates a mathematical
computational tool which when used with Life Cycle Analysis provides a
quantitative Impact Improvement Analysis. A quantitative state space model of
industrial products or processes will be created. The model, as a discrete
finite Markov chain, will predict the impact of a proposed design decision and
optimize that decision for its impact upon both sustainable development and the
environment on the firm and its industry. Using time history data, a
multivariate data dependent system (DDS) will be developed to further refine the
analysis so that decision makers can order their decisions to have the least
disruptive effect upon their operations. The research tools will be made
available on the World Wide Web. If successful, this research will provide to
industry tools to allow decision makers to apply Environmental Life Cycle
Analysis at the facility level. Currently these tools do not exist and restrict
or prevent decision makers from taking advantage of Life Cycle Analysis in
planning both products and processes. Among these tools is an effective means to
compute the anticipated changes in materials on a facility due to the attempt to
meet specified environmental goals for material reduction and prevention of
pollution. Additionally, these tools provide a dynamic, time structured,
analysis of the effects of incremental decisions. This is enhanced by the
ability to compare and optimize decisions to meet industrial competitive
objectives. This research extends Life Cycle Analysis to allow manufacturers to
better quantify their inventories and to provide pathways to reducing material
usage where desired. ***