* 9613754
* CONACyT: Research on Integrated Optical/Digital Imaging     Systems with Increased Longitudinal Resolution
* CSE,CCF
* 01/01/1997,12/31/2000
* W. Thomas Cathey, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* John Cozzens
* 12/31/2000
* USD 83,917.00

Two groups, the Imaging Systems Laboratory (ISL) of the University of Colorado
and the Laboratorio de Optica, (LO) in the Departamento de Fisica y Matematicas
of the Universidad de Los Americas, are pursuing a joint research program to
further develop and demonstrate tools for the design of integrated
optical/digital imaging systems. This program combines the capabilities of the
two groups and focuses their efforts by concentrating on the reduction of the
longitudinal region of focus of an imaging system. That is, an optical/digital
imaging system is to be designed that has a greatly reduced depth of field or,
equivalently, a dramatically increased resolution along the longitudinal axis.
Based on previous research by the two groups, it is believed that this goal can
be achieved without adversely affecting the transverse resolution. Indeed, it
appears likely that, with a combined optical/digital system, the transverse
resolution can also be increased somewhat. Such a system would be useful in
microscopy, medical imaging, and in inspection devices for manufacturing. In
addition to the scientific advances and potential new imaging systems, the
interaction between the graduate students in each group and long-term (one month
to one semester) visits to each others' institutions will greatly promote
international cooperation in the field, and understanding between the two
cultures.