* 9613785
* CONACyT:  Topological Methods in Distributed and Concurrent Computation
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/1996,08/31/1999
* Maurice Herlihy, Brown University
* Continuing grant
* Yechezkel Zalcstein
* 08/31/1999
* USD 300,000.00

This NSF-CONACyT Collaborative Renewal Award continues to apply techniques from
the abstract mathematical area of simplicial algebraic topology (developed under
CCR-9505949) to the problem of coordinating concurrent processes in a
distributed or parallel computing system. Coordination problems arise at all
scales of modern distributed and concurrent systems, way from synchronizing
access to shared data objects in tightly-coupled multiprocessors, to allocating
data paths in ATM networks. Coordination is difficult because modern parallel
and distributed systems are inherently asynchronous (that is, processes may be
delayed without warning for a variety of reasons, including interrupts, pre-
emption, cache misses, communication delays, or failures). These delays can vary
enormously in scale: (a) a cache miss might delay a processor for fewer than ten
instructions; (b) a page fault for a few million instructions; and (c) operating
system pre-emption for hundreds of millions of instructions. Coordination
protocols that do not take such delays into account run the risk that if one
processor is unexpectedly delayed, then the remaining processes may be unable to
make progress. Such problems become increasingly severe as systems scale. In the
past few years, a number of researchers have developed a range of new
techniques, based on classical algebraic topology, for analyzing distributed and
concurrent protocols and data structures. These techniques have been applied
successfully, under the US-Mexico collaborative effort supported by CCR-9505949,
to a range of computational problems. This renewal collaborative project extends
these algebraic topological techniques to a range of more difficult problems,
not just for distributed and parallel computing, but for any problem area that
requires reasoning about uncertainty and partial information.***