* 9613997
* Dissertation Research:  Prehispanic Settlement Patterns in  the Palenque Region, Mexico:  The Organization of           Agricultural Production in a Classic Maya Center
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/1997,06/30/1998
* Robert Drennan, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/1998
* USD 5,343.00

Under the direction of Dr. Robert Drennan, Mr Rodrigo Liendo will collect data
for his doctoral dissertation. He will conduct archaeological research at the
Mayan site of Palenque, Mexico which flourished at the height of classic Maya
civilization. His immediate goal is to reconstruct the settlement pattern and
agricultural system and to accomplish this he will first conduct a systematic
regional survey of an area of 65 square km. This will include surface collection
and recording of architectural data that will provide a synchronic view of
settlement organization and distribution. It will also identify the likeliest
locations of elite and non-elite households and show the relationship between
these and administrative centers. Households will be classified according to
status on the basis of qualitative architectural indicators and well as
quantitative indicators such as size and number of associated structures. The
survey will also incorporate information on agricultural features such as
terraces and their relation to elite and non-elite residences. Local topography,
household ecological zone location, site area, slope, soil and vegetation
characteristics will be noted and the data will be recorded and manipulated in a
Geographic Information System. During a second phase of the work, excavation
will be conducted in a sample of 12 households to collect ceramics and other
materials which will permit determination of household status. On this basis it
will be possible to determine the relationship between agricultural organization
and elite control. One triumph of Maya civilization rests on the fact that it
developed in a region which can support only limited populations today. The
Mayans developed agricultural techniques which permitted dense population
aggregations in a relatively hostile environment and embedded them in a social
structure which allowed the development of a complex hierarchical form of
organization. As agronomists have learned, the central difficulties in
developing small scale agricultural systems in the tropics involve `social`
rather than `technical` factors. Because it was so successful, archaeologists
wish to reconstruct the social context within which the Mayan agricultural
system developed and have proposed very different hypotheses. Some believe that
it was highly centralized and administered from either a single central place or
from smaller dispersed administrative centers. Others think that much less
vertical integration was present and that small farmers thrived in a relatively
independent context. Mr. Liendo's research directly addresses this question.
This research is important for several reasons. It will provide information on
the management of small scale tropical agricultural systems which may prove of
practical use. It will yield data of interest to many archaeologists and assist
in training a promising young scientist.