* 9614259
* Hydrologic Change and Accelerated Erosion in Mountainous    Tropical Watersheds:  The Impact of Rural Roads
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/1997,02/28/2001
* Ross Sutherland, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 02/28/2001
* USD 299,999.00

9614259 Giambelluca Unpaved roads play a significant role in altering near-
surface hydrologic response and subsequently accelerating soil erosion in
temperate drainage basins. Road-related impacts are also of particular concern
in tropical areas where agriculture practices are most often blamed for erosion
and sedimentation problems. The focus of this study is to show how an expanding
road network changes the hydrological and erosion processes of a mountainous
tropical watershed in northern Thailand. The major objective are to (1)
determine the degree to which hydrologic processes in tropical watersheds are
disrupted by roads--this information can later be compared with what is known
about road disruption in temperate watershed; (2) establish the importance of
roads in relation to agricultural areas in initiating hydrologic change and
contributing to accelerated erosion; and in so doing, obtain a detailed
understanding of erosion processes operating on and adjacent to road surfaces;
and (3) evaluate the conservation value of several road management-related what
if scenarios. The proposed research strategy can be represented by four
components: (1) a comprehensive field study to build a database of hydrological,
erosional, and soil-vegetation-atmosphere-transfer (SVAT) information; (2) in-
depth analysis of changes in hydrologic and erosion processes due to land-cover
change, especially changes due to road expansion; (3) determination of the
important road-related runoff processes in order to select the appropriate model
or models to simulate hydrologic change and erosion resulting from the expansion
of road networks; and (4) use of model(s) to simulate the effects of several
management scenarios. This research will improve our knowledge of hydrologic and
geomorphic processes operating in tropical watersheds undergoing dramatic
landuse changes; help determine the importance of roads, as compared with
agricultural practices, in contributing to cumulative watershed impacts; aid in
the fut ure management of tropical mountainous watersheds; and provide insight
into improving the design, routing, maintenance, and usage of rural roads.