* 9614458
* SCIENCE FRIDAY
* EDU,DRL
* 12/01/1996,11/30/2000
* William Buzenberg, National Public Radio
* Continuing Grant
* Hyman H. Field
* 11/30/2000
* USD 806,783.00

9614458 Buzenberg National Public Radio (NPR) has been awarded a grant of
$807,335 in declining amounts over a four year period for production of Science
Friday, the weekly two-hour call-in radio show that deals with science topics.
Over the four year period, NPR will make an increasingly larger commitment to
the total budget of $1,763,768 until they assume total budgetary responsibility
for the project in FY 2001. The series' goal is to make science easily
accessible to the public and to help them realize the relevance of science and
technology to everyday life. The format of the programs enables the public to
engage in conversations with scientists and science educators to discuss
contemporary science topics. Science issues anticipated to be included in future
programs include: science and mathematics education, science literacy, science
risk assessment and public policy, and the future of technology. In addition to
the broadcast series, NPR will develop a web site for Science Friday which will
distribute the radio series on demand via the Internet, bring Science Friday to
cities and rural areas where the series is not broadcast, create live Internet
chat groups where listeners can meet to discuss the program, provide sound bytes
and audio files of guests, and create a "Science Day Book" which will be a
calendar of events loaded with science opportunities for people in their own
home towns. Science Friday also has established a joint project with Kidsnet, an
established computerized clearinghouse for education through the media. Ira
Flatow will continue as the series host and producer. Barbara Flagg of
Multimedia Research has been engaged to assess the audience impact of the
project.