* 9614508
* Geochemical Evolution of the East African Rift              System:  Constraints from He, Pb, Nd and Sr Isotopes        and 40Ar-39Ar Geochronology
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/1997,12/31/1998
* David Graham, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 12/31/1998
* USD 110,000.00

9614508 Graham The long term goal of this study is to provide the geochemical
framework to help detail the timing and the nature of the interactions between
the mantle plume, the convecting upper mantle and the subcontinental
lithospheric mantle during the evolution of the East African Rift. The
preliminary data has shown marked geochemical differences between various
provinces on the western branch of the Rift. These differences can be related to
the timing of ancient metasomatic events and to the development of isotopically-
discrete domains within the subcontinental lithosphere. Whether these isotopic
systematics are a general feature of the western branch of the rift remains to
be demonstrated. Continuation of this line of study will be done by analysing He
and radiogenic isotope compositions for classic suites of the Toro-Ankole and
Virunga provinces and by dating lavas from the South Kivu province where the
largest variations in radiogenic signatures have been observed. High 3He/4He
ratios are known to be present in volcanic rocks of the Afar region and the
northern parts of the main Ethiopian Rift and they are interpreted to reflect
the influence of a mantle plume. A second goal of this study is to track the
effects of this plume signature in pre-rift and post-rift magmas of the southern
Ethiopian Rift.