* 9614228
* Seismic and Acoustic Signals Generated from Explosive       Volcanic Eruptions:  A Numerical Investigation of a         Potential Monitoring Tool
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/1997,05/31/2000
* Bernard Chouet, Colorado School of Mines
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 05/31/2000
* USD 86,358.00

9614228 Morrissey Pressure and seismic records are to be studied in order to
determine their usefulness for monitoring activity at explosive volcanoes such
as Sakurajima in Japan and those of the Aleutian Islands in Alaska. Eruptions at
these volcanoes are classic examples of discrete, explosive events that
violently eject blocks of fragmented lava and generate pressure disturbances in
the atmosphere. Many of these eruptions are accompanied by shallow earthquakes
(tremor episodes) lasting several minutes. The source of the pressure
disturbances and seismic events has been hypothesized to be related to the
eruption but never demonstrated successfully. The intent of this project is to
formulate a computer model that simulates the movement of high pressure fluid
discharging from a volcano and the response of the volcano to the discharging
fluid. The results from these simulations will demonstrate how parts of pressure
and seismic waveforms may be used to estimate eruption pressures, gas and
particle concentrations in the eruption cloud, and the geometry and physical
properties of the volcanic conduit. Applications of the computer code include
modelling the pressure and seismic disturbances recorded within several
kilometers from active vents at Sakurajima volcano and several Alaskan volcanoes
such as Iliamna and Pavlof.