* 9614174
* GOALI: Model-Based Equipment Control in Microelectronics    Manufacturing
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/1997,04/30/2001
* Isaac Trachtenberg, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 04/30/2001
* USD 294,926.00

Abstract - Edgar/Trachtenberg - 9614174 This project involves efforts directed
toward the joint development, implementation, validation and transfer of
advanced model-based control systems for next generations rapid thermal
processing (RTP) and plasma etching tools for single wafer processing. It is a
joint program between the University of Texas, Advanced Micro Devices (AMD,
Austin), a manufacturer, and two tool developers and equipment suppliers: Matrix
Integrated Systems (Austin, TX) and AG Associates (San Jose, CA).
Microelectronics manufacturing requires advanced systems technology in order to
achieve satisfactory yields, maximize throughput and reduce costs for 0.25
micrometer semiconductors. Improved mathematical models, sensors, and control
systems can provide the capability to automatically adjust processing conditions
in response to changes in the process environment and market requirements. To
demonstrate the key concepts, the PI's will focus on the latest technology using
single-wafer reactors. For various commercial equipment systems, in rapid
thermal processing, fundamental (theoretical) mathematical models will be
developed that relate the operating and equipment design variables to
performance. These models will be verified using production data from commercial
equipment located at various industrial sites. Next they will research the
application of new sensors and control strategies that permit design of advanced
model-based controllers for each reactor. The resulting control systems will be
tested with real-time computer control of the reactors use of in-situ direct and
indirect measurements will be investigated to improve controller performance.
For plasma etching systems, they will focus on the monitoring of end-point
signals to determine when the end point is reached or if a fault has occurred
with the equipment or wafer.