* 9614729
* 1997 Superconductivity Gordon Conference to be held January 12-17, 1997
* MPS,DMR
* 12/15/1996,11/30/1997
* Douglas Finnemore, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Edward L. Wolf
* 11/30/1997
* USD 7,000.00

9614729 Finnemore Technical abstract: The 1997 Gordon Research Conference on
Superconductivity will devote one week to the research area of
superconductivity, with emphasis on High Tc cuprate materials. The focus will be
on order parameter symmetry and the properties of vortices. Other topics will be
discussed, the participants will include world leaders in this area. The
conference will be interdisciplinary, and will bring together leading scientists
from academia and industry to critically assess the current level of knowledge
and what remains to be learned in the future. NSF support will provide financial
assistance to young investigators. Non-technical abstract: The 1997 Gordon
Research Conference on Superconductivity will devote one week to the research
area of superconductivity, with emphasis on High Tc cuprate materials. The focus
will be on order parameter symmetry and the properties of vortices. Other topics
will be discussed, the participants will include world leaders in this area. The
conference will be interdisciplinary, and will bring together leading scientists
from academia and industry to critically assess the current level knowledge and
what remains to be learned in the future. NSF support will provide financial
assistance to young investigators. ***