* 9614501
* Early Mesozoic Reef Evolution and Recoveries from Mass      Extinctions
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/1997,05/31/2003
* George Stanley, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 05/31/2003
* USD 271,732.00

9614501 Stanley The principal focus and goal of this project is to study the
evolution of Triassic and Jurassic reefs and the evolution of reef faunas in
displaced terranes of western North America. A secondary goal concerns holdover
faunas and possible roles of terrane faunas in reef recoveries in the Tethys.
Corals, sponges and problematica are the principal reef organisms which evolved
after major mass extinctions now widely recognized in the Tethys. Most reef
deposits of the Cordillera have been destroyed by dynamic tectonic processes of
terrane formation and accretion. However new research has uncovered a dozen key
sites where preservation is sufficient to permit detailed study. This three-year
project will concentrate on faunas from these sites. The terrane faunas to be
investigated occur in volcanic sequences interpreted to have been ancient
volcanic islands geographically remote from the Tethys. Extensive studies of
early Mesozoic reef faunas of the Tethys have failed to confirm the presence of
holdover taxa. However the situation in the Americas has not been fully
examined. The project combines field, laboratory and museum studies of early
Mesozoic sites in western North America and comparisons with Tethyan reefs to
assess the idea that reef taxa in terranes played an important role in reef
evolution. Documentation of biostratigraphically important microfossils,
particularly conodonts, is an important element of the project. This topic will
be investigated with a post-doctoral research associate who will retrieve and
study conodonts and other microfossils from reef sites and use the resulting
biostratigraphic data to improve the accuracy of dating and time-stratigraphic
comparisons with the Tethys. Preliminary collections of reef fossils made by
field geologists in Canada have revealed reef faunas containing possible Permian
and Triassic holdover taxa--genera and species previously thought extinct in the
Tethys following the devastating mass extinctions affecting th at region. In
addition to confirming the "Lazarus effect", these discoveries, confined
exclusively to western Pacific terranes, hint at the idea that terranes
functioned as refuges for preferential survival of Permian and Triassic Tethyan
reef taxa. The idea of volcanic islands as refuges is firmly implanted in the
literature, but it is mostly speculative and largely without solid field and
taxonomic base. This project therefore seeks to gather new data which, when
combined with a voluminous Tethyan database now available, offers a concrete
basis to assess ideas of survival and the recoveries of reef ecosystems outside
the Tethys. It is possible that early Mesozoic reef faunas from volcanic
terranes contain a paleontoligical record not represented in the Tethys. Careful
taxonomic and field study of Triassic and Jurassic reef faunas from specific
horizons, combined with graphic plotting of age and paleogeographic
distributions of Tethyan and non-Tethyan taxa, will be important in confirming
or refuting the idea. The resulting new data is certain to expand knowledge of
reef evolution outside the Tethys, adding a stronger basis for comparisons with
Tethyan faunas.