* 9614443
* The Effects of Computer Mediation on the Development of     Trust:  A Web-Based Experiment
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1999
* Michael Cohen, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* C.  Iacono
* 08/31/1999
* USD 49,506.00

*** 9614443 Cohen With the recent dynamic expansion of the National and Global
Information Infrastructures, the activities of larger, more diverse communities
are becoming integrated. Because of this, there is great need to understand how
trust develops among people acting together in computer-mediated ways. This
project will empirically investigate how people generate and maintain trust in
task groups working within networked, computer-mediated environments. It will
compare results from face-to-face experimental conditions, with results obtained
from groups working via networked computers that provide "desktop conferencing"
video connections, and results on groups working via the World Wide Web without
video support. Two significant products are expected. First, the research will
provide valuable experimental evidence on whether and how computer mediation
affects the development of trust as work groups learn task routines. Second, it
will provide extensive development and demonstration of new tools and methods
for the conduct of scientific experiments on the integration and impacts of
information technology via the World Wide Web. These include tools and methods
for recruitment of subjects, scheduling, instruction, experimental task
performance, post-session questioning, and payment. This promises to help open
the Web at large as an active research tool and environment. ***