* 9614884
* Relationship of Predominant Soil Moisture, Soil Hydraulic   Processes and Precipitation Length Scales
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/1997,11/30/2000
* Richard Cuenca, Oregon State University
* Continuing grant
* L. Douglas James
* 11/30/2000
* USD 274,099.00

9614881 Cuenca While processes in the atmospheric boundary layers are integrated
on length scales of kilometers or tens of kilometers, processes in soils are
integrated at length scales of meters or tens of meters. The spatial variability
of precipitation is controlled by atmospheric processes while the spatial
variability of soil moisture content is controlled by soil hydraulic properties
which regulate redistribution of precipitation as it infiltrates below the soil
surface. Physically-based simulation models of hydrologic and atmospheric
boundary layer processes are affected by soil moisture content and require
incorporation of soil hydraulic properties to quantify soil moisture
redistribution. Information on length scales of physical processes is required
for design of sampling schemes to retrieve process characteristics and to
determine the optimum spatial resolution for physically-based simulation models.
The objectives of this project are focused on determination of relevant length
scales for soil moisture content, soil hydraulic processes and precipitation
from a field experiment within the Walnut River watershed in Kansas.
Instrumentation required includes a combination of automated and manual time
domain reflectometery sites for soil moisture content, distributed tension
infiltrometer measurements for soil hydraulic properties, and a rain gauge
network for precipitaiton. The proposed experimental site is the Towanda sub-
basin within the Walnut River watershed which makes up the CASES (Cooperative
Atmosphere Surface Exchange Study) experimental domain. Measurements will be
centralized around the Argonne National Laboratory (ANL) eddy correlation flux
tower presently operating in this sub-basin. Geostatistical techniques for
regional variable analysis will be applied to determine the relevant length
scales and investigate their variation with time. The CASES project brings
together an interdisciplinary team of hydrologists, plant, ecosystem and
atmospheric scientists to st udy the coupling between hydrologic processes, the
diurmal energy balance and the atmospheric boundary layer at the mesoscale. The
Walnut River watershed was chosen because processes within the watershed are at
sufficiently large scale for effects to be measured in the atmospheric boundary
layer. The objective of CASES is to develop an experimental framework which can
be used for hydrologic-atmospheric-ecosystem studies of sufficient duration to
allow evaluation of interseasonal and interannual effects. CASES can be viewed
as a logical step in the progression of large-scale hydrologic-atmospheric
science-remote sensing experiments starting from HAPEX-MOBILHY, through FIFE,
HAPEX-Sahel and BOREAS. All of these experiments have focused on a different
ecosystem which has potential for significant impact in the global circulation
syqtem and resulting climate but were limited in the time scale to a few weeks
or months. The objectives of CASES fall within the GCIP GEWEX (Global Energy and
Water Cycle Experiment) Continental-Scale international Project domain and the
International Geosphere-Biosphere Program (GBP). The instrumentation required
for this project will remain in the Walnut River watershed at the conclusion of
the project and responsibility for continued operation will be taken over by
ANL. The PI of this proposal is presently serving as the coordinator for the
Hydrology Group of CASES. The experimental design builds on the experience of
the PI in the HAPEX-MOBILHY, HAPEX-Sahel and BOREAS field experiments.