* 9614701
* Transport of Sediments, Radionuclides, and Agrochemicals    in Agricultural Watersheds, Experimental Field and          Modeling Approach
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/1997,07/31/2000
* Reza Khanbilvardi, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 07/31/2000
* USD 119,431.00

9614701 Khanbilvardi Soil erosion is a major scientific and environmental
problem, especially when radionuclides are involved. The transport process of
radioactive pollutants in soils is complex and not yet completely understood.
These pollutants are being transported with soil particles down and out of the
slopes, but at the same time they influence upon the erodibility of soils
through various geo- and biochemical processes involving soil minerals, soil
microbiota, soil moisture and traditional pollutants. A unique chance to improve
our understanding of these processes and to develop a model predicting erosion-
controlled transport of radioactive pollutants, based on both theoretical and
field studies, has been presented by the Chermobyl disaster which occurred in
Ukraine in 1986. It is the goal of this project to test two hypotheses and
develop a simulation model. The study is designed to find answers to (1) fate
and transport of radionuclides in soils subjected to erosion, (2) the influence
of microoganisms upon the transport of radioactivity in soils, and (3) to
develop a computerized model that can be used to simulate radionuclide migration
in agricultural watersheds subjected to erosion. With a unique data set which is
being obtained in Ukraine, the model can be validated in areas where validation
was not formerly possible. The project team which includes scientists and
experts from Ukraine and from CUNY, USDA/Purdue and Benedictine University is
already using this opportunity to the fullest extent possible. In the vicinity
of Chermobyl there are facilities staffed and equipped to study the process in
situ, using artificial rainfall, so that any model developed for its prediction
could be verified. This would result in a much cheaper research as compared with
a similar one conducted in the USA where, moreover, no such radioactivity
contaminated places can be found. Data obtained from this study will be used as
an important tool for development of process formulation of vertic al migration
and horizontal transport of radionuclides in soils. This international endeavor
would benefit the science and scientists in both countries and the world in
protecting environment.